* 0835621
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Computational Homology, Jamming, and Force Chains in Dense Granular Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2012
* USD 588,082.00

This project will employ a highly interdisciplinary approach that integrates
new&lt;br/&gt;geometrical techniques, modeling, and experiments to address
fundamental, open&lt;br/&gt;questions concerning the physical properties of
granular media and other jammed&lt;br/&gt;materials such as glasses, foams, and
colloids. The hallmark of jammed materials is&lt;br/&gt;that they resist applied
forces like solids, but are disordered like liquids. In addition,&lt;br/&gt;many
jammed materials possess heterogeneous, ramified structures known as
force&lt;br/&gt;chain networks when external forces are applied. Although the
existence of force&lt;br/&gt;chains has been known for decades, a quantitative
understanding of their role in&lt;br/&gt;physical processes has proved elusive
in part because previous studies have been&lt;br/&gt;unable to devise an
unbiased and general definition for them. Precise identification
and&lt;br/&gt;characterization of force chains and the response of jammed
materials to applied forces&lt;br/&gt;will likely have a transformative impact
in many arenas. For example, financial and&lt;br/&gt;energy costs of handling
and processing of granular materials, typically with
high&lt;br/&gt;inefficiency, is estimated to be at least one trillion dollars in
the US alone. Also,&lt;br/&gt;avalanches and earthquakes are examples where the
unpredictable behavior of&lt;br/&gt;granular media detrimentally impacts
mankind. In this work, we will apply novel&lt;br/&gt;mathematical techniques
coupled with computer simulations and experiments to obtain&lt;br/&gt;a
quantitative, predictive description of jammed materials.&lt;br/&gt;The outreach
efforts of this project emphasize providing educational opportunities
to&lt;br/&gt;students from underrepresented groups. We will organize education
and recruiting trips&lt;br/&gt;to predominantly female liberal arts colleges in
the Northeast and historically black&lt;br/&gt;schools in North Carolina, such
as North Carolina Central University, and others in the&lt;br/&gt;Southeast.
These trips will include giving technical and popular lectures,
including&lt;br/&gt;demonstrations to show that research on jammed materials is
intriguing and important.&lt;br/&gt;During informal meetings with students we
will emphasize that careers in science and&lt;br/&gt;technology are rewarding
and open to those in underrepresented groups. To stimulate&lt;br/&gt;further
student interest in this research, we will hold biannual 2-day lab open houses
so&lt;br/&gt;that promising undergraduates can be exposed to both experimental
and theoretical&lt;br/&gt;aspects of our research. To encourage close
collaboration among researchers in the&lt;br/&gt;field of jammed materials, we
will organize biannual interdisciplinary workshops. The&lt;br/&gt;inaugural
workshop, ``Computational Homology Tools Applied to Jamming and Flow
in&lt;br/&gt;Granular Materials'' is scheduled for the winter of 2009.