* 0835653
* New Epitaxial Nanostructures in the Limited Adatom Mobility Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Robert Hull, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2010
* USD 292,913.00

Technical: The thesis of this research is that by reducing ad-atom mobility
during epitaxial growth, formation of new localized nanostructures are possible.
The approach focuses on the GeSi/Si system, although fundamental mechanisms
uncovered may be transferable to other systems. Under study is how growth
conditions determine kinetically limited local formation of islands as a
function of strain. Kinetic parameters will be explored for molecular beam
epitaxy (MBE) and chemical vapor deposition growth methods. The project is
collaborative including researchers at national laboratories, enabling access to
unique instruments and methods. Both continuum and atomistic modeling is coupled
to experiment to predict where in growth parameter space, and why, such assembly
of new kinetically limited nanostructures might be expected. Another focus is on
understanding initial surface perturbations that lead to localized islanding.
Combined in-situ microscopy and deposition techniques based upon scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) and low energy electron microscopy (LEEM) systems
will be employed to study the early stages of morphology evolution and to
determine controlling factors. Once fundamental behavior is understood, the
controlling factors will be utilized to achieve novel device structures. This
includes control of size, composition, and lateral positioning of the
nanostructures. To control positioning, a focused ion beam (FIB) will be
employed for creating initial perturbation sites in pre-defined substrate
locations, both in-situ and ex-situ to deposition/imaging. Non-technical: This
project builds upon previous work on a complex nanostructure, the Quantum Dot
Molecule, that forms under kinetically limited growth conditions in the GeSi/Si
system. Such nanostructures may be relevant to novel quantum dot based device
architectures. Thus this research could lead to advances in fundamental
knowledge of thin film growth and potential building blocks of novel
nanoelectronic device structures. This interdisciplinary project and the related
collaborations provide graduate students with opportunities to work closely with
researchers at national labs and other institutions in a field at the cutting
edge of materials research. Also special opportunities are provided for
undergraduate research experience, including extension of a MS transfer program
for students from Longwood University in Virginia. Additional outreach
activities include development of a website aimed at informing the general
public about materials science research.