* 0835843
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type I: Realizing the Ultimate Potential of List Error-Correction: Theory, Practice, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Alexander Vardy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 09/30/2011
* USD 332,500.00

Error-correcting codes, studied in a branch of science and engineering known as
coding theory, safeguard data against the adverse effects of noise and enable
reliable storage and communication of information. Such codes pervade our daily
lives, with applications ranging from computer hard-disks and UPS bar-codes to
cell phones and the Internet to deep space communication. One of the most
fundamental questions in coding theory is the following: What is the largest
possible fraction of errors that a code of information rate R can correct?
Recent theoretical breakthroughs provide a complete answer to this question,
namely that the ultimate error-correction radius of 1-R can be reached (by codes
over sufficiently large alphabets). Moreover, it can be reached constructively
with polynomial-time list decoding, via codes closely related to Reed-Solomon
codes, which are ubiquitous in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a practical
standpoint, this promises a factor of two improvement over classical error-
correction algorithms that are in widespread use today. While this is extremely
encouraging, numerous challenges must be overcome in order to bring the
theoretical promise of the recent results to practice. This project, led by a
multi-disciplinary team, involves an integrated collection of research
activities targeted at progress towards the long term goal of attaining the
fundamental limit of error-correction. At the theoretical end, the goals include
improving the complexity of the decoding algorithms as one approaches the
optimal error-correction radius of 1-R, and devising faster algorithms and
heuristics for the key steps involved in algebraic list decoding. The project
also studies methods to reap the practical benefits of combining the new codes
with soft-decision decoding, putting to use the ample amount of probabilistic
symbol reliability estimates often available to decoders. Furthermore, the
research lays the groundwork for eventual implementation of such algorithms in
high-speed/low-power VLSI, thereby enabling the potential deployment of the new
codes in a broad range of communication and storage systems. On the education
front, the project provides a stimulating research environment for graduate
students, encouraging team-work across university boundaries and collaboration
across disciplines (computer science, communication theory, and VLSI design).