* 0835451
* Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy Workshop, August 2008, Blue Mountain Lake, NY
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Allen Bard, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

This support by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program of the National
Science Foundation Chemistry Division is to encourage participation in a
Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy (SECM) Workshop by graduate students and
postdoctoral, with an emphasis for women and minorities, and encourage training
of next generation SECM users and developers. The goal of this 3-day workshop is
to bring leading scientists in the field of SECM together in order to stimulate
intensive discussions and initiate national and international collaborations.
This workshop will be different from symposia on SECM that have been held at
national meetings (e.g. American Chemical Society, Pittcon, and Electrochemical
Society) in that it will allow much more time for both formal and informal
discussions, especially between senior investigators and students or
postdoctoral fellows. SECM technology has had a wide impact in a variety of
scientific fields including fundamental electrochemistry, corrosion science,
electrocatalysis, liquid-liquid interfaces, biochemistry, biology and high-
resolution imaging. This workshop will facilitate interactions between
scientists from ten countries (Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Poland, United Kingdom, United States) with broad and complementary
research interests in SECM who would normally not have the opportunity to meet.