* 0835507
* The Geometry, Topology and Combinatorics of Hamiltonian Lie Group Actions
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Tara Holm, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 67,058.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0604807&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Tara S. Holm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's
principal focus in this proposal is group&lt;br/&gt;actions and reduction in
symplectic geometry. A fundamental problem&lt;br/&gt;in symplectic geometry is
to relate the geometry and topology of a&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian system to the
combinatorics of the moment polytope, and&lt;br/&gt;vice versa. The principal
players on the geometric side include the&lt;br/&gt;symplectic manifold itself
and its symplectic reductions.&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorially, the vertices, edges,
k-dimensional faces, and even&lt;br/&gt;the chambers of the moment polytope play
a significant role.&lt;br/&gt;Generically, a symplectic reduction has orbifold
singularities. The&lt;br/&gt;principal investigator outlines a program towards
understanding the&lt;br/&gt;geometry and topology of such orbifolds. These
results will provide&lt;br/&gt;insight into the structure of the Chen-Ruan
orbifold cohomology ring,&lt;br/&gt;yielding information about orbifold Gromov-
Witten invariants. This&lt;br/&gt;work has also naturally led to foundational
questions regarding group&lt;br/&gt;actions on orbifolds. Finally, the PI will
distill the geometry and&lt;br/&gt;topology of the Hamiltonian system into
combinatorial data associated&lt;br/&gt;to the moment polytope. This will shed
new light on recent&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial results concerning intervals in the
Bruhat order on any&lt;br/&gt;Coxeter group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic
geometry is the mathematical framework for describing&lt;br/&gt;phenomena in
mathematical physics, from classical mechanics to string&lt;br/&gt;theory. The
moment map is an important tool that translates the&lt;br/&gt;symmetries of a
physical system into discrete data. An expert in&lt;br/&gt;symplectic geometry,
the PI will achieve a deeper understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between
the geometry of a symplectic manifold and the&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics of the
moment map data. Her work will shed light on&lt;br/&gt;stringy invariants in
this context. The proposed activities will&lt;br/&gt;advance our knowledge in
the fields of symplectic geometry and&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics, with applications
to algebraic geometry, algebraic&lt;br/&gt;topology and mathematical physics.
The PI's broader objectives&lt;br/&gt;include increasing the participation and
visibility of women in&lt;br/&gt;research mathematics, and enhancing the
undergraduate experience in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;