* 0835978
* Transforming Engineering Education through Social Networking
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* John Bennett, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 04/30/2012
* USD 99,999.00

This exploratory project will investigate the utility of social networking as a
learning environment to motivate and improve the performance of high school
students, especially Hispanic students, and college students in the areas of
math, science, and engineering. The Learning Enabled Social Network (LESN), a
joint project between the University of Connecticut?s Schools of Engineering and
Education, seeks to discover how these inherently motivating environments can be
adapted to enhance motivation and interest in engineering education and how to
harness the power of project-based learning and social networking to enhance
learning and promote the science, technology, engineering, and math disciplines.
LESN is based on a strong theoretical framework of communities of practice to
engage students in authentic problem solving activities. The structure of the
technology allows vertical integration from elementary school to professional
engineering as well as horizontal participation across various cultures and
disciplines. The tool?s student-centered design seeks to facilitate student-
centered learning and transform faculty teaching. Collaboration between the
University of Connecticut and Windham high school will seek to identify features
of the online social network that lend themselves to improved engineering
problem solving. This project will also advance the understanding and skills of
participating engineering faculty and administrators as related to innovative
pedagogy as a result of working with the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering education must be transformed if it is to meet
the needs of the 21st century. Academic performance and motivation must be
addressed at the K-12 level if we are going to improve recruitment and expand
the diversity of incoming engineering enrollment. Critical thinking skills to
solve real-world problems must also be improved if our graduates are to be
capable of working in multi-disciplined and multi-cultured communities, which
are increasingly becoming common forums for engineering work. Social networking
can effectively boost academic performance and eventually lead to improved
recruitment and retention in science and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;