* 0835795
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research - Simulation of ultrasonic-wave propagation with application to cancer therapy
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Robin Cleveland, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew D. Pollington
* 09/30/2012
* USD 488,500.00

The project develops and implements recent "Fourier continuation alternating
direction" (FC-AD) high-performance algorithms for nonlinear Partial
Differential Equations (PDE), validates such solvers via comparisons with
experiments and well-known approximations, and applies the resulting methodology
to realistic medical configurations. A significant portion of the effort will
design strategies to expand significantly the applicability of High-Intensity-
Focused-Ultrasound (HIFU) (an emerging minimally invasive therapy that uses
focused ultrasound beams to cause localized destruction of cancer tissue), and
to enable design of optimal HIFU therapies for liver, kidney, and pancreatic
cancers. In HIFU, an ultrasound source acoustically contacts the patient's skin
to produce a high-amplitude ultrasonic field within the body that focuses on
(and heats) a target region---thus leading to tumor destruction. The ultrasound
propagates within a medium that is highly heterogeneous---most strongly so due
to bone---thus affecting heating, which arises, for example, through perfusion
by large blood vessels. Optimal HIFU requires a treatment-planning computational
tool, which ensures treatment of the targeted zone and minimal impact on the
surrounding tissue. Because previous 3D PDE solvers are more expensive, solution
of such complex HIFU problems has not been possible. Using alternating
directions and a rapidly convergent Fourier series for non-periodic functions,
the proposed FC-AD method has provided for the first time high-order
unconditionally stable numerics for general 3D domains at a cost that grows only
linearly with the size of the spatial discretization; preliminary tests have
demonstrated the capability of the FC-AD method to address satisfactorily the
types of nonlinear acoustic problems under consideration. This approach will
make possible the study of the effect of heterogeneity on field focusing, heat
deposition, and ablation properties - enabling highly optimized HIFU treatment.
The associated geometric/computational demands provide a powerful driving force
for additional developments of our solvers, geometry modeling tools, etc. The
proposed multi-disciplinary interactions will further significantly the state of
the art in all three fields: computational science, nonlinear wave physics, and
cancer therapy.

Broader Significance of the Project: Already a well-established technique for
medical imaging, ultrasound is seeing widening use in diagnostic and therapeutic
applications ranging from tumor detection, to kidney stone destruction, to
targeted drug delivery. Both the accuracy of ultrasound images, and the
precision and reliability with which ultrasound can deliver energy or modify the
structure of tissue, depend critically on the type of software that will result
from this effort, providing a capability to predict the propagation properties
of ultrasonic fields in biological media. The resulting methodology will be
applicable across the broad spectrum of biomedical ultrasonics - enabling rapid
instrument prototyping, treatment planning, and ultrasound safety assessment.
Although the work plan is focused on the modeling of HIFU-based cancer
treatment, the potential for effecting key advances in multiple therapeutic and
diagnostic applications is very significant.