* 0835997
* A National Symposium to Develop and Present a Case for the Establishment of Engineering Education Academic Programs (SEEAP)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Kamyar Haghighi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 07/31/2010
* USD 99,548.00

This symposium will stimulate a national dialogue on establishing engineering
education programs in colleges of engineering in the U.S. The symposium will
highlight opportunities and challenges of three institutions with established
engineering education programs and will assemble a group of key stakeholders to
share their expertise and explore methods of developing a successful engineering
education program. This will include examining opportunities to initiate
engineering education academic programs as venues for research and scholarship.
This will require developing understanding of and foundation for creating
dynamic programs to address the major challenges of ability and diversity of
incoming students, retention/recruitment, classroom practices, and enhanced
pedagogy. Further, the symposium will examine a national research paradigm for
engineering education, and determine the revenue benefits of engineering
education departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for transformation in
engineering education is well documented. The need for change, American
students? declining interest in engineering as a major, low retention rates, the
need for a diverse engineering workforce, the effects of rapid technological
change and globalization have been highlighted often in professional
publications and the popular press. These reports argue that tomorrow?s graduate
will compete in an emerging global economy fueled by rapid innovation and
technological breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;Higher education institutions must
respond decisively to fundamental obstacles to substantial and necessary
educational transformation and build a coherent educational research program for
engineering education which integrates a dynamic cycle of learning and
implementation. &lt;br/&gt;