* 0835594
* Collaborative Research:    Ethics Education in Computing - A Moral Development/Constructivist Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Linda Morales, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 62,134.00

The PIs will develop and pilot test educational materials for teaching ethical
and social issues to graduate students in information assurance and security,
computer science, and information technology, the main deliverable of the
project being a book having four main sections: ownership; privacy; access; and
safety, reliability, and liability. The book will present case studies to help
students develop their ethical reasoning skills, and to engage students in an
enthusiastic understanding of how information assurance and security
professionals contribute to the construction of the future. The PIs envision
that the final edited book could be used as the text in a stand-alone graduate
course in a computing curriculum or an information assurance and security
curriculum, or alternatively a chapter at a time as supplementary material
throughout a graduate computing curriculum. The PIs' approach differs from
existing efforts, in that the structure and theoretical basis of the book will
stem from research on moral development in early adulthood as well as
constructivist learning theory. That is to say, the PIs' book will address
ethical and social issues in a manner that attends to the cognitive, social, and
affective aspects of ethical development of human beings during early adulthood,
which is the age of most graduate students. The PIs' approach is also unique in
that it is specifically targeted at ethical and social issues for the
information assurance and security graduate curriculum, which is a growing
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The availability of a well
designed, evaluated and tested educational resource as described above will help
computing programs establish courses and curricula that emphasize ethical
development of students. The project is built on the partnership of faculty from
nine universities who will serve as developers and/or testers of the book. The
home institutions of these faculty include an HSI and an HBCU, and the developer
group has ethnic, gender and geographic diversity.