* 0835670
* High School Enterprise
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Robert Warrington, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 04/30/2010
* USD 99,657.00

This project will extend, expand and assess an after-school program in which
students from grades 9-12 engage in active, applied STEM learning. High School
Enterprise (HSE) teams will participate in "virtual" companies that provide
technical services to actual clients and develop products intended for ultimate
distribution through the marketplace. HSE team projects will be STEM-based. Like
athletic teams, HSE teams will be coached by specially-trained high school
teachers and will have access to expertise and mentoring from professionals in
academia and industry. The teams will write business plans, solve real-world
problems, perform testing and analyses, build prototypes, manufacture parts,
stay within budgets, and manage their projects. This project will implement and
evaluate the HSE program in a broad range of schools and among diverse groups of
students, including students who are underrepresented in STEM fields. Pilot
schools include rural and inner city, small and large, and schools that are
culturally, ethnically and geographically diverse. At the conclusion of their
HSE experiences, students will demonstrate proficiency in the top applied
workforce skills identified by U.S. employers as essential to enter and
contribute to the STEM workforce, they will be more disposed to enter STEM
careers, and they will be better equipped to undertake the work that prepares
them for these careers.

The High School Enterprise program will help avert the looming shortage of
professionals needed to enter and sustain the domestic high-technology workforce
by increasing the interest in and preparation for engineering education. The
program will be an after-school activity that should be highly effective in
motivating thousands more high school students, especially underrepresented
students, to pursue careers in science and engineering. HSE relies on academic,
industry, and community partnerships for success. This is also its key to
sustainability because the program will ultimately benefit the partners that
support it.