* 0835990
* Can gaming provide enough context to improve knowledge integration and retention in engineering freshmen? Developing a computer game for industrial engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* William Hernandez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 12/31/2013
* USD 499,956.00

The objective of this IEECI proposal in engineering education research is to
develop, deploy, and assess a serious virtual-world role playing game in which
freshmen industrial engineering (IE) students will tackle real-world problems
typical of what they may face after graduation. Students will interact with a
virtual world where IE techniques will be applied to make improvements in a
factory, bank, hospital, or amusement park for example. This learning tool will
be assessed in terms of improved retention, interest, and motivation of freshman
IE students, as well as support of learning in context, improved student
understanding of core concepts, and improved problem-solving skills in complex
unstructured problems. Many game development experts agree that models are
needed for developing learning games that take advantage of the strengths of
both the educational and gaming
worlds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the number of engineering
graduates qualified to deal with open-ended real-world problems is essential to
the economic health and vitality of the nation. Providing appropriate experience
of this sort has been a challenge to undergraduate engineering education, and a
common barrier to retention has been a lack of student understanding of how the
skills taught in the classroom are relevant to the ?real-world.? The proposed
research on the development of an educational tool in the form of a role playing
game will test how serious games may address these issues and also provide a
resource and a model for other engineering disciplines and programs. Although
simulations and games are used for personnel training in industry and the
military, and in more informal settings as entertainment, games have not been
used and tested as an undergraduate engineering educational tool. The
programming code of this game will be released as an online open- source
project. This will be an open invitation for current and prospective students to
use the game and for collaborators around the globe to participate in continued
development.&lt;br/&gt;