* 0835995
* EFRI-RESIN: A Multi-Scale Design and Control Framework for Dynamically Coupled Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructures, with Application to Vehicle-to-Grid Integration
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Huei Peng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,000,000.00

PI: Jeffrey Stein&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0835995&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFRI-RESIN: A
Multi-Scale Design and Control Framework for Dynamically Coupled Sustainable and
Resilient Infrastructures, with Application to Vehicle-to-Grid Integration
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an outcome of the competition as
part of the Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation (NSF 07-579) program
solicitation under the subtopic Resilient and Sustainable Infrastructures
(RESIN). The goal of this research is to formulate a fundamental system science
for interdependent, dynamically coupled civil infrastructures via multi-role
intermediaries (MRIs), with the objective of improving their collective
performance for resiliency and sustainability. This project examines the flow of
resources and commodities between infrastructures via devices and junctions
referred to as MRIs. Examples of MRIs include building energy systems that
couple the built environment with electricity infrastructures, GPS-enabled
mobile phones that couple transportation and telecommunications infrastructures
to manage traffic congestion, and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) that
couple transportation and electricity infrastructures by using grid electricity
for transportation, possibly sending stored electricity to the grid (vehicle to
grid, or V2G) when appropriate. This project will formulate a framework to
design and control MRIs whose functions are influenced by stochastic processes,
interactions across space and time scales, and human decision-making. The
research includes the following tasks: (1) combine agent-based modeling and life
cycle assessment into a framework for evaluating the long-term sustainability of
dynamically coupled infrastructures; (2) develop hybrid state diffusion
approximation methods to model the dynamics of resiliency in coupled
infrastructures with stochastically available resources and MRIs; (3) create a
fundamental hierarchical (multi-scale) framework for optimizing the design and
configuration of MRIs for resiliency and sustainability within each
infrastructure; (4) use stochastic dynamic programming and Poincar√© map
techniques to optimally control intermediaries in light of their stochastic
dynamic switching between different infrastructures; (5) construct Lyapunov
energy functions for MRI-coupled systems to control for stability and
resiliency; and (6) develop statistical, energy-based model reduction techniques
to reduce complexity in infrastructure and intermediary models to facilitate
analysis and design of coupled infrastructures. The research outcomes will
provide fundamental theoretical contributions to engineering disciplines that
are rooted in dynamics and controls, as well as to the social sciences and the
field of industrial ecology. The research will use plug-in hybridization and V2G
integration as the test bed application. With respect to PHEVs, the research
will (1) quantify their impact on sustainability and resiliency of the
transportation and electricity generation infrastructures, (2) design and
configure PHEV powertrains that balance conflicting needs of the transportation
and electricity generation infrastructures, (3) formulate power and energy
management strategies in PHEVs, taking into account their transportation role,
their role in providing distributed storage to the electrical grid, and the
switching between such roles, and (4) investigate grid power and energy
management methods that capitalize on the distributed capacity provided by V2G
integration and the resulting ability to accommodate renewable resource
intermittency and prevent and recover from catastrophic failures. The framework
developed in this research will enable practical and efficient identification of
infrastructure configurations that are globally sustainable and resilient. The
research team includes investigators from the University of Michigan and the
Missouri University of Science and Technology in the fields of electrical and
mechanical engineering, economics and public policy, natural resources and
environment, and transportation research. The methods and tools will be
disseminated to industry via an external advisory and technical publications.
The research results (including a sustainability simulation tool) will be
incorporated into classroom instruction in the new graduate level Engineering
Sustainable Systems program at the University of Michigan and through education
and outreach programs that target underrepresented students at the high school
and undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;