* 0835338
* Collaborative Research: Technological and Educational Foundations for Understanding and Improving Large-classroom Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 332,975.00

Large-enrollment courses are a practical necessity for introductory courses in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) at many institutions.
Innovative technologies, such as audience response systems, can enhance
instruction in large-enrollment classes, but the information that can be
conveyed with these existing technologies remains quite limited. The goal of
this project is to develop a new role for technology in large STEM classes, one
that exploits advances in computer vision technology and the rapid proliferation
of digital video. By building a multi-camera array to simultaneously observe all
individuals in a large classroom, the investigators will pursue foundational
research in both education and computer vision. For computer vision, large
classrooms provide a convenient microcosm of social interaction in which
individual activities are constrained but not controlled; this project will
leverage this property to develop vision-based recognition systems for large
group activites. Educationally, this new vision system will be used to
systematically study learning in large classrooms---something that has not
previously been possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights gained from research in
these two areas will be used to create a radically new tool for computer-
assisted collaborative instruction. This project will develop systems to
automatically detect and summarize real-time activity information for course
instructors, thereby enhancing their ability to make optimal use of interactive
class time. These systems are viewed as prototypes that can ultimately be
replicated at other institutions. In addition, the results of this research into
the nature of learning in large classrooms will serve as a basis for improving
instruction in large-enrollment STEM courses nationwide, regardless of their
technological assets. More broadly, the project offers a new paradigm for
education research, in which small-scale ecological observations are scaled up
by automated visual activity recognition.&lt;br/&gt;