* 0835762
* CDI-Type I: Fundamental Terrain Representations and Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Barbara Cutler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 670,000.00

The project, Fundamental Terrain Representations and Operations, unifies the
fields of computational geometry, computer graphics, and civil engineering
hydrology, resulting in a transformational ability to predict how erosion
occurs, specifically in levee failure by overtopping, and, after a failure, to
reverse-simulate what happened. This enables more efficient levee designs and so
reduces the frequency and cost of levee failures in the United States. That will
result in reduced flood damage in the US, which cost $50,000,000,000 in the
1990s, thereby saving money and lives. This project will continue and expand the
PIs' strong track record of involving undergraduate students in research,
hosting elementary and high school students and international visitors in their
labs, and of involving women and other underrepresented groups. The vehicles
include the Research Experience for Undergrads and the Research Experience for
Teachers programs, and RPI's own PREFACE program, which hosts high school
student from underrepresented groups for two weeks in the summer. It will also
expand continuing joint research with a Brazilian collaborator.

The project's goals are: a new representation for volumetric terrain, a.k.a.
soil, that respects the geophysics of how surface water flows (hydrology) formed
it, a better modeling of local erosion in terrain and earthen structures such as
levees, an experimental plan for validation in Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute's geotechnical centrifuge, a predictive reverse simulation of earthen
levee erosion, a visualization of non-homogeneous terrain erosion, an out-of-
core parallel simulation on large terrain datasets, and a collaboration in
Brazil. Therefore the accumulated data on past levee erosion will be transformed
into knowledge about future erosion. One intellectually novel aspect of this
research will be computational geometry representations of volumetric terrain in
which the mathematics more closely aligns with the physics. It will not enforce
a nonphysical continuity of elevation - cliffs are important in the real world.
Even during progressive transmission, it will be hydrologically correct, with
few or no interior local minima. Since erosion is not linear (gulleys don't
cross each other and their elevations don't `add'), such a representation cannot
be linear, and so innovative and compute-intensive techniques are required.