* 0835879
* EFRI: Resilient and Sustainable Interdependent Electric Power and Communications Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Benjamin Hobbs, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,226,857.00

PI name: Lamine Mili&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp;
State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0835879&lt;br/&gt;Title: EFRI-RESIN:
Resilient and Sustainable Interdependent Electric Power and Communications
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an outcome of the competition as part
of the Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation (NSF 07-579) program
solicitation under the subtopic Resilient and Sustainable Infrastructures
(RESIN). The goal of this project is to develop complex systems theories and
methods aimed at modeling, assessing, and reengineering the resiliency of
sustainable interdependent electric power and communications infrastructures to
catastrophic failures and natural hazards. Currently, the monitoring,
protection, and control of electric power systems rely heavily on computer-based
communications networks. Consequently, the failure of one infrastructure can
affect the functioning of the other. This research will investigate the impact
that these interdependencies have on the vulnerabilities of both
infrastructures. It will suggest ways to make them more agile and resilient to
anticipated and unanticipated failures and natural hazards while making the
energy supply sustainable and less harmful to the environment. A new graduate
course on risk management of critical infrastructures based on research results
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One facet of the research is to extend
the scope and applicability of the Highly Optimized Tolerance (HOT) approach to
modeling cascading failures across interdependent electric power and
communications infrastructures. The HOT method has previously been used with
models involving only a single type of event and assumes that any multiple
events of the same type are independent. This project will extend HOT to develop
a risk function that involves not only several types of events but also
dependent events to analyze the interdependent power and communication systems.
To address the sustainability issue, the research will investigate the use of
microgrids supplied with renewable and fossil distributed generation and energy
storage systems. Previous research has suggested that a microgrid type of power
distribution system is more resilient, e.g. less subject to a system wide
failure, and more sustainable. This is due to a collection of appropriate
incentives that can be provided to encourage customers to participate in energy
conservation programs and to agree to rapid load shedding during emergency
conditions to ensure grid survivability. In addition to HOT, another part of the
research of this project will be to investigate financial impacts and required
incentives to address resiliency and sustainability from the resource,
environment and socioeconomic points of view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use existing data from failures in the Southern Brazilian power and
communications systems and from the North American Electric Reliability Council.
The project will develop the theoretical foundations of a sustainability
assessment framework (SAF) that uses two categories of quantitative measures:
sustainability indicators and total cost functions. The SAF methods developed
will rely on the concept of energy, which measures the effective amount of
energy that can be converted into work.&lt;br/&gt;