* 0835381
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Robust Learning with Conceptual Personalization Technologies
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Holly Devaul, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 82,207.00

Personalized instruction instruction that targets individual students' unique
learning needs and builds upon their prior knowledge is critical for supporting
effective science learning. The primary goal in this project is to support
robust learning with personalization strategies using natural language
technologies. The project is a three-institution collaboration between the
University of Colorado, the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, and
the University of Utah. It has two objectives: the technology objective is to
create domain-independent techniques to create personalization algorithms. The
learning science objective is to measure the effect of these algorithms on
learning. The project focuses on robust learning, i.e., learning the supports
transfer and the promotion of meta-cognitive skills. The subject matter is earth
science and biology. The proposed techonology would operate as follows. Firstly,
the system uses state-of-the-art statistical natural language processing methods
(mainly latent semantic analysis) to automatically process learning resources
(primarily texts) in order to create a domain knowledge map. This includes
automatically identifying core concepts. Secondly, during learning sessions, the
system would analyze students' essays to dynamically construct a domain
knowledge map of the students' responses (and an assessment of student
understanding). Using graph matching techniques, the system evaluates the
student's response, including determining what concepts were missing or
misunderstood. Finally, the system uses recommendation engine methods to suggest
web resources that could help the student understand the material. For learning
assessment, the project uses a 2 (technology or none) by 2 (domain of study)
mixed research design using a sample of 40 students.

The intent of this project is to make science learning and teaching more
effective. The project draws upon a rich set of new tools for analyzing textual
materials. The tools serve several functions. They initially allow the analysis
of text course materials to automatically develop a description of the core
concepts embedded in the texts. The tools then assess essays that the students
write about the core materials to determine their individual level of
understanding. The tools then provide feedback to the individual students
regarding missing or misunderstood concepts. This feedback includes references
to the text materials that comprise the course of study and references to
additional internet resources that the individual students can use to better
understand scientific concepts in biology and earch sciences. This research
builds upon 15 years of work on semantic analysis of texts. The research is
significant because it works for any subject area and, since it is automated, it
can scale nationwide.