* 0835914
* The Effect of Academic Policies on the Effectiveness and Efficiency of Achieving Student Outcomes
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Matthew Ohland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This exploratory project will create a model of how an institution?s
instructional culture and institutional infrastructure affect student outcomes
through feedback to students. It will examine instructional culture and
institutional infrastructure as manifested in academic policies, such as grade
forgiveness, probation, or suspension, and structure such as the process of
articulating to engineering, credit loads, or student-faculty ratio. In addition
to the study of retention and graduation as outcomes, it will also explore time-
to-graduation and rates of course repetition as measures of academic efficiency.
This project builds on the work of the Multiple-Institution Database For
Investigating Engineering Longitudinal Development (MIDFIELD) research team and
creates a rare opportunity to study persistence, graduation, and other outcomes
longitudinally while accounting for institutional differences. The MIDFIELD
partnership will leverage resources and initiatives beyond the individual
institutions.

This project?s research and documentation of institutional policies will lay a
foundation for the continued study of the effect of academic policy and
structure on retention, graduation, and other educational outcomes. It will also
expand the study of institutional differences identified in earlier work. The
addition of new MIDFIELD database partners will support the concomitant
development of a cadre of researchers using MIDFIELD in their own research. By
engaging other researchers, the project also gains a broader perspective,
dissemination partners, and, ideally, colleagues who will continue to do
research using the MIDFIELD database. As the MIDFIELD partnership grows, the
results will be more representative of the nation?s engineering education
enterprise.