* 0835907
* RedShirt Transitional Program: Creating Engineering Capacity and Expanding Diversity through Strategic Partnerships
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Malinda Zarske, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 06/30/2011
* USD 99,579.00

This project, called the RedShirt Program, will directly admit disadvantaged,
under-prepared high school graduates who demonstrate potential to be successful
engineers, but fall short of meeting standard admissions criteria to
engineering. The students will be welcomed and supported as real engineering
students during their RedShirt year; which is the beginning of a program that
can lead to completion of B.S. degrees in five years. &lt;br/&gt;A two week
Summer Bridge program will focus on building community and developing leadership
skills. During the first academic year, students will learn in small, cohort-
based classes, and students who achieve pre-defined metrics in their RedShirt
year continue in the college, following the standard curriculum enriched by a
variety of supportive opportunities and activities. The curricula are informed
by the science of learning, and every component of the pilot RedShirt project
will be researched and measured. This project will unearth the key conceptual
issues at the root of achievement gap and diversity barriers to determine
appropriate research strategies which have the potential to double the diversity
of most engineering colleges. The College of Engineering?s existing partnerships
with two high schools and its summer diversity-centered workshops for rising
high school seniors provide avenues for recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering programs is vital to meeting the economic demands for a diverse
engineering workforce. This program will leverage university/high school
partnerships for the benefit of first-generation college-bound students,
students from disadvantaged economic backgrounds, underrepresented minorities,
women and rural students. Bold, replicable strategies are needed to augment the
preparation of high-potential, underrepresented students so engineering colleges
can serve the profession and nation more broadly. The RedShirt curriculum and
programming strategies, once piloted and refined, are exportable to virtually
any U.S. engineering college, increasing the potential that the intractable
barriers for increasing diversity within engineering can be overcome, and
providing a strategy for supplying the profession with a rich potential of
students from all walks of life. &lt;br/&gt;