* 0835572
* CDI-Type I: High-Performance Simulations and Interactive Visualization for Automated Nanoscale Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 550,000.00

Assembling nanoscale components to make functional devices remains a grand
challenge despite rapid advances in imaging, measurement, and fabrication at the
nanoscale. While manipulation techniques for nanocomponents are finally emerging
they currently lack automation. The lack of automation seriously limits the rate
at which new nanocomponent-based devices can be invented. In order to develop
automated real-time planning algorithms, we need to develop a fundamental
understanding of the interaction of nanocomponents with trapping fields.
Understanding different ways in which components can interact with the trap
requires dense sampling of the planning parameter space using millions of
computationally intensive simulation runs. The proposed project will focus on
(1) development of GPU-based simulation infrastructure for simulating trap and
nanocomponent interactions, (2) development of algorithms for automatically
constructing simplified assembly process models from simulation data, (3)
development of visualization tools for enhancing the understanding of the
nanoscale assembly processes, (4) identification and characterization of real-
time motion planning strategies for nanoscale assembly processes, and (5)
integration of the proposed the research results with education and wider
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will lead to a reliable,
efficient, and automated assembly process for fabricating nanocomponent-based
devices. We expect that this assembly process will enable nanotechnology
researchers to explore new design possibilities in the area of nano electronics,
nano photonics, and bio-inspired sensors. Automated assembly capability will
also allow them to explore a large number of design options in a cost effective
manner and hence accelerate discovery and invention. The proposed research will
significantly reduce the need for manual assembly operations and will make
nanomanipulation significantly less labor-intensive thereby facilitating the
manufacturing of nanodevices in a cost-competitive manner. The proposed project
will also create training and education materials in the areas of GPU-based
simulations, interactive visualization at nanoscale, automated model
construction, and real-time motion planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;