* 0835601
* CDI Type I:  Virtual Worlds: Scalability and Content Creation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Patrick Hanrahan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2011
* USD 570,000.00

Virtual worlds are networked three-dimensional environments that simulate
physical interaction in three-dimensional spaces and decouple such interaction
from geographic constraints. Virtual worlds open new avenues for education,
business, and scientific discovery, and can significantly enhance collaboration
in virtual organizations. To accomplish this requires scalable and secure system
architectures, complemented by appropriate tools for creating virtual world
content. This project aims to design, build, deploy, and evaluate a virtual
world platform for use as a research and development platform for virtual world
technology and applications. The two major research thrusts are system
architecture and content creation. For system architecture, the project will
develop: (1) continuous dynamic world partitioning for maximal resource
utilization and fault tolerance, (2) a capability-based security engine that
seamlessly enforces access controls, (3) a scalable content distribution network
for bandwidth-intensive virtual world content, and (4) privacy-preserving
archiving of virtual world events for scientific research and exploration. For
content creation, the project will investigate domain-specific modeling tools
that leverage domain knowledge and community input to drastically ease the
three-dimensional modeling process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
significantly advances the state of the art in virtual world systems and three-
dimensional content creation. The scalable and secure virtual world platform
will be able to support millions of participants concurrently interacting in a
shared three-dimensional simulated environment. The novel content creation
methodologies will enable untrained participants to create unique high-quality
three-dimensional objects for a variety of application domains. Dedicated data
collection capabilities will support social science, legal, and economic
research on previously unseen scales, with analysis of large-scale behavioral
data that may yield deep and novel insights into human and societal behavior.