* 0835411
* GEOPOD: Geoscience Probe of Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Sepideh Yalda, Millersville University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2014
* USD 364,986.00

This research project (GEOPOD) focuses on the development of a software module
that implements an interactive, intuitive interface - the "GEOpod", that allows
users to probe a 3D immersion world of authentic geophysical data, actuate
virtual devices to collect data and record observations, while guided by
instructional design strategies that are customized for undergraduate learners.
Because the data will consist of real observations and imagery, and simulated
data from numerical models based on actual physics, the exploration environment
naturally exhibits technical accuracy, scientific soundness, physical
consistency, authenticity, and high fidelity; attributes that are otherwise
enormously challenging and costly for synthetic simulations targeted for
education. GEOpod will enable a user to pilot a vessel to simultaneously probe,
the eye of a hurricane for example, and experience points of interest while
immersed in an authentic storm simulation. The software module will extend
Unidata's Integrated Data Viewer (IDV), and utilize its collaborative utility to
allow simultaneous users to engage in group learning activities and share
information in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed
project include the delivery of a free, open-source IDV extension; development
of learning modules with instructional strategies informed and improved by
assessment rubrics, critical external evaluation, and experts in instructional
technology; and engagement of students and university educators from the
geosciences and computer science communities. GEOPOD?s Web-accessible, Java-
based software will operate across operating systems. NSF investments in Unidata
and Linked Environments for Atmospheric Discovery (LEAD) will be heavily
leveraged. Finally, the products of this effort will be widely disseminated
through conferences on geosciences technology and education, graphics, and
virtual reality; Unidata's established community portal and workshops; and
national scientific venues such as the American Meteorological Society, American
Geophysical Union, and the Association for Computing Machinery. It is estimated
that GEOPOD has the potential to enrich the learning environment for 20,000
undergraduates in the nearly 200 higher education institutions in the U.S. and
other countries through course integrations for geosciences majors and large-
enrollment introductory courses for non-majors.