* 0835558
* Workshop on Equivariant Gromov-Witten Theory and Symplectic Vortices; July 2009, Luminy, France
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Christopher Woodward, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2009
* USD 25,058.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0835558&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Christopher Woodward&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry,
symplectic geometry and low-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology have been
revolutionized in recent years by the&lt;br/&gt;introduction of holomorphic
curve techniques. This workshop, to&lt;br/&gt;be held July 6-10, 2009, at the
CIRM (Luminy) conference center,&lt;br/&gt;concerns equivariant generalizations
of invariants defined by&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic curves. In Gromov-Witten theory,
equivariant&lt;br/&gt;invariants have been extensively studied by Givental and
others,&lt;br/&gt;in the sense of integrals of equivariant cohomology classes
over&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces of stable maps. The focus of the workshop will
be&lt;br/&gt;on the following more sophisticated version of
equivariant&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten theory: the study of moduli spaces of maps
to the&lt;br/&gt;stack-theoretic quotient of, say, a smooth projective variety
by&lt;br/&gt;a reductive group. By definition, such a map consists of
a&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic principal bundle, together with a section of
the&lt;br/&gt;associated bundle. From the symplectic point of view,
suitable&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces of such pairs are known as moduli spaces of
{\em&lt;br/&gt;symplectic vortices}. The workshop is organized around
this&lt;br/&gt;specific direction, with an aim to bring together researchers
in&lt;br/&gt;algebraic and symplectic geometry who have had no
previous&lt;br/&gt;interaction. On the other hand, the workshop will
promote&lt;br/&gt;discussion of the interaction of holomorphic maps, gauge
theory,&lt;br/&gt;and group actions more broadly. Applications of the theory
are&lt;br/&gt;expected for instance, to the relation between Gromov-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;theories of different varieties, and to the relation between
the&lt;br/&gt;gauge-theoretic invariants such as Floer-Donaldson invariants
and&lt;br/&gt;their symplectic analogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a
workshop which will bring together gauge theory and&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic
curves. Gauge theory is the study of local symmetry&lt;br/&gt;in mathematics and
physics; the most famous example is&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetism. Holomorphic
curve techniques aim, in algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry, to understand spaces by
understanding the certain&lt;br/&gt;classes of curves in them, or in symplectic
geometry, to&lt;br/&gt;understand the periodic orbits of dynamical systems.
Symmetry of&lt;br/&gt;the target varieties may be used as a computational tool,
and&lt;br/&gt;also combined with holomorphic curves to define new
invariants.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on recent developments and
emerging&lt;br/&gt;applications to algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry,
and&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional topology. The workshop will benefit a number
of&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and postdoctoral fellows working in this
area&lt;br/&gt;who have had little interaction with other groups working
on&lt;br/&gt;related problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference web-page
controlled by the organizers is&lt;br/&gt;www.math.rutgers.edu/~ctw/Luminy,
while that controlled by the&lt;br/&gt;conference center CIRM
is&lt;br/&gt;www.cirm.univ-mrs.fr/web.ang/liste_rencontre/Rencontres2009/Renc346
/Renc346.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;