* 0835473
* Collaborative Research:  Inhibition of Snowfall by Pollution Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2012
* Douglas Lowenthal, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2012
* USD 244,804.00

Intellectual Merit: This research will advance understanding of the potential
role of aerosol pollution in modifying wintertime orographic precipitation. A
key issue to be addressed is how the influence of aerosol pollution upon clouds
may be altered by various synoptic weather regimes, cloud types, and amounts of
supercooled water within these clouds. Based on previous modeling results, it is
anticipated that clouds with higher amounts of supercooled water (such as those
typically found over the San Juan Mountains of Colorado) are more susceptible to
impacts by aerosol pollution. The modulation of this potential response will be
addressed both temporally via time-series measurements at the Storm Peak
Laboratory (SPL) and spatially through more distributed measurements over the
San Juan Mountains of Colorado and through model simulations.

Potential for Transformative Research: This investigation has the potential to
revise traditional theories of aerosol-induced impacts on wintertime orographic
precipitation. Prior work has suggested that increased pollution aerosol
concentrations lead to a significant reduction in precipitation falling from
orographic clouds. Further studies by the Principal Investigators conducted in
the Park Range mountains of Colorado suggest that aerosol pollution may also
redistribute orographic precipitation and subsequent runoff among adjacent river
basins. In this view, some reduction of total precipitation may occur but
aerosol-induced shifts in the location of precipitation predominate. The
relative contributions of these two potential influences will be further
explored in this new study. Consideration of longer time periods (i.e., a full
winter season) should lead to more robust conclusions, as well as an improved
regional climatology of pollution aerosol influences.

Broader Impacts: This work has significant demographic and economic
implications. If pollution aerosols are indeed systematically reducing mountain
snowfall, increased development across the western U.S. will in turn reduce
available snowpack-derived water resources needed to sustain such population
growth and require strategies to minimize such impacts. Education and outreach
activities at SPL during the field component of this study will include a three-
day graduate level mesoscale modeling class led by the Principal Investigator, a
week-long graduate/undergraduate class in mountain meteorology led by a
University of Wisconsin collaborator, and. a graduate field meteorology class
offered through the Desert Research Institute focusing on SPL's unique
observational capabilities. The location of the laboratory at the summit of the
Steamboat Ski Resort also affords considerable public access to its full range
of activities, and the Principal Investigators supported under this grant will
conduct open houses for the public and create a more permanent outdoor display
describing work being done under this project.