* 0835393
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Robust Learning with Conceptual Personalization Technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* James Martin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 392,381.00

Concerns about both economic competitiveness and educational equity emphasize
the need for the United States to broaden and diversify the pipeline of students
prepared and motivated to pursue STEM college majors. An emerging strategy for
addressing this need is large-scale implementation of inclusive STEM high
schools. In this exploratory project, investigators from SRI International and
George Washington University are laying the foundation for a rigorous quasi-
experiment to test the effects of attending such a school using longitudinal
student records, surveys, and interviews. The project's operational definition
for an inclusive STEM high school (ISHS) is a school, school within a school, or
school program that accepts students primarily on the basis of interest rather
than aptitude or prior achievement and gives them the mathematics and science
preparation they need to succeed in a STEM college major. ISHSs enroll students
from groups underrepresented in STEM professions through an application process
that does not require high test scores before high school entry. In contrast to
selective STEM schools that admit gifted and talented students on the basis of
entrance examination scores and thus select for perceived STEM aptitude. ISHSs
have the more ambitious goal of developing STEM
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To establish the feasibility of a large, multi-
state investigation of the effectiveness of inclusive STEM schools at scale,
researchers are:&lt;br/&gt;Developing a tentative taxonomy of ISHSs and
exploring implications of ISHS heterogeneity for the research design;&lt;br/&gt;
- Recruiting three school partners representing different ISHS
approaches;&lt;br/&gt; - Using state data to identify a comparison school
(without a particular focus on STEM) for each ISHS school partner and recruiting
comparison school partners;&lt;br/&gt; - Developing School Leader and three
student surveys (fall 9th-grade, spring 12th-grade, and spring post-
graduation);&lt;br/&gt; - Collaborating with partner schools in design of data
collection procedures, recruiting materials, and incentives;&lt;br/&gt; -
Piloting the School Leader Survey and two student surveys (9th-grade fall survey
and 12th-grade spring survey) in six partner schools;&lt;br/&gt; - Identifying
and recruiting a larger sample of ISHSs and matched comparison schools for Year
2 data collection;&lt;br/&gt; - Administering surveys in 40 or more high
schools; &lt;br/&gt; - Locating spring 2012 graduates of the three ISHS partner
schools and pilot testing the post-graduation student survey with these
students; and&lt;br/&gt; - Engaging an Advisory Board who will provide
methodological expertise and advice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, by
documenting survey response rates, student location rates, and rates for
successful matching of student administrative and survey data, this feasibility
work is demonstrating that it is possible to collect the kind of data that would
enable a large-scale study to be launched with the necessary instruments and
experience in hand. As evidenced by the recent call from the President's Council
of Advisors in Science and Technology for 1,000 new STEM schools and the
National Research Council's report entitled "Successful K-12 STEM Education:
Identifying Effective Approaches in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics" that highlights various STEM schools, the proposed research is
highly relevant to current policy initiatives and debates. Moreover, the
research has the potential to promote diversity in the STEM pipeline by
influencing policymakers in states and districts that have yet to implement
ISHSs at scale.