* 0835623
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: Advanced Theory and Computational Methods for Modular Analysis and Design of Complex Gene Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Alexander Van Oudenaarden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan S. Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 762,877.00

The objective of this research is to develop the theory and advanced
computational tools for a modular decomposition and analysis of complex gene
networks. The key challenge to overcome is that biological networks are high-
dimensional coupled stochastic nonlinear systems with uncertain components. The
approach is to employ tools and expertise from computational and experimental
systems biology, stochastic dynamic nonlinear networks, and control theory to
systematically decompose the network into simple modules whose dynamic
properties can be understood in isolation and then related to the behavior of
the network.

The research has the potential to provide a framework that (a) enables the
decomposition of complex biological networks into modules; (b) identifies the
essential characteristics of each module necessary to account for its role in
the network's behavior; and (c) provides the analytical and computational
foundation for the analysis and synthetic construction of networks of modules.
The systematic approach explicitly accounts for network dynamics, the stochastic
nature, and uncertainty of biological networks. Development of the framework is
guided by and validated through carefully selected biological experiments.

The research has the potential to provide new tools to help scientists reverse-
engineer complex biological networks, leading to a deeper understanding of
biological function. Such understanding is a key step in the rational design of
therapies. Research and educational activities are tightly integrated to train a
diverse cadre of scientists and engineers who are adept at employing
computational thinking in multi-disciplinary research. Recruitment of women and
students from under-represented groups through summer internships, campus
programs, and special institutional partnerships is central to the
investigators' strategy for achieving diversity.