* 0835652
* CDI-Type II: Exploiting Collective Human Knowledge to Understand and Evolve Complex Networked Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Dina Katabi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,450,000.00

Large networked computer systems are some of the most complex and sophisticated
engineered systems ever constructed. Because of this complexity, our existing
computing environment is unreliable, insecure, and difficult to use. One
intriguing aspect of this situation is that most problems people encounter in
practice are not new --- they have previously been seen and solved by others.
Developing techniques that enable the automated analysis of this rich knowledge
source is therefore a key step in advancing our understanding of this important
class of engineered artifacts. The research effort focuses on developing
techniques that automatically process existing repositories of human
interactions regarding previously encountered problems and solutions to isolate
potential solutions to the problem. It will then use multiple virtual machines
to evaluate each of the potential solutions, then use this evaluation to
automatically select an candidate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected benefits of
this approach are three fold. First, developing methods that jointly analyze
documents in natural language and formally structured computer information can
lead to new insights and a deeper understanding of these important phenomena.
Second, this research will yield a new class of techniques for reasoning about
computer systems in the presence of uncertainty by leveraging collective
knowledge of a user community. Finally, by automatically finding solutions to
system problems, these methods hold out the promise of substantially reducing
the cost and risks associated with using computers to perform many of the key
activities in our society.&lt;br/&gt;