* 0835607
* CDI-Type II: Understanding Water-Human Dynamics with Intelligent Digital Watersheds
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* David Bennett, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2012
* USD 995,400.00

0835607 &lt;br/&gt;Schnoor &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of
water and the role of humans in the water cycle are not well understood largely
because: (a) environmental and socio-economic analyses have traditionally been
performed separately; and (b) the methods, tools, and data needed for true
multidisciplinary work do not exist. In the absence of a full understanding of
coupled human-natural system dynamics, there is a risk of unintended
consequences (e.g., increased nutrient pollution, Gulf Hypoxia, greenhouse gas
emissions, and food prices as a result of a government policy to improve energy
independence through agricultural production of corn for biofuels). This
project's overarching goal is to develop a prototype cyberinfrastructure-based
intelligent digital watershed (IDW) that enables discovery and innovation in
ways never before possible. IDW will facilitate novel insights into
human/environment interactions through multi-disciplinary research focused on
watershed-related processes at multiple spatio-temporal scales. Project
objectives are to: (a) Determine the time delay between socio-economic decisions
in land management practices and the resulting water quality at multiple scales,
(b) Discover patterns, emergent behavior, dynamic interactions and underlying
principles from the integration of heterogeneous data collected or generated by
multi-disciplinary simulation models, (c) Develop computational intelligence to
fill-in data gaps, and improve model parameterization, and (d) Determine needs
(data transformation, knowledge extraction/representation, and visualization)
for a real-time, multi-domain cyberinfrastructure system using distributed
resources to engage a variety of users in watershed science &amp;
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Use of the novel IDW will
enable the prediction of stream-flow and water quality fluxes based on rainfall
runoff forecasts and human-management decisions, including dependencies on
hydrologic, biogeochemical, and anthropogenic parameters (e.g., vegetation,
subsurface structure, land use and cover). The associated fluxes, stores, and
properties will be combined to determine estimates of water quality and quantity
at the watershed-scale level. Direct benefits of the research will be: (a)
creating prototype tools and technology needed to collect near real-time data
related to land use; (b) understanding the impact of local land-use decisions on
stream water quality at multiple scales; and (c) enhancing the eco-hydrological
data management systems currently used to monitor water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The broader benefit of the
proposed research will be an increased understanding of how humans: (a) process
information about natural systems, (b) make decisions under uncertainty, and (c)
evaluate social and environmental impacts of technological change and
substitution among competing societal objectives. First, the modeling and
cyberinfrastructure approaches proposed in this research are applicable not only
to the emerging observatory effort led by the WATERS Network community, but to
many other disciplines where distributed databases are used for decision making.
The domain studied in this research makes a useful test-bed for envisioned
applications of research in energy, medicine, technology, and other domains.
Such generalizations are suggested by general systems theory and the
similarities among nonlinear, complex, coupled human behavioral and natural
science systems. Second, the Intelligent Digital Watershed operates on a web-
based platform, so anyone with internet access will be able to benefit from the
research including environmental specialists, engineers, hydrologists,
regulators, non-governmental organizations, environmental consulting firms, and
academic institutions. Broader impacts will include the capability to utilize
this Intelligent Digital Watershed in problem-based learning (PBL) like the
Invent Iowa Program, a network of 30,000 active student participants (K-12).