* 0835454
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Robust Learning with Conceptual Personalization Technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kirsten Butcher, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 145,558.00

Personalized instruction ? instruction that targets individual students? unique
learning needs and builds upon their prior knowledge ? is critical for
supporting effective science learning. The primary goal in this project is to
support robust learning with personalization strategies using natural language
technologies. The project is a three-institution collaboration between the
University of Colorado, the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, and
the University of Utah. It has two objectives: the technology objective is to
create domain-independent techniques to create personalization algorithms, and
the learning science objective is to measure the effect of these algorithms on
learning. The project focuses on robust learning, i.e., learning the supports
transfer and the promotion of meta-cognitive skills. The subject matter is earth
science and biology. The proposed techonology would operate as follows. Firstly,
the system uses state-of-the-art statistical natural language processing methods
to automatically process learning resources (primarily texts) in order to create
a domain knowledge map. This includes automatically identifying core concepts in
a treatment of the subject matter. Secondly, during learning sessions, the
system would analyze students' essays to dynamically construct a domain
knowledge map of the students' responses (and an assessment of student
understanding). Using graph matching techniques, the system evaluates the
student's response, including determining what concepts were missing or
misunderstood. Finally, the system uses recommendation engine methods to suggest
web resources that could help the student understand the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, by automating many of the processes
to identify knowledge and key concepts, has the potential to transform learning.
The system is independent of the domain of learning so it can be used for any
area of science. The system also does not depend upon skilled teachers ? so it
can be effectively used in under-served schools. &lt;br/&gt;