* 0835734
* CDI-Type I: Combined Global Physical, Chemical, and Mineralogical Models of Protoplanetary Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Denton Ebel, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2014
* USD 575,192.00

The Earth is unique among known planets in having liquid water on its surface, a
crucial reason for the existence of life. Explaining how this came to be, and
predicting conditions friendly to life elsewhere requires understanding the
protoplanetary disk from which Earth and the other planets formed, a complex,
interacting system of rocks, dust, gas, plasma, and magnetic fields in orbit
around the young Sun. Many models by different scientific communities have
addressed separate aspects of this problem, but none has integrated all the
different physical, chemical, and mineralogical processes into a single,
general, continuously improvable, three-dimensional, computational
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our imminent entry into the petascale computing era
makes such a model practical for the first time. This project will be the first
serious attempt to develop a complete, multi-physics model based on a global
simulation of a protoplanetary disk. We will include three major physical
processes. First is the turbulence driven by magnetic fields coupled to the
partially ionized gas, which determines how fast the disk accretes onto the star
and how well dust can stick together to form the building blocks of planets.
Second is the radiative cooling of the disk, which determines the temperature of
the disk, and is determined by how dusty the disk is. That, in turn, is
controlled partly by the temperature. Third, the gas chemistry and the
temperature, as well as the dust properties, determine the ionization of the
gas, which in turn determines how turbulent the disk is. All of these processes
will be included in a common computational framework. This framework will rely
on a novel numerical algorithm for computing magnetized gas flows using
simulated particles moving with the gas. This algorithm combines advantages and
evades limitations of both traditional grid-based simulation codes and of more
widely used particle methods such as smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Our team
includes the inventor of this method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a new,
integrated model, we will be able to better understand Earth's position and
properties, the properties of other Solar System objects, and observations of
extrasolar planetary systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding for
this project will support the interdisciplinary training of a graduate student
in the areas of meteoritics and astrophysics treated here. A collaboration
between the host institution and two European institutions will be supported,
with graduate students traveling in both directions for collaboration and
training. Three undergraduate students will also participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research undertaken here will inform the
exhibitions and education work of the PI and co-PI Ebel. Currently, their
projects include a new Hayden Planetarium Space Show (estimated international
viewership 7 million over 5 years, including 0.5 million NYC school children), a
photo exhibit on the Cassini-Huygens mission to Saturn, as well as extensive
work with the professional development and community education departments of
the Museum, and mentoring summer REU students and interns.