* 0836020
* Success Partnerships for Increasing Recruitment into Technology (SPIRIT)
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Chinya Ravishankar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 10/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This exploratory project will develop Success Partnership for Increasing
Recruitment into Technology (SPIRIT), which will integrate and build upon
ongoing effective programs at secondary schools, community colleges, and the
University of California, Riverside (UCR). San Bernardino and Riverside counties
in Southern California together are larger than 10 states and home to more than
4 million people, but the region lags behind much of California in college
matriculation rates and economic opportunity. This project will build on a year-
old initiative from the Alliance for Education, operated by the San Bernardino
County Superintendent of Schools, to establish pre-engineering curricula in high
schools throughout the county. UCR will integrate outreach activities,
mentoring, tutoring, design experiences, and teacher workshops into this
initiative. The project will raise awareness of engineering and highlight the
relevance of math and science instruction, increase student readiness to succeed
in college engineering studies by strengthening their math and science
preparation, and establish ongoing dialog among school teachers, school
administrators, district administrators, community colleges, and four-year
institutions? faculty and administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
emphasize fundamental engineering skills necessary for success in engineering
which will help to secure our continuing leadership in technology by encouraging
more students to enter engineering. The project will reach a large number of
underrepresented minority students, and recruiting more of these students will
increase and diversify the pipeline from K-12 to university engineering
programs. UCR is one of America?s most diverse research-intensive universities.
Approximately 35% of undergraduates are underrepresented minorities, and it is
an accredited Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). In addition, the schools
involved in this project are also highly diverse. Having UCR college students
tutor high school students in math and science will demonstrate to these
students that people from neighborhoods and cultural backgrounds similar to
their own can succeed in college and go on to careers in engineering. The
activities also will build a sense of community and commitment on the part of
the college students.&lt;br/&gt;