* 0836716
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Power Relations and Urban Landscape Formation: A Study of Construction Labor and Resources in Teotihuacan, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* George Cowgill, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,305.00

Under the direction of Drs. Barbara Stark and George Cowgill, Mr Tatsuya
Murakami will collect data for his doctoral thesis. He will focus his research
on the archaeological site of Teotihuacan to determine how political and
economic power was differentially distributed among the inhabitants and how this
changed over time. Teotihuacan which is located in the Valley of Mexico, is one
of the largest and most impressive prehistoric sites in the New World.
Monumental architecture - the Pyramids of the Sun and the Moon - provide
evidence of this early state's ability to harness and maintain a large supply of
labor and at its height archaeologists estimate that population reached 100,000
or more individuals. Teotihuacan projected its power over a large hinterland and
its effects were felt as far as the Mayan lowlands where trade relations were
established. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Murakami wishes to understand the
dynamics which allowed this state to develop and flourish and to accomplish this
he proposes to study how power was distributed between elite rulers and the
broader populace. Archaeological evidence suggests that the latter gained
influence over time. The research is designed to examine the relative amount of
effort devoted to construction within the central ceremonial portion of the site
which, it is assumed, was occupied by the elite ruling class and the adjacent
residential precincts which were inhabited by other groups. Quantitative
assessment of labor expenditure for construction will be based on replicative
experiments, ethnographic observation and published measures of construction
costs. The total and per capita labor costs for structures within the central
precinct will be used as proxy for the extent and degree of state power
respectively. For quality analysis, cut stone blocks (used for facing walls and
stairways) and lime plaster (coverfing floors and walls) will be analyzed since
both are non-local materials and require relatively high labor inputs for
manufacture. The research will not only provide new insight into an iconic
archaeological site but also provide a new and useful tool for archaeological
analysis. The project will also further the intellectual and academic
development of a promising young scientist.