* 0836575
* Fatigue Response of Nanostructured Metallic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2008,08/31/2009
* T. Venkatesh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2009
* USD 83,568.00

Recent research efforts have demonstrated that nanostructured materials exhibit
significant enhancements in mechanical properties such as yield strength,
hardness and wear resistance, when compared to conventional 'microstructured'
materials. However, a comprehensive understanding of the fatigue and fracture
behavior of nanostructured materials is currently unavailable. Furthermore, the
potential for enhancing the fatigue life of conventional materials through the
creation of nanostructured surface layers/coatings has not been explored in
sufficient depth. Hence, this project is directed towards obtaining key insights
on the fatigue phenomenon in nanostructured materials. Through an approach that
combines analytical modeling, numerical modeling, and experiments on model
nanostructured metallic systems (nickel and iron), this study lays the
foundation for: (i) a fundamental understanding of the plain fatigue and fatigue
crack growth response of nanostructured materials; (ii) a quantitative
assessment of the contact fatigue response of nanostructured materials; (iii) a
unique application of a novel adhesion model for the prediction of contact
fatigue crack initiation in nanostructured materials; and (iv) the development
of a simplified numerical model for contact fatigue life prediction in
nanostructured materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present study leads to broad
impact at the following three levels: (i) Research: By advancing the current
understanding of the mechanisms associated with fatigue of nanostructured
materials, the research activities provide scientific and technological impact
in the tribology industry (including aircraft, automotive, and bio-medical,
fatigue-sensitive applications). Comprehensive research training is imparted to
one graduate student. Because Louisiana's research investment has been
significantly lower than in other states, the project activities also enhance
the state's research base and educational efforts in the field of
nanotechnology. (ii) Educational experience for minorities: In conjunction with
this research project, a graduate/undergraduate course on Deformation, Fatigue
and Fracture that has been developed by the PI, is enhanced to provide an
exciting hands-on experimental component to the class-room learning experience
about the fatigue phenomenon.