* 0836407
* Numerical Simulations of Gravity Wave Instabilities, Wave-Wave and Wave Mean Flow Interactions, Momentum Transport, and Spectral Evolution in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Thomas Lund, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 10/31/2012
* USD 505,000.00

This project will perform comprehensive modeling studies intended to quantify
gravity wave (GW) instability dynamics and nonlinear wave-wave and wave-mean
flow interactions that drive energy and momentum deposition and energy transfers
within the GW spectrum in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT). GW
momentum transport is the major driver of the large-scale circulation and
thermal structure of the MLT at middle and high latitudes and appears to play an
important role at equatorial latitudes. Observations and modeling also suggest
that GW momentum fluxes are strongly modulated by tides and planetary waves
(PWs) and that variable GW momentum fluxes can in turn modulate these larger-
scale motions and map the effects of their GW filtering to much higher
altitudes. Despite the critical importance of these processes, the GW
instability and interaction dynamics controlling these large-scale responses
have been quantified only in very idealized environments to date. The
descriptions of these dynamics via GW parameterizations in various large-scale
general circulation model, climate, and numerical weather prediction models are
widely recognized to be poor approximations of these dynamics in many
applications, despite their important influences on larger-scale dynamics
throughout the atmosphere. The goal of the project is to define the various
instability dynamics for large domains and broad GW spectra sufficiently well to
provide a critical understanding of the most important components and guidance
that is of value in the design of parameterizations of these GW influences that
would substantially improve the performance of the various weather and climate
models that depend on them. To quantify the most important GW instability and
interaction dynamics and their mean and variable responses as fully as possible,
very high resolution direct numerical simulations (DNS) and large-eddy
simulations (LES) will be done in order to assess the competition between
different instability classes (including wave-wave interactions) and the
circumstances where one or the other is clearly dominant for various GWs scales,
frequencies, and amplitudes in various environments; the importance of
localization of GW instability events in GW dissipation, amplitude (and momentum
flux) constraints, and spectral evolution; the consequences of GW (and mean
shear) superposition for instability occurrence and type and turbulent mixing
and transport. The project aims to provide a more quantitative characterization
of these dynamics on GW momentum deposition, spectral evolution, and mean and
large-scale forcing of the MLT.