* 0836566
* Geology of National Parks:   Spreadsheets, Quantitative Literacy, and Natural Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Mark Rains, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 12/31/2012
* USD 197,688.00

Geology (42) This project is adapting a CCLI Phase 2 "Spreadsheets Across the
Curriculum (SSAC)" (NSF DUE 0442629) to focus on a specific course, "Geology of
National Parks", taught at USF and at institutions across the country. A
collection of educational materials (16 SSAC modules) is being developed that
couples elementary mathematical problem solving with National Parks geology
context. The activities are short, PowerPoint presentations from which the
students build one or more spreadsheets to perform calculations to answer
specific questions about the environmental geology and ecosystem health of the
park. The guiding concept for the geology context is alignment of the "Geology
of National Parks" course with "The Natural Resource Challenge", the National
Park Service (NPS) initiative to integrate science, park planning, and
management. This project is: 1) building a collaboration between eight NPS
Research Learning Centers (RLCs) and geology faculty of USF; 2) helping students
become more aware of the kinds of environmental-geological work that informs the
management of parklands; and 3) promoting quantitative literacy (QL) in an
introductory geology course. SSAC is a partner in SERC's Pedagogical Services
project and this project is adding a new collection ("Geology of National
Parks") to the SSAC library. This project promotes quantitative literacy and
aims to add a form of scientific literacy - the "science-in-action" realization
that data-based science is crucial in making decisions that society cares about:
in this case, the preservation of treasured parklands.