* 0836943
* Discovering the Art of Mathematics: A Library of Inquiry Based Learning Guides for Mathematics for Liberal Arts
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Julian Fleron, Westfield State College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 05/31/2012
* USD 149,971.00

Discipline: Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Discovering the Art
of Mathematics" is developing, evaluating and distributing a library of ten
inquiry-based learning guides and supplemental teacher resources primarily for
college-level Mathematics for Liberal Arts courses. These curriculum materials
provide compelling, high-quality, student-centered resources that support a
continuum of individual learning styles; have engaging content that is
intellectually challenging; and nurture in-depth explorations of mathematical
topics in the liberal arts tradition. The topics for the ten volumes are
patterns; the infinite; number theory; knot theory; music; geometry; calculus;
games and puzzles; art and sculpture; and reasoning, truth, logic, and
certainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes a broad range of
meaningful, positive, cognitive, meta-cognitive, and affective student gains and
is being and will continue to be assessed through both formative and summative
evaluations. An advisory board, including nationally known mathematicians, is
reviewing, beta testing, and providing feedback on each of the ten
volumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full library is being widely distributed
through a website, workshops, presentations, and publication. This project
provides a well-designed and intellectually sound liberal arts curriculum which
is a healthy complement to quantitative literacy and applications curricula for
Mathematics for Liberal Arts courses.