* 0836768
* SGER: Mechanical Behavior of Low Coordination Number Metallic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Gary Dargush, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2010
* USD 160,001.00

TECHNICAL: In this high-risk, high-payoff exploratory research program, the PI
investigates the mechanical behavior of low coordination number (LCN) metallic
systems and their constitutive equations. The intellectual merit resides in
identifying this knowledge gap and in proposing a unique set of experiments and
modeling strategies to characterize LCN system mechanical properties. To date,
virtually all the research on nano-mechanical properties has focused on systems
whose physical dimensions are of the order of tens to hundreds of nanometers.
These ?nano? systems share a basic commonality with their bulk counterparts -
their atomic coordination number (CN) is the same as that in the bulk (12 for
FCC or HCP, 8 for BCC). A fundamental departure in mechanical behavior is
expected to occur when the atomic CN changes relative to the bulk. This is
because a departure from bulk CN is accompanied by a change in intrinsic
properties of the system such as the cohesive energy, modulus, etc. However,
little is known about the behavior of systems so small that the total number of
atoms constituting the specimen is less than the bulk CN. The transformative
nature of these studies can be gauged from the fact that something as elementary
as the stress-strain curves for LCN systems remain unknown; the term 'Poisson
ratio' makes little sense in LCN systems; modulus (ordinarily an intrinsic
property) itself varies with the number of atoms in the system, and surface
energy effects are likely dominant. The scientific payoff lies in establishing a
new framework for mechanical properties of LCN systems. The high-risk component
of this research resides in the ability to reliably make such atomic sized
samples and measure their mechanical properties. This is non-trivial. New
experimental techniques have to be developed and new concepts have to evolve
that currently have no analogs in relatively larger systems. Specific research
objectives include: (1) Measure force-displacement curves as a function of CN
(<12); (2) Infer stiffness as a function of CN from the measured force-
displacement curves; (3) Measure force-displacement curves for linear atomic
chains and infer the dependence of modulus on chain length; (4) Evaluate the
feasibility of detecting transitions between different isomers for a given CN;
(5) Develop phenomenological constitutive equations for the above and infer
stress-strain curves and moduli. NON-TECHNICAL: This research has significant
broader impacts and implications that extend beyond the obvious gains and
insight that would be made in understanding the deformation behavior of
materials. Results would provide a new intellectual framework for studying not
just mechanical behavior of small nano systems, but also an entirely new avenue
for treating the problem of deformation in bulk systems. In addition, by
establishing basic or elementary constitutive relationships for small
coordination systems, the research would impact ongoing studies of mechanics of
molecules, biomolecules, and biological cell membranes. The educational broader
impacts include training and education of a graduate student who would
participate in this cutting edge research at the intersection of metals,
mechanical deformation, advanced tools for testing, technique development and
modeling.