* 0836907
* Scaffolding Effective Practice for Use of Animations in Teaching Mineralogy and Physical Geology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Laura Wenk, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 12/31/2011
* USD 31,557.00

42 (Geology) &lt;br/&gt;Six pairs of computer animations and visualization tools
for use in teaching physical geology and mineralogy are being developed. The
first half of each animation pair is suitable for use in geoscience classrooms.
Instructors show these animations while providing cues to aid in students'
analysis of the visual information. The second half of each animation pair
consists of an on-line interactive web-based exercise suitable for homework or
distance-based learning assignments. The style and content of the animations are
consistent throughout so that conventions, symbols, and spatial relations carry
over from one animation to the next, improving the benefits to student learning.
The animations are hosted on a web site dedicated to scaffolding effective
practice for teaching with animations, and include not only the animations
themselves, but also resources on best practice for use of animations,
information on specific learning challenges in teaching geology and mineralogy,
and tools for evaluating the use of animations. The animations are being
initially tested by a small group of local users for formative evaluation. After
revisions, the improved animations will then be embedded in a rich web site that
will provide examples of the relationships between content and context for
student learning through animations. A cadre of users across the country has
volunteered to test the web site and the animations and provide feedback at a
gathering at the Geological Society of America National Meeting. The outcome
will be a contribution to the knowledge base relating to effective use of
computer animations in teaching fundamental geoscience curricula.