* 0836592
* Collaborative Research: An autonomous indicator-based pH sensor for oceanographic research and monitoring
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Andrew Dickson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2011
* USD 113,209.00

Changes in pH of the global ocean can have ecosystem wide impact (coral
bleaching etc.) and is identified as a ?chronic hazard? related to the carbon
cycle. pH or another carbon system measurement besides pCO2 is required to
completely characterize the dissolved inorganic carbon system in the ocean. ?The
Global Ocean Carbon Observation System ? A Background Report? (UNESCO 2002)
recommends sampling the carbonate system (DIC, alkalinity, pCO2,
pH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s with previous funding have developed a pH
sensor based on a simple and robust technology that can be readily quality
controlled. The SAMI-pH sensor offers a powerful method for autonomous
measurements of seawater pH. The instrument can be used for inorganic carbon
quantification, CO2 acidification studies, and biogeochemical process studies.
The instrument may also find applications in freshwater research and monitoring
and industrial monitoring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current funding will be used
to transition the SAMI-pH sensor to commercial status. The goals for this
project are to: 1) Improve SAMI optical performance; 2) Minimize pH
perturbation; 3) Minimize analysis time; 4) Improve ease of assembly, operation
and troubleshooting; 5) Reduce power consumption; and 6) Implement in situ
quality control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project will make an autonomous pH
instrument commercially-available to oceanographers and other researchers
interested in stable, accurate and precise pH measurements. By deploying the
instruments in the ocean, long-term pH data will be obtained that will help the
scientific community understand how CO2 absorption from the atmosphere is
changing seawater pH. These results will guide policy makers charged to
determine time-frames for CO2 remediation. General sensor technology developed
as part of this project will benefit other research and commercial sectors that
rely upon automated, high quality, chemical measurements. Post-doctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students who participate in the project will increase
the U.S. expertise in sensor development for environmental applications, an area
of critical need. &lt;br/&gt;