* 0836754
* CAREER: Learning rules for map plasticity in somatosensory  cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 08/31/2007,02/28/2011
* Daniel Feldman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 02/28/2011
* USD 460,188.00

Sensory experience drives long-lasting changes in neural circuit function, which
are essential for brain development and learning. A dominant model is that such
plasticity involves long-term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD), well-
studied mechanisms that increase or decrease the strength of synaptic
connections between neurons. LTP and LTD are triggered by specific local neural
activity patterns according to quantitative synaptic learning rules. Despite an
increasing molecular understanding of plasticity, the relevant learning rules
driving LTP and LTD in vivo are not known. Work in this proposal will identify
these learning rules, in order to allow a quantitative description of how
plasticity is induced and how information is stored in neural circuits. The
model system is the whisker region of rat somatosensory cortex (S1), which is a
classical system for studying the effects of experience on brain function.
Whisker deprivation drives LTD at specific S1 synapses. A prospective, model-
independent approach will be taken to identify the specific neural activity
patterns and learning rules that drive LTD in vivo. The strategy is to record S1
spike trains in awake, behaving rats, and to use quantitative analysis
techniques to identify spike train parameters that are altered acutely by
deprivation, and that constitute candidate activity patterns that may drive LTD
in vivo. These candidate parameters will be played back to neurons in S1 slices
in vitro to determine which parameters actually drive LTD, and to characterize
the learning rules governing such plasticity. This approach will identify novel
learning rules driving plasticity in vivo, and will confirm or reject
involvement of previously known rules. Identification of the relevant learning
rules for plasticity will provide a critical bridge between existing
molecular/synaptic and systems/theoretical descriptions of plasticity and
learning. By advancing our understanding of cortical plasticity, this work will
suggest new strategies for treating learning disabilities and memory disorders
during aging. This work will also support improved instructional techniques in
undergraduate education by developing a small-group, discussion-format course to
promote critical thinking and reasoning in biology and neuroscience. This course
will emphasize structured discussions, critical interactive thinking exercises,
and physical demonstrations to teach scientific reasoning skills and promote
improved knowledge retention, and will provide an alternative to standard,
large-lecture format classes. As part of this effort, graduate students will be
intensively trained in interactive, small-group teaching techniques, which will
aid their professional development as future educators.