* 0836464
* Western Airborne Mercury Observations (WAMO)
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Daniel Jaffe, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 11/30/2011
* USD 320,786.00

The goal of this project is to develop, evaluate, and utilize an airborne
instrument to measure two of the most important chemical forms of mercury (Hg):
gaseous elemental mercury (GEM) and reactive gaseous mercury (RGM). The
instrument will quantify RGM by two methods, one with one-hour resolution and a
second with 2.5-minute resolution. Data from the two techniques will be compared
and the uncertainty of the RGM measurements will be assessed. This will enable
the first high time resolution observations of both GEM and RGM by aircraft and
allow the following questions on the atmospheric mercury cycle to be addressed:
1) Do the two different airborne RGM measurements agree within their respective
uncertainties? 2) Do GEM observations by aircraft agree with observations at the
Mt. Bachelor Observatory in Oregon? 3) Can air masses with elevated RGM, seen
previously at Mt. Bachelor and predicted by models to be present over the
southwest U.S., be identified? If so, what are the chemical and meteorological
controls on RGM in the western U.S.? 4) What is the distribution of GEM and RGM
in the troposphere? 5) Can airborne measurements be used to quantify the flux of
GEM and RGM from industrial sources? This project should lead to a better
understanding of the chemical processing of atmospheric mercury and its sources
and sinks in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioaccumulation of mercury is a
problem with global and national significance because of its health impacts. One
postdoctoral fellow and one undergraduate student from the University of
Washington will participate in the project.