* 0836278
* SGER: Cooperative Learning-unlearning Algorithms for Identification of Robust Auditory Manifolds
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2009
* USD 62,010.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is investigating a framework of
learning and unlearning algorithms that can be used for identifying noise robust
auditory features.&lt;br/&gt;Even though most speech based recognition systems
deliver robust performance under controlled laboratory conditions, their
performance degrades significantly in presence of noise primarily due to
mismatch between training and deployment conditions. The proposed exploratory
study investigates the possibility of using information embedded in higher-order
spectral and temporal manifolds which could remain intact even in the presence
of ambient noise. Estimation of these non-linear manifolds in presence of noise,
however, poses a significant challenge and is the focus of this study. We are
investigating proof-of-concept features based on cooperative learning-unlearning
(CLU) algorithms that estimates manifold parameters in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) spanned by speech signals. We are evaluating the robustness
of these features in presence of room acoustics and background noise. The
broader impact of this exploratory study will be development of enabling
technology that can be used in the area of voice based biometrics, where
seamless authentication can be performed over the internet, cell phones or other
voice based media. The educational impact of the study includes graduate student
training and development of public domain software tools for CLU algorithms
which will be available to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;