* 0836526
* SGER: Representation in the 2008 Presidential Nomination Campaign
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Kim Fridkin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 80,823.00

A rare political event is unfolding. Nearly 30 million Democratic partisans have
participated in contests to choose the Democratic Party's presidential nominee;
but ultimately, less than 800 party elites known as "superdelegates" can
determine the Democratic candidate for president. This conundrum raises a series
of interesting questions regarding the role of political party leaders in
elections. How do party figures see their roles in the nomination process? Who
do they believe they represent? What considerations guide their decisions? What
do the millions of partisans who voted in primaries or participated in caucuses
think about the notion that party leaders could settle a historic nomination
campaign? Do voters believe the process is legitimate and that party leaders are
acting in ways that resonate with citizens' attitudes and
beliefs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project argues that the key to understanding
the behavior of political elites lies in exploring their perceptions of their
representational roles. By examining the thoughts and impressions of citizens
and their representatives, we gain important insights regarding the quality of
representation as well as voters' understanding and assessment of the workings
and legitimacy of the national nominating system. To understand how
superdelegates make their choices, it is necessary to survey this special
population. This project will conduct a mixed mode telephone/internet survey.
Because the identities of the superdelegates are publicly available, this
project can obtain their contact information and will attempt to interview the
entire population of 795 superdelegates using telephone and internet interviews.
In addition to talking to the superdelegates, the project will interview a
random sample of registered voters participating in an ongoing panel survey for
the 2008 presidential campaign. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current nomination
campaign provides leverage to examine the classic questions surrounding "mass-
elite linkages." Specifically, exploring the nature and quality of
representation between elites and citizens has enduring interests to students of
and participants in democratic institutions. This project is in a unique
position to compare mass and elite perceptions regarding attitudes towards the
candidates and evaluations of the conduct and consequences of the nominating
campaign. In summary, this study offers an opportunity to explore the nature of
representation in a novel setting to accurately assess the attitudes of
representatives and constituents and with respect to organizations that play
such an important role in determining public policy.