* 0836142
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Lower Atmospheric Source Regions of Medium-scale Gravity Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Michael Nicolls, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 05/31/2012
* USD 131,500.00

This project will investigate the sources of observed perturbations to the F
region ionosphere due to upward propagating gravity waves at two incoherent
scatter radar sites, Poker Flat and Arecibo. A by-product of the research will
be the extraction of time-varying F region neutral winds. The research
activities include making gravity wave observations using a new technique at the
two radars, modeling of secondary gravity wave excitation as well as the
propagation and dissipation of these gravity waves, and reverse ray tracing
studies. The F region of the atmosphere frequently exhibits medium-scale
traveling ionospheric disturbances that are thought to be gravity waves
propagating upwards from the lower atmosphere, but their sources are generally
unknown. Of particular interest is determining the role of secondary gravity
waves in producing the ionospheric disturbances. Two types of secondary wave
generation will be investigated in this project: those excited by mountain wave
breaking in the wintertime thermosphere at high latitudes and those excited by
the breaking of gravity waves in the mesosphere. One of the tools used to
address the identification of gravity wave sources is reverse ray tracing. The
essential information needed for the ray tracing approach is: 1) an accurate
gravity dispersion relation, and 2) knowledge of the gravity wave's horizontal
and vertical wavelengths and its period. Recently, an accurate viscous gravity
wave dispersion relation which accounts for realistic thermospheric dissipation
was derived and incorporated into a 3D ray trace model under a previous grant.
Meanwhile, information on gravity wave wavelengths and period have recently
become available from new multi-beam experiments at the Poker Flat and Arecibo
radars. As part of this project, observations of electron density perturbations
associated with the passage of gravity waves will be made at the two radars.
These measurements will be the basis for the modeling studies, which emphasize
gravity wave (GW) coupling between the lower atmosphere and the thermosphere.
The specific tasks and objectives include: determining wavelengths and periods
from the density and velocity perturbation profiles for selected gravity waves
at Poker Flat and Arecibo; extracting the temporal evolution of the neutral
winds and accelerations in the F region from these profiles using the viscous
gravity wave dispersion relation; calculating the secondary gravity wave spectra
excited from breaking mountain waves, and characterizing the scales and
amplitudes of the GWs in the F-region via ray tracing; determining the lower-
atmospheric sources of the gravity waves observed in the thermosphere for three
case studies at Poker Flat and one or two case studies at Arecibo; testing the
accuracy of the viscous GW dispersion relation by comparing the extracted
neutral winds with the measured neutral winds along the magnetic field at
Arecibo.