* 0836064
* Management and Operation of the Green Bank Observatory (GBO) and Long Baseline Observatory (LBO), amending AST-0836064 formerly entitled "Management and Operation of NRAO..."
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2019
* Ethan Schreier, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2019
* USD 0.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;AST 0836064&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Schreier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI) will manage
the operation of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) from October 1,
2009 to September 30, 2015, maintaining the strong reputation of NRAO as the
premier radio astronomy observatory in the world. The research community will be
provided cutting-edge&lt;br/&gt;capabilities: the Green Bank Telescope (GBT),
the most precise filled-aperture, fully steerable radio telescope; the Expanded
Very Large Array (EVLA), replacing the Very Large Array, already the most
productive radio telescope ever built; the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA), with
micro-arcsecond&lt;br/&gt;astrometry, the highest resolution imaging telescope
at any wavelength; and the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA),
with unprecedented millimeter-wavelength sensitivity and resolution. All will
operate with state-of-the art instrumentation, advanced data processing, and
broad user&lt;br/&gt;support, enabling the entire astronomy community to address
key problems in astronomy and astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: The opportunities for astronomy and astrophysics research have never been
richer. The unique NRAO radio telescopes will complement the next generation of
large ground based optical telescopes and space-based facilities covering the
entire electromagnetic spectrum. Together they&lt;br/&gt;comprise a
comprehensive suite of powerful tools to probe and decipher the full range of
outstanding problems, from the origin of planets, stars, quasars and galaxies,
to the structure of the Universe and the nature of dark matter and dark energy.
Observations with VLBA, EVLA and ALMA will shed new light
on&lt;br/&gt;exoplanets, and planetary and stellar formation and evolution. EVLA
and ALMA will image the gas and dust of the first galaxies near the end of the
epoch of reionization and normal galaxies beyond z~1. VLBA microarcsecond
astrometry is making possible a new class of precision measurements of the
parallax of premain sequence stars, recoil motions of stars in response to
exoplanets, the structure of the Galaxy and the dynamics of the Local Group of
galaxies. Accurate pulsar timing with the GBT is enabling high
precision&lt;br/&gt;tests of General Relativity in the strong field limit and
detection of the stochastic background of nanoHertz gravitational waves. Multi-
epoch high resolution VLBA images will lead to a better understanding of
relativistic jets from micro-quasars and supermassive black holes found in
Active Galactic Nuclei, along with the nature of gamma-ray bursts seen by the
GLAST satellite. GBT will discover new megamasers, and follow-up VLBA
observations will provide the angular-diameter distance determination of
galaxies in the Hubble flow, leading to a more accurate determination of the
Hubble Constant, higher precision determination of cosmological constants, and
better constraints on the equation of state of dark energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: NRAO facilities are used by more than one
thousand scientists each year and are available to all scientists based on the
intellectual merits of the proposed studies, independent of institutional or
national affiliation. NRAO will provide end-to-end user support at its science
centers, enabling easy&lt;br/&gt;access to its telescope and their data by the
entire astronomical community. Calibrated images will be made available in
archives accessible to both the broad research community and the public through
the Virtual Astronomical Observatory. Astronomy is an important element in
meeting national goals related to diversity, science and technology education,
and increased U.S. competitiveness. NRAO is attracting an increasingly diverse
staff. Through the undergraduate Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
and co-op programs, resident graduate fellowships and external student grants,
Green Bank and Socorro summer schools, and competitive postdoctoral Jansky
Fellowships, it continues to help train the next generation of scientists. The
Green Bank Science Center, the VLA Visitors Center, US-Chile teacher/student
exchange programs, and teacher and K-12 education programs, further serve to
create a science-literate public.