* 0836061
* Collaborative Research: Controls on Climate-Active Gases by Amundsen Sea Ice Biota
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Mark Dennett, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2011
* USD 142,704.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convincing evidence now confirms that polar
regions are changing rapidly in response to human activities. Changes in sea ice
extent and thickness will have profound implications for productivity, food webs
and carbon fluxes at high latitudes, since sea ice biota are a significant
source of biogenic matter for the ecosystem. While sea ice is often thought to
be a barrier to gas exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere, it more
likely functions as a source or sink for climate-active gases such as carbon
dioxide and ozone-depleting organohalogens, due in part to activities of
microbes embedded in the sea ice matrix. This project brings together
experienced US and Swedish investigators to examine the controls by sea-ice
biota on the production and degradation of key climate-active gases in the
Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean. We hypothesize that 1) the physical
properties of the sea-ice environment will determine the community structure and
activities of the sea ice biota; 2) the productivity, biomass, physiological
state and species composition of ice algae will determine the production of
specific classes of organic carbon, including organohalogens; 3) heterotrophic
co-metabolism within the ice will break down these compounds to some extent,
depending on the microbial community structure and productivity, and 4) the sea
ice to atmosphere fluxes of CO2 and organohalogens will be inversely related.
This project will build close scientific collaborations between US and Swedish
researchers and also train young scientists, including members of
underrepresented groups. Dissemination of results will include the scientific
literature, and public outreach venues including interactions with a PolarTrec
teacher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;