* 0836971
* BMACC:  Blended, Multimodal Access to Computational Physics Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rubin Landau, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 148,567.00

Physics (13) Intellectual Merit: Computational science and engineering (CSE) is
a multidisciplinary combination of techniques, tools and knowledge to solve
scientific and engineering problems through computer simulations. Computational
physics (CP) is a subdiscipline of CSE. Modern physics also requires the
understanding of computation. A CP curriculum, being a combination of physics,
computer science (CS), and applied math, provides a broader viewpoint than
normally found in physics, yet by containing a toolset common to other
computational sciences, it opens up multiple intellectual paths. This project
opens up the computational black box by providing CP curricula materials based
on a problem-solving paradigm. These materials support a balanced, effective,
and efficient approach to undergraduate education that prepares students better
for their careers.

Over the last decade, NSF support has led to the development of five courses,
four textbooks, and a new degree program in CP at Oregon State University. This
project is augmenting these materials with video-based discussions, to convert
and combine all materials into electronic forms that permit multi-modal and
multilayered access to them, and to conduct outreach activities to encourage and
educate faculty in their use. The new forms for the curricular materials can be
blended into courses that have variable degrees of face-to-face and face-to-
computer elements. The ability to vary the blend to fit the local educational
environment is a documented avenue for improving the effectiveness of a course.
The complete digital package of CP materials being created is a model for a
future generation textbook that promises to be more accessible, to improve
learning, be less costly-yet still be commercially viable, and that advances the
CP collection of the National Science Digital Library/comPADRE.

Broader Impact: The goal is to stimulate a systemic change in undergraduate
education that reflects computation having become an essential element in all
the sciences. Although the desired systemic change has begun slowly with a small
number of early adopters, the project is supporting and accelerating the process
by providing flexible and complete educational materials that can be used in
various computational science classes, and by continuing outreach activities in
the physics, education, and computational communities. Even though students may
take fewer science classes in a computational science curriculum, they tend to
learn the science, CS, and math better when placed in context, and thus get more
out of the classes. The reduction in the number of science classes is thereby
compensated for by the increased efficiency of the approach. Furthermore,
learning various subjects in context, for the purpose of solving problems
important to society, is more effective for and appealing to students who are
more diverse than those presently in CS or physics.