* 0836966
* Online Multimedia Teaching Tool (OMTT) for Neurobiology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* John Walsh, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,891.00

This project is developing an interactive online multimedia teaching tool (OMTT)
to be used by an interdisciplinary community of professors and students in
undergraduate neurosciences, gerontology, psychology, bioengineering and biology
courses, and with the intention of improving the understanding of complex
science processes by a wide range of students. The objectives of the project are
to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1. enhance STEM learning for a group of diverse
undergraduate science students by making course material easier to understand
and more accessible, &lt;br/&gt; 2. demonstrate to students the connection that
exists between basic science research and science education, and &lt;br/&gt; 3.
improve recruitment and retention of students in the sciences by building a
diverse scientific community and encouraging student interaction with faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OMTT is expected to enhance learning by providing
students with continuous online access to course material used in class by their
professors. The interactive multimedia presentation of course content includes
scrolling text, video, narration and computer animations, thus offering students
self-paced access to varied and rich representations of the curriculum.
Additionally, the OMTT educates students about ongoing research and recent
scientific publications as they relate to class topics. For each topic, students
can explore a written description of a professor's research laboratory, a short
video illustrating how research is performed to address the issue taught in
class, and examples of articles published by the professor. This feature is
meant to improve student understanding of the connection between core subject
material and the research that creates this knowledge base, and to facilitate
student contact with professors in the field and identify research
opportunities. The OMTT also includes on-line assessments that can be used by
students and professors to gauge student learning, and are intended to enable
early intervention for struggling students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students have
the opportunity to become digital scientists by completing digital laboratory
exercises imbedded in learning exercises in the online multimedia-teaching tool.
The OMTT is designed to be easily modified and adapted by faculty in other
disciplines and at other institutions. Enhancement of the infrastructure and
broad dissemination is occurring through multiple avenues, including those based
at the University of Southern California and via the Internet.