* 0836040
* Partnership, Pathway, and Pipeline for Engineering Education:  Engaging Middle School Students with Curricular Integration and Societal Relevance
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Deirdre Meldrum, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 12/31/2011
* USD 99,830.00

This exploratory project will provide effective mechanisms to motivate and
engage middle school students in the practice of engineering through hands-on
community-based service learning projects by establishing sustainable linkages
between higher education, K-12, and community partners, developing professional
learning communities (PLCs) comprised of engineering faculty and K-12 educators,
and creating appropriately aligned educational pathways that integrates STEM
with social studies and language arts. The university- school district-
community partnership is at the heart of the proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed ?Partnership, Pathway and Pipeline for Engineering Education: Engaging
Middle School Students with Curricular Integration and Societal Relevance? will
be led by the Dean of Engineering at ASU and the superintendent of CUSD. The
project will leverage and scale the resources of both ASU and CUSD and allow
project outcomes to be incorporated into the strategic plans and organizational
missions of both institutions. Central to this project is the identification of
engineering service learning projects that facilitate integrated learning of
science, math, social studies and language arts. These STEM-based integrated
activities are designed to engage students and captivate their interest while
promoting problem-solving and entrepreneurial skills by addressing a real world
needs in their local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase the awareness, motivation and self-perception of Arizona
students in their formative middle school years to engineering opportunities and
educational pathways that lead to successful engineering careers. In doing so,
the State of Arizona will have in place a more socially-embedded comprehensive
and effective educational pipeline that will provide the needed Arizona
engineering workforce to compete in a global competitive high technology
economy. This project will result in a sustainable partnership across
institutions and communities to improve and diversify the K-12 pipeline into
engineering and technology. &lt;br/&gt;