* 0836530
* Advanced Undergraduate and Graduate Student Scholarship and Travel Grants for the 2008 Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing; October 1-4, 2008; Denver, CO
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Telle Whitney, Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 06/30/2009
* USD 85,000.00

This CISE Special Project award provides funding for approximately eighty
undergraduate and graduate students to attend the 2008 Grace Hopper Celebration
of Women in Computing. The eighth Grace Hopper Celebration will be held on
October 1-4, 2008 in Colorado. This special project is funded by the CISE
Broadening Participation in Computing Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the access to the many technical
presentations and researchers at the conference. In addition, students have the
opportunity to participate in poster sessions and receive feedback from
discipline specialists. The Grace Hopper Celebration provides a unique,
supportive environment for intellectual discourse that is particularly appealing
for women and other under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project deal with providing resources and support to students
that will help them persist in their programs as well as access to avenues to
continue through the IT workforce pipeline. Students who attend the Grace Hopper
Celebration will be exposed to women who are creating, improving, and studying
computer and information technologies who serve as role models and mentors. This
travel scholarship support provides a unique opportunity to directly affect the
careers of future computer scientists and increase the representation of women
in computing.