* 0836152
* The Sondrestrom Upper Atmospheric Research Facility:  Research, Operation and Coordination
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Mary McCready, SRI International
* Cooperative Agreement
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 14,968,182.00

This is an award to continue management, operations, and scientific activities
in support of the Sondrestrom upper atmosphere research facility located near
Kangerlussuaq, on the west coast of Greenland. Activities include all technical
aspects concerning the incoherent-scatter (IS) radar, the Rayleigh and resonance
lidars, and the all-sky imager, and to provide science, service, education, and
leadership of the facility. Other instruments at the site support solid earth,
stratospheric, and environmental change research in addition to the physics of
solar-terrestrial relationships. The facility management features evolutionary
development with further implementation of state-of-the-art radar data
acquisition and processing schemes that are becoming practicable with new
technology, further advancements in lidar and all-sky imager capabilities,
upgrades in telescience capabilities, and improvements to the facility
infrastructure that will enable key instrument deployments in the future. To
provide an environment that promotes education and training, an educational
advisory board, consisting of a group of diversified, education research
experts, will determine and develop the most effective way of formulating,
implementing, communicating and disseminating information and data to public and
educational institutions. Also, a new post-doctoral program will be established
to train the future research professionals in the field, and the existing
graduate student research experience program will be augmented to increase
student involvement. To foster new ideas in upper atmospheric research, facility
staff will advance instrumentation to promote scientific discovery, ensure data
are of high research quality, and maintain expertise in the related sciences
conducted at the facility. Areas of research include the pioneering effort to
investigate the response and variability of the high latitude ionosphere from
seconds to solar cycles, the exploration of the ionosphere's role in the coupled
magnetosphere-ionosphere system, and the deciphering of the myriad processes
occurring in the mesosphere/lower thermosphere-ionosphere region. The IS radar
will be operated more than 1200 hours per year to respond to the evolving needs
of the community, provide flexibility in radar operations to capture space
weather events, and make more data available for retrospective analysis, To take
advantage of these extensive observations, facility staff will focus on
collaborative studies with other existing and planned high-latitude radars. This
will pave the way to establishing a high-latitude IS radar consortium to
optimize coordinated operations and encourage the exchange of scientific and
technical developments among the radar facilities. A new data handling and
processing strategy will be implemented to provide ready access to real-time
data products, immediate analysis of 20 years of radar data, and assimilation of
radar data into physics-based community models. The investigators will also
maintain relationships with the Greenland Home Rule Government and Danish
Commission for Scientific Research in Greenland to ensure effective management
and operation of the facility.