* 0836176
* Workshop in Paleoecology and Ecology:  Evaluating ecological possibility - past, present, and future
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* William Dimichele, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 06/30/2010
* USD 18,148.00

Workshop in Paleoecology and Ecology: Evaluating ecological possibility - past,
present, and future

A.K. Behrensmeyer, W.A. Dimichele and C.V. Looy

The Smithsonian Paleobiology ETE group will host a 3-day workshop entitled
Stranger than we can suppose: Evaluating ecological possibility past, present,
and future, to discuss specific topics relating to the Earths ecology from the
standpoint of two different scientific disciplines paleobiology and ecology.
This workshop builds upon the results of the September, 2007, Evolution of
Terrestrial Ecosystems (ETE) workshop, Paleontological Powers of Ten: Issues of
Scale in Paleoecology, and is part of a broader initiative to stimulate
productive exchange between ecology and paleobiology. The workshop will include
specialists in marine invertebrates, terrestrial plants, and terrestrial
vertebrates. The workshop is intended to build strategies for transmitting
knowledge among paleoecologists and ecologists and to generate new
collaborations directed at specific problems and theme topics. The workshop will
strengthen intellectual knowledge sharing and promote synthesis of ecological
knowledge from both major areas of scientific enquiry. The meeting will involve
a total of 45 attendees including graduate students, post-doctoral fellows,
young and established professionals, with one-quarter of the invitees being ETE
scientists.