* 0836041
* Understanding the Progression of Student Learning in Materials Courses Achieved through Conceptual Change of Nano-to-Macroscale Concept Models of Materials (CONCOMM
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Amaneh Tasooji, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 495,198.00

This project will develop an understanding of the progression of student
learning in materials courses achieved through conceptual change of concept
models of materials (CONCOMM). A learning progression of student conceptual
knowledge and change for the topics covered across a semester would be
developed, and using this progression would foster new strategies for materials
teaching and learning strategies, as well as improve the effectiveness of
student learning in materials classes. New misconception-compensated
instructional materials would be developed to address students' misconception
related issues. This approach would be not be limited to materials courses in
the materials discipline, but could be used in materials courses for other
disciplines as well as new types of nanotechnology courses now being created and
taught. The CONCOMM approach will utilize rapid feedback technological tools of
Just-in-Time-Teaching and Personal Response Systems to quickly characterize and
address misconceptions. It could also be used to study and characterize
potential differences of conceptual change for diverse populations which would
allow the modification to instructional materials for more effective learning
for diverse student populations. A final point is that a general toolkit of
misconception-eliciting-methods will be defined which could be used by any
engineering discipline to explore students' prior knowledge and misconceptions
and then address them to improve teaching
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is one of the leading edge
technologies that must be effectively taught to engineering students who will be
ready to compete in the global economy. This research will create a framework
and instructional materials for the CONCOMM technique which uses rapid
accommodation of misconceptions in materials instruction to promote more
effective conceptual change, improve the effectiveness of teaching and learning
of materials, and build a general model that would have potential for broader
application. Effective implementations and assessment and will be developed to
measure the effect of the CONCOMM technique on student learning and the
instructional materials will be widely disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;