* 0836171
* Analysis of Global Atmospheric Responses to Externally and Internally Driven Global Circuit Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Brian Tinsley, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2012
* USD 309,652.00

Previous funded research has shown that the strength of winter cyclones in the
Northern Hemisphere varies with changes in the current flow (Jz) in the global
atmospheric electric circuit, driven by several independent external generators
due to the solar wind. The external drivers are changes in cosmic ray flux,
reductions in precipitating relativistic electron flux at solar wind magnetic
sector boundary crossings, (now called heliospheric current sheet, or HCS
crossings, that are associated with periods of several days of low solar wind
speed); and solar proton events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also showed
that surface pressure in both the Antarctic and Arctic responds to the solar
wind electric field that penetrates into the polar caps. The pressure responses
are opposite in the two polar caps, following the opposite Jz responses to the
solar wind electric field in each polar cap. Another result was that the surface
pressures in 7 Arctic stations and 11 Antarctic stations show responses at the
level of a few hPa to the day-to-day changes in the internal generators of the
global circuit (low latitude, highly electrified convective cloud). The
observational results are consistent with a conceptual model in which Jz
deposits positive charge in the conductivity gradients associated with droplet
concentration gradients at the tops of layer clouds, and deposits negative
charge similarly at the bases of such clouds, in accordance with Gauss's Law.
This charge attaches to droplets and aerosol particles, including cloud
condensation nuclei (CCN) and ice forming nuclei (IFN) and affects the rate at
which these and other aerosol particles are scavenged by cloud droplets, and can
lead to changes in cloud cover, precipitation, and the atmospheric radiation
balance. This project will extend the research to the southern hemisphere by
examining meteorological data for the southern hemisphere to test for cyclone
variability related to Jz changes. Observations of the solar wind speeds will be
examined for decreases in the speed which will indicate changes induced by
relativistic electron precipitation, as suggested by the conceptual model,
rather than heliospheric current sheet crossings, to improve the understanding
of these links. Another component is to re-examine the meteorological responses
to Forbush decreases of the galactic cosmic ray flux, using 20 years of more
recent data. The conceptual model will be used to predict the vorticity of
winter storms due to internally generated changes in Jz, as well as the
responses of cloud cover and precipitation changes. None of these changes in
atmospheric dynamics induced by electric charge in layer clouds are currently
included in global forecast or climate models. As a result of this project, day-
to-day forecasts of winter storm strength may be improved, based on forecasts of
thunderstorm activity in the main generating regions, and forecasts of space
weather, that affect Jz.