* 0836409
* Voter Turnout and Abstention in Context:   A Multi-level Analysis of the Factors Affecting Voter Turnout and Abstention in Systems of Multi-Level Governance
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Karen Jusko, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2015
* USD 187,521.00

[This proposal is part of a funded CRP from the EuroCORES HumVIB
competition.]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can electoral institutions overcome the
political consequences of social exclusion and poverty? What role did political
parties play in incorporating the working classes into the electorates of
European democracies? And, why are so many Americans, particularly the working
and lower middle people, still alienated from participation in their countrys
electoral processes? This research begins with the premise that these questions
reflect different perspectives on the same political phenomenon: The context of
electoral competition especially the rules governing legislative elections and
their interactions with the geographic distribution income shapes the incentives
of political actors to mobilize and incorporate low-income and working-class
citizens. The proposed research contributes to a recommended Collaborative
Research Proposal from the EuroCORES HumVIB competition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier accounts of the relationship redistributive policy
emphasize a stark division between multimember district (MMD) electoral rules
and single-member district (SMD) rules (e.g., Iversen &amp; Soskice 2006,
Persson &amp; Tabellini 2000). These accounts, however, miss the important
modifying effect of electoral context - specifically, the geographic
distribution of citizens of different types - on the effect of electoral rules
in structuring legislators' policy-making incentives. The intellectual merits of
this proposal lie, therefore, in the recognition that given the national context
in which elections are held - in particular, the geographic distribution of
income - the electoral institutions of contemporary democracies may undermine
the opportunities for those societies to achieve their democratic
ideals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of a European Science Foundation
Collaborative Research Scheme (EUROCORES), the proposed research will contribute
to a broadly collaborative and highly integrated project that is motivated by
questions about voter turnout. The proposed research will contribute to the
theoretical development and data collection exercises of this larger project.