* 0836869
* Integration of Bioinformatics into a Biology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Bruce Wightman, Muhlenberg College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/2011
* USD 85,910.00

The Muhlenberg College Departments of Biology, Chemistry, and Mathematics and
Computer Science are jointly integrating bioinformatics into multiple biology
and biochemistry courses at three levels: introductory, intermediate, and
advanced. There are two major educational goals for this project: 1) to improve
undergraduate sophistication about bioinformatics, and 2) to increase the
mathematical content in the biology and biochemistry curricula. The project is
serving approximately 200 biology, biochemistry and neuroscience majors each
year. One introductory biology course, three intermediate level biology
laboratory courses, and three advanced courses in biology and biochemistry are
introducing new bioinformatics components or are expanding and improving
existing components. Laboratory curricula feature multiple-week investigative
experiences that build on existing experimental schemes. The curricular goals
are being supported by a new genomics and proteomics core laboratory facility
that features real-time PCR and 2-D gel electrophoresis. In addition, multiple
laptop computers are enabling students in introductory and upper-level courses
to work on challenging problems in smaller discussion sections and laboratories.
The new computers allow instructors to explore computational applications, and
the underlying mathematics, more effectively in the classroom. Faculty
development, in the form of a one-time week-long inter-disciplinary on-site
bioinformatics course, is supporting the curricular goals, inspiring faculty in
the use of the new technology, and encouraging collaboration among biologists,
biochemists, and computational scientists. The increased faculty expertise and
interdisciplinary collaboration is also resulting in undergraduate research
projects in bioinformatics or projects that rely on bioinformatics as an
integral tool within the research design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project adapts and implements published curricular suggestions for
improving undergraduate education in biology and bioinformatics. The over-
arching mission is to educate more quantitatively-literate biology students.
Faculty development, the potential for new collaborations in courses and student
research, and the new laboratory core facility itself are having a significant
impact on the local science environment. The value of bioinformatics as a tool
for improving quantitative instruction and the specific instructional schemes
themselves are being assessed through student surveys and other instruments as
appropriate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Familiarity with basic
bioinformatics and computational approaches is increasingly a necessity for
professionals in a range of areas related to the life sciences. The assessment
of curricular outcomes from the project is being disseminated broadly to provide
a reference point for the development of similar strategies and projects at
other undergraduate institutions. &lt;br/&gt;