* 0836433
* A Functional Genomics Approach to Investigate Regulation of Phenolic Glycoside Metabolism in Populus
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Chung-Jui Tsai, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2010
* USD 450,000.00

There is a wealth of evidence that the metabolic cost of defense is large in
comparison to resources available for growth in plants. The abundant phenolic
glycosides (PG) of Populus tree species are derived from salicylic acid, a
metabolite that is central to the defense of herbaceous and woody plant species,
but whose accumulation is extremely costly to herbaceous plant growth. By
investigating the functional genomics of PG regulation in a range of hybrid and
transgenic Populus, we expect to learn how these plants accommodate such costly
outlays, and to identify genes of potential agricultural importance. Cottonwood
hybrids varying widely in leaf PG content and growth will be used to obtain
differentially expressed PG-regulating and PG-sensitive genes. PG inductive
treatments including nitrogen limitation and methyl-jasmonate application will
be used to perturb PG homeostasis in the hybrids as well as in transgenically
modified aspen, and to verify gene function and assess PG-growth interactions.
EST sequences and microarray gene expression profiles derived from this work
will be deposited in GenBank and accessible at www.aspenDB.mtu.edu. cDNA
microarrays will also be made available to the research community. Information
about the release schedule and fee structure of ESTs, arrays, and other
biological resources will be posted on the project website at aspenDB.mtu.edu.
Project findings will bear particular relevance to the NPGI goal of
understanding efficiency of photosynthate utilization in a renewable
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several anticipated broader impacts. A
deeper understanding of the molecular basis of tree carbon budgeting should be
of value to ongoing investigation of Populus as keystone ecological species
whose productivity and phytochemisty is particularly sensitive to global changes
in atmospheric pollutants and greenhouse gases. There are also agricultural crop
implications due to possible interplay between PG and condensed tannin (CT)
regulation, and the effects of CT on forage digestibility/quality. The value of
Populus as a model organism for linking functional genomics to ecological
research will be disseminated via a professional microarray workshop targeting
tree physiologists and ecophysiologists in year 4. Because aspen is important to
the regional economy its use in the planned K-12 educational activities is
particularly relevant. Planned outreach activities will emphasize the
significance and value of basic research to participating students and their
families. &lt;br/&gt;