* 0836410
* CEDAR: Radar and Optical Observations of Enhanced Ion Acoustic Lines and Associated Auroral Fine Structure
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Robert Michell, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 12/31/2010
* USD 154,000.00

The scientific objective of this project is to combine radar, optical and
satellite data to investigate and characterize the occurrence of Naturally
Enhanced Ion Acoustic Lines (NEIALs) with coincident auroral fine structures and
to provide insight to their possible generation mechanisms. To accomplish this
goal, the project will make use of common-volume observations of the nighttime
auroral ionosphere with ground-based imagers and the Poker Flat Incoherent
Scatter Radar (PFISR). In situ measurements will be made by the Japanese Reimei
satellite which will pass once per night, near magnetic midnight, within the
all-sky camera field of view (FOV). The observations will take place during the
three moon down periods in early 2009 (mid-January through early-April), and one
of the moon down periods in early 2010. PFISR observations of NEIALs have raised
new questions regarding their occurrence in relation to specific auroral forms.
The enhanced returns were found to occur in the dark regions immediately
adjacent to thin auroral arc structures and to have altitude propagation at or
near the Alfven speed. They are also found to occur near the poleward edge of
the large-scale auroral features. Recent observations have found NEIALs to be
associated with very dynamic, small-scale auroral arcs, indicative of
Alfvenically accelerated electron precipitation. NEIALs in the PFISR data are
observed with matching morphology and overlapping parameters as are the broad-
band extremely low-frequency (BBELF) waves that are seen with satellites and
rockets. These observations suggest connections between NEIALs and BBELF and
Alfven waves. The understanding of NEIAL generation mechanisms is a beneficial
addition to the incoherent scatter radar community, partly because the presence
of NEIALs prevents the application of the normal fitting procedure used to
derive the plasma parameters from the radar spectra. Also, NEIALs can be used as
a means to study processes occurring in the ionosphere that would not otherwise
be obtainable from ISR data. If NEIALs can be linked to specific types of wave
activity, instabilities, or electron distributions, then ISRs provide a ground-
based method to study when and where they occur.