* 0836936
* VLE-STAR: Virtual Learning Environment for Scientific Thinking in AstRonomy
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James Laffey, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2013
* USD 149,832.00

The project is developing learning materials for laboratory experiences in an
undergraduate astronomy course, which utilize advances both in technologies
available and in our understanding of the social nature of learning. These
learning materials serve as proof of concept units demonstrating the power of
combining 3D virtual learning environments (VLEs) with social interaction to
augment science learning so that it is more engaging, active, visual and
effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VLEs are interactive computer systems that
mediate the students experience with the subject matter and the instructor and
fellow students. The proof of concept units include the use of 3D virtual
reality to help students interact with scientific constructs, the use of
collaborative learning tools to motivate student activity, deepen understanding
and support knowledge building, and the use of process support mechanisms to
enable realistic implementation of the instruction and guide students to
effective and efficient work plans. The demonstration units and VLE target
developing a basic understanding of science, i.e. what it is and how it works,
through learning the meaning of Kepler's law and the nature of lunar motions and
eclipses in an interactive environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key steps of
this project are: 1. Develop two proof of concept learning units to demonstrate
the potential of implementing an integrated VLE comprising a 3D virtual science
exploration, a collaborative system for social networking and class management,
and a notification system for facilitating work process and social learning. 2.
Implement the proof of concept units in open source environments (Croquet,
Sakai, CANS) so as to leverage existing technology, support needed customization
and maximize potential for dissemination, extension and broad impact. 3. Field
test units and VLE for improving the design and implementation and to draw
implications for dissemination, extension and broad impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The key outcomes are new, innovative
learning materials that exemplify an integration of 3D exploration, social
learning, and laboratory teaching. The project contributes to the intellectual
basis for developing learning materials and VLE by furthering our understanding
of design for virtual and social aspects of learning systems and by testing how
well this work supports learning outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact:
Given the need for improving and extending laboratory teaching for the sciences
and the need for helping non-science majors to think scientifically, the
proposed project is developing learning materials that can directly serve
courses in Astronomy and serve as illustrations of how 3D and social
environments can be used for other math and science learning in post-secondary
and secondary education. The use of 3 open source systems makes the project
materials and impact available for use and extension across the science
education and learning technology communities