* 0836354
* SGER: Designing an Ecologically Sustainable Community Water Supply in Rural Honduras
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Theodore Endreny, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 12/31/2009
* USD 49,995.00

Theodore A Endreny&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0836354&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes to examine the following question: What degree of&lt;br/&gt;dewatering
will trigger changes in hyporheic and riparian hydraulic gradients, flows, and
nitrate concentrations in a dry tropical mountain stream? This research question
will be pursued in a small headwater stream proposed to supply water to the
Village of Buena Vista, within in the State of Yoro, in the country of Honduras.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the dry
season, this stream flows at approximately 75 liters per minute, equivalent to
the flow from four household faucets. It is enough water, however, to meet the
United Nations recommendation of 50 liters per person per day for the community
of Buena Vista. The water quality in the stream is potable, maintained by
nutrient transformations in the near stream environment, which acts like a
filter. Filtering of nutrients will likely be affected by withdrawing water from
the stream, which lowers the stream water level, and subsequently adjusts flows
within the riparian zone and the hyporheic zones. This project uses groundwater
and surface water monitoring in the riparian and hyporheic zone during
controlled stream dewatering experiments in the dry season of August and
September. Nutrient chemistry analysis will record changes in redox
transformation with changes in the riparian and hyporheic gradients as a
function stream water withdrawal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts from this research will involve college
student participation in ecological designs for a community water supply
project. Their work will balance needs of society and nature and improve the
quality of life in Buena Vista and other mountain villages in Honduras, should
these designs be disseminated. The project will also provide training of college
students in ecological engineering design and construction in the developing
world.