* 0836771
* Increasing Student Understanding of Separation Science Through Addition of LC/MS into the Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Susan Ensel, Hood College
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Brown
* 01/31/2012
* USD 137,000.00

Chemistry (12) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hood College proposes to incorporate liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) instrumentation into its chemistry and
biochemistry curriculum. LC/MS is an instrument that allows scientists to make
discoveries in the fields of biology, biochemistry, polymer science, and
chemistry. The importance of the development of the instrument and its continued
impact on science was recognized in 2002 with the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. The
implementation of LC/MS instrumentation in their research laboratories and in
classes enrolling majors and non-majors (~300 students per year) has a
significant influence on the education of their predominantly (70%) female
population. Hands-on experience with LC/MS strengthen the preparation of Hood
students for employment opportunities and graduate and professional programs as
well as provide valuable research results to the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hood's commitment to effective teaching and
undergraduate research in collaborative, active environments are greatly
impacted by the LC/MS instrument. By using the LC/MS from their freshman year to
their senior year students gain valuable experience with this modern instrument
in a variety of applications across the disciplines of biology, chemistry, and
biochemistry. Research students apply their knowledge of LC/MS to a range of
interdisciplinary research topics including the study of proteins, marine
organisms, and biofuels. The progress and results of this project plan to be
disseminated through presentations at regional and national conferences, as well
as through professional journals.