* 0836546
* Integrating a Psycholgy Curriculum Through the Incremental Building of Computer Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Kirk Lunnen, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2011
* USD 125,119.00

Psychology (73)&lt;br/&gt;This project is redesigning the core psychology
curricula for majors as an integrated hardware - software infrastructure
designed to progressively build technologically sophisticated experimentation
skills as students advance to upper division courses. Student skills are
acquired through core laboratory courses positioned in the sophomore and junior
years and also through exercises developed in collateral courses within the
curriculum. In their senior year, students apply these acquired skills in their
yearlong capstone thesis projects. &lt;br/&gt;Operationally, the project
incrementally builds skills in use of E-Prime and BioPac technology. The
training commences as students learn to integrate E-Prime programming exercises
into sequenced laboratory courses, beginning with "Research Methods and
Analysis" - a prerequisite for all courses included in this project. More
advanced E-Prime skills are acquired in the sophomore-junior level core
laboratories of Assessment and Social Psychology where students also learn how
to design projects that make use of BioPac physiological recording technology.
&lt;br/&gt;Additional experiences with these technologies are provided in
exercises developed for courses in Cognition, Abnormal Psychology, and
Behavioral Neuroscience. Thus, when students begin their capstone research
projects, they have had technological training in at least two core laboratory
courses and are likely to have had additional training in several other courses.
&lt;br/&gt;Because the project provides a more skill driven rather than content
driven curriculum, the intellectual gains of students are likely to be
transferable to a variety of STEM careers and also engender critical thinking
and synthesis skills.&lt;br/&gt;The project is being evaluated through a
pre/post assessment tool used in all courses involved in the project, the impact
of the program on an on-going departmental assessment based on the PCAT
Instrument (Psychology Area Concentration Achievement Test), and a before/after
assessment of the quality and technological sophistication of our capstone
thesis projects performed by outside evaluators. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to
publications and conference presentations, the project outcomes and
documentation are being disseminated on the departmental website
(www.psych.westminster.edu). It provides detailed descriptions of the materials
and student projects developed, including programming protocols and on-line
manuals.