* 0836560
* Putting the Clouds in Context:   Statistical Machine Translation with MapReduce
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Philip Resnik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 06/30/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Statistical machine translation (SMT) promises to bridge the language divide in
today's multi-cultural and multi-faceted society. Systems capable of converting
text from one language into another have the potential to transform how diverse
individuals and organizations communicate. Despite recent successes, we see two
critical impediments to continued progress in translation technology: (1) the
development of systems depends on access to large amounts of data, and the
growth of available resources has far outpaced increases in the performance of
individual computers; and (2) current systems for the most part do not take the
context of what they are translating into account. With few exceptions, systems
translate sentence by sentence, and do not differentiate whether the input text
is a newswire article or a children's book. This project advances the state of
the art in SMT by addressing both issues. Since divide-and-conquer techniques
running on multiple processors are currently the only practical solutions to
large-data problems, we must develop scalable algorithms that can exploit large
computer clusters. MapReduce is an attractive framework for tackling these
challenges since it hides low-level distributed processing issues such as
synchronization, fault tolerance, etc., allowing the researcher to focus on
actually solving the problem. By coupling network analysis with cross-language
information retrieval techniques, we can build rich, multilingual contextual
models that will guide an SMT system in translating different types of text. We
focus on cross-language enrichment of Wikipedia as an application for
demonstrating this technology. Although Wikipedia has emerged as a valuable
repository of human knowledge, it has yet to transcend the language barrier. For
the most part, contributors work in silos defined by languages, without the
benefit of knowledge that is being accumulated elsewhere. The potential broader
impact of this project is no less than knowledge dissemination across language
boundaries, which will serve to enrich the lives of all the world's citizens.