* 0836117
* Conference: Essential Cosmology for the Next Generation; January 12 - 16, 2009, Los Cabos, Mexico
* MPS,AST
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2009
* George Smoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 10/31/2009
* USD 20,248.00

This award provides partial support for the international meeting "Essential
Cosmology for the Next Generation" to be held in Los Cabos, Mexico from 12-16
January 2009. It is sponsored jointly by the Berkeley Center for Cosmological
Physics (BCCP), the Munich 'cluster of excellence' for "Structure and Origin of
the Universe", and the Mexican Advanced Institute for Cosmology (IAC), an
organization bringing together 45 researchers at 18 academic institutions. The
meeting will combine mini-courses with plenary talks and contributed papers. The
organizers expect about 100 attendees, with roughly 90 junior participants
(students and postdocs). Half of the participants are expected to be from
Mexico, with the rest from the US and Germany. NSF funding will cover half of
the travel, lodging and registration costs for 20 US junior participants.

The collaboration with IAC and with the Munich cluster will expose US students
and postdocs to international aspects of research. Proceedings will be webcast
and archived for later viewing, allowing a broader audience. A public talk for
the local community is planned during the meeting. This award is made jointly by
NSF's Astronomical Sciences Division and its Office of International Science and
Engineering.