* 0836485
* CEDAR:  Characterizing the Variability in the High Latitude Ionospheric Electric Field
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2012
* Simon Shepherd, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 11/30/2012
* USD 317,000.00

The high-latitude electric field is one of the most important parameters that
influence energy deposition in the form of Joule heating in the upper
atmosphere. Numerical models often use statistical or climatological electric-
field models which ignore an important component of Joule heating that is due to
rapid, small-scale fluctuations in the electric field, or small-scale
variability (SSV). Studies attempting to quantify this type of variability using
satellite or groundbased incoherent scatter radar measurements have created
variability maps associated with statistical electric-field patterns. The
variability described in these studies is a different type of variability,
namely, climatological model variability (CMV) that describes how well the model
reproduces the measurements. The relationship between these two variabilities,
and the physical significance of CMV, is presently unknown. This project aims to
resolve the ambiguity between CMV and SSV by using data from southern and
northern hemisphere SuperDARN radars to develop maps of both CMV (similar to
previous studies) and SSV. The latter will be obtained from observations sampled
at 1-2 min that are continuous for &gt;10 min. The resulting maps will allow for
a direct comparison of the relative magnitudes of CMV and SSV over the entire
high-latitude region, providing a clear picture of the physical significance of
SSV and CMV in electric fields. By further utilizing the widespread and
continuous SuperDARN measurements for specific events, the project obtain
additional information that allows the variability measurements to be located
relative to large-scale convection and magnetospheric boundaries, providing
clues to its origins. The end product of the research should be the resolution
of the ambiguity that exists between SSV and CMV, and clarification of the
physical significance that CMV plays in the high-latitude ionosphere. Since
large-scale convection maps of the high-latitude electric potential are perhaps
the most commonly used data product of the SuperDARN HF network, the southern
hemisphere statistical patterns resulting from this study will improve the
accuracy of the southern hemisphere convection patterns during times when data
coverage is not widespread. The availability of hemisphere-specific statistical
patterns and variability maps resulting from this project will facilitate
studies of the interhemispheric dependencies of various ionospheric and
magnetospheric parameters.