* 0836775
* MathVote:  Teaching Mathematics with Classroom Voting
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Holly Zullo, Carroll College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,974.00

Classroom voting engages students by requiring every student in the class to
answer a multiple choice or true/false question. They do this by "voting" on the
correct answer, often using a hand held electronic clicker. The results of
voting provide immediate feedback on the level of student understanding - both
to instructors and to individual students. Numerous studies about the use of
this teaching method in collegiate mathematics report that students generally
enjoy this teaching method and that it frequently creates a positive and
engaging learning environment. Although evidence shows that classroom voting can
be more effective than traditional teaching methods if it is used to motivate
students to participate in small group discussions about key conceptual issues
before a vote, getting started with classroom voting can be challenging. New
users are faced with numerous decisions about how the voting will be structured.
There are significant challenges to be overcome, including how to incorporate
voting while still teaching the necessary curriculum, and how to motivate all
students to participate. Thus far these challenges have been dealt with by
faculty largely working in isolation at different institutions. "Project
MathVote" is a joint effort by a team of eight mathematics instructors with
years of experience using classroom voting in a variety of courses at many
different types of institutions. The project team is developing a set of general
principles of teaching with classroom voting in a way that will apply to a broad
range of courses and institutions. Outcomes include a clearer understanding of
effective practices for teaching with classroom voting. From the data that
classroom voting provides, the project team is gaining insight into common
student issues and misconceptions. The team is engaged in writing and testing a
library of over 400 classroom voting questions for use in a variety of courses,
particularly college algebra, pre-calculus, statistics, and integral calculus.
An external evaluator is assisting with impact assessment throughout the
project, including analysis of the data gathered through student surveys and
voting statistics, the papers written for publication, the new questions
produced, and the workshops presented.