* 0836215
* Impacts and Consequences of Predicted Climate Change on Andean Glaciation and Runoff
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Mathias Vuille, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2010
* USD 44,503.00

0519415&lt;br/&gt;Vuille&lt;br/&gt;The tropical Andes are one of the regions of
the globe where recent climate change is&lt;br/&gt;most evident, consistent with
the notion that high-elevation mountain ranges that extend into
the&lt;br/&gt;mid-troposphere will experience greater warming. As a result
glaciers are receding throughout the&lt;br/&gt;tropical Andes, with potentially
severe consequences for the availability of drinking water, and&lt;br/&gt;water
for irrigation, mining and hydropower production.&lt;br/&gt;General Circulation
Models (GCMs) run with a 2.CO2 scenario predict an additional&lt;br/&gt;warming
of more than 2.5.C by the end of the century. However large uncertainties exist
about&lt;br/&gt;these future projections, especially because the coarse
resolution of GCMs is inadequate to&lt;br/&gt;resolve the meso- and local-scale
circulation features associated with the steep Andean&lt;br/&gt;topography. To
accurately understand and predict future climate change and its impact on
tropical&lt;br/&gt;Andean glaciers, higher resolution models and a better
simulation of variables other than&lt;br/&gt;temperature are
required.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to simulate climate variability and change in the
Andes under both presentday&lt;br/&gt;conditions (1961-90 and 1958-2001) and two
different IPCC-SRES emission scenarios&lt;br/&gt;(2071-2100) with a regional
climate model (PRECIS) to gain a better understanding of how&lt;br/&gt;future
climate change might affect tropical Andean glaciers.&lt;br/&gt;Results from our
regional climate model will be validated with observational data
from&lt;br/&gt;space before they are used as input into a glacier-climate model
(ITGG 2.0) to simulate how&lt;br/&gt;glacier mass balance will be affected by
future climate change. The simulated present-day mass&lt;br/&gt;balance of
selected glaciers will be compared with observational records from the tropical
Andes&lt;br/&gt;to verify the accuracy of our results. To gain a better
understanding of the consequences of&lt;br/&gt;glacier retreat, the ITGG 2.0
model will also be used to simulate changes in runoff from
Andean&lt;br/&gt;watersheds. The anticipated results of our proposed research
are:&lt;br/&gt;1) The use of a high-resolution model will improve simulations of
climate in this area of complex&lt;br/&gt;terrain and yield more accurate
predictions of future climate change than are available to date&lt;br/&gt;from
GCM.s.&lt;br/&gt;2) An in-depth model validation with observational data will
lead to a better assessment of model&lt;br/&gt;performance (for both the RCM and
the ITGG 2.0).&lt;br/&gt;3) We will for the first time establish robust
projections of how glaciation and runoff will change&lt;br/&gt;in this region at
the end of the 21st century. This has important implications for the
anticipated&lt;br/&gt;future water shortage in the region and will provide much
needed information to implement&lt;br/&gt;adaptation and mitigation
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;4) Finally we anticipate a significant model improvement
as a result of using regional climate&lt;br/&gt;model data instead of course
resolution reanalysis data as input into the ITGG 2.0 model.&lt;br/&gt;We
strongly believe that our proposed research addresses a key issue related to
future&lt;br/&gt;climate change in the tropical Andes, which is of high
scientific interest but also of primary&lt;br/&gt;socio-economic relevance for
the region. The potential for a future water crisis is evident and
this&lt;br/&gt;water shortage is related to a projected future change in runoff,
due to the observed rapid glacier&lt;br/&gt;retreat. The scientific merit of
this proposal is therefore to gain a better understanding of
both&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms and consequences related to the disappearance of
tropical Andean glaciers. This&lt;br/&gt;increased knowledge on how fast and how
far glaciers will recede and how much this will affect&lt;br/&gt;future runoff
and water availability from the Andes will have a significant and broad impact
on&lt;br/&gt;local economies and populations. Without a better and much more
detailed knowledge of how&lt;br/&gt;future climate change will affect
glaciological and hydrological systems in the Andes, no&lt;br/&gt;mitigation and
adaptation strategies can be put in place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;