* 0836806
* Collaborative Research: An Integrative Course and Laboratory Research Experience: Embedded Multimedia Applications on FPGAs
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* James Haralambides, Barry University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 05/31/2012
* USD 47,753.00

Computer Science (31)

This collaborative project develops of a course and a laboratory that focus on
the design, implementation, testing, and performance evaluation of Multimedia
Applications using Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). A principal project
goal is to demonstrate that the proposed project can be implemented successfully
in diverse environments.

Intellectual merit: The project builds a new path for engineering and science
education. Traditional curricular structures are fragmented in the sense that
course inter-relationships or links between theories, methodologies, and
practices, are not immediately recognized by the students. The completion of the
course puzzle and the integration of course knowledge usually become evident
only after graduation. This course course/lab presents a unique opportunity for
students to experience the full spectrum of course elements, namely,
fundamentals of theory, algorithmic design, hardware design and simulation,
implementation and testing, and performance evaluation. Common student
questions, such as how can this course help me and how does this course relate
to my studies, are answered within a single course/lab framework. Furthermore,
new course materials, including lectures, projects, code, software and
documentation, and web-based materials, are developed.

Broader impact: The project integrates research and education by introducing
research concepts into the undergraduate curriculum. Students are educated in a
flourishing research area, Multimedia processing on FPGAs. Students are
encouraged to choose final projects based on research applications closely
matching their learning styles and interests, publish their findings at
conference proceedings, and extend their work through capstone projects. The
appeal that many every day multimedia applications have to students of varied
backgrounds and disciplines is undisputed and encourages wider participation in
the sciences paired with higher levels of enthusiasm and academic performance.
Project results are disseminated broadly through a website (containing lecture
notes, lab projects, codes, software and documentation, and
assessment/evaluation summaries), presentations/seminars to high school
students, and college students and faculty, advisory boards, and educational and
research conferences.