* 0836933
* Travel Grant to attend Fluidos-2008 in Santa Fe, Argentina
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Ramon Cerro, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2010
* USD 2,616.00

0836933&lt;br/&gt;Cerro&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aninternational
travel grant Dr. Ramon Cerro to participate in the Fluids-2008 to be held in
Santa Fe, Argentina the week of November 19-21, 2008. This conference is the
10th National Meeting on Recent Advances in Physics of Fluids and its
applications, organized by Argentinean universities and sponsored by the
Secretary of Science and Technology. The PI of this grant has been invited to
deliver a plenary conference paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of
Proposal: The PI was invited to give a plenary lecture on the "Contact Angles:
Static and Dynamic". A topic that draws heavily from the research conducted by
the PI and sponsored by NSF on multiphase fluids transport. This line of
research is of particular interest for the conference on the light of recent
advances on flows in micro channels and under very low gravity. The interfacial
effects have a large effect on the transport in the micro-
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This conference takes place every
two years and is a point of gathering for fluid mechanics experts from
Argentina, Chile and Brazil. The audience are chemical, nuclear and mechanical
engineers as well as physicists and mathematicians. This is an excellent
opportunity to meet the leading scientists of South America and to develop
collaboration with the University of Alabama Huntsville graduate research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All expenses of the PI and travel within Argentina
are paid by the organizing Argentinean Committee, but this grant provides the
coach airfare to/from Argentina. International collaboration and contacts with
South American and Latin American countries, as well as other countries, have
resulted in many beneficial effects to USA researchers supported in this NSF
program.