* 0836400
* Structure Function Correlation of G-Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Arieh Warshel, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2014
* USD 745,219.00

G-Proteins almost exclusively control and regulate the communication of the
messages that tell living cells how to operate and play a major role in the
mediation of many life processes. Thus, obtaining quantitative structure
function correlations for G-proteins is a problem whose solution holds major
promises in terms of the understanding biological processes on a molecular
level. Previous studies conducted in this project developed and refined
simulation methods for studies of the GTPase reaction in solution, in Ras and in
related systems. The simulations explored the key role of residues whose
mutations lead to cell malfunction, and indicated that these residues operate by
an allosteric mechanism, where a distant effects change the action at the active
site. Attempts to confirm this finding and to reach more unique mechanistic
conclusions included systematic high level ab initio quantum mechanics studies
of phosphate hydrolysis in solution, as well as a preliminary ab initio QM/MM
study of the RasGAP complex. These studies reproduced key experimental findings
while giving new insights into the nature of the energy landscape of such
systems. The above advances have placed the project at a pivotal point, where it
is poised to exploit the enormous progress in structural studies of G-proteins
and related systems. Thus, the research is now moving in a parallel way on the
following fronts: (i) extending previous studies to other systems that do not
use the same key residues as Ras; (ii) conducting comparative studies of the
action of different G-proteins and determining whether or not they share a
common mechanism; (iii) exploring the information transfer in RasGAP and between
Ras and its effectors by double mutation analyses; (iv) learning how the
hydrolysis of ATP activates molecular motors; and (v) pushing for a consensus on
the nature of phosphate hydrolysis in biology and chemistry by comparing the
results of different ab initio QM/MM calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advances in the above research have been integrated into teaching and training
programs by: (i) developing and teaching a computer modeling course; (ii)
writing a widely used book on enzyme simulations; (iii) developing key
simulation methods (e.g., the QM/MM and EVB methods); (iv) generating movies on
the nature of GTPase and ATPase reactions (see http://futura.usc.edu); (v)
giving specialized courses and lectures on enzyme catalysis in different
universities; (vi) training postdocs, PhD students and undergraduates in modern
simulations and in the analysis of complex biological functions; and (vii)
presentation of the simulation techniques of Ras and ATPase, in general
chemistry lectures. The future direction of the project will involve more
aggressive enhancement of the above effort in four ways: (i) writing a text book
on phosphate as the central molecule in biology (the first three chapters have
been completed) and including in this book chapters on signal transduction,
energy conversion and replication. This book will be used in advanced
undergraduate and graduate classes on chemical biology. (ii) Producing movies
that illustrate the process of cellular signal transduction and its molecular
foundations. The movie will be produced in collaboration with the USC School of
Cinema. The movies will be distributed to high schools where they should raise
interest in the fascinating issues of the field and encourage young people to
pursue research in this field. It can also be used in presentations to the wide
public. (iii) Opening a site with ready to run EVB input files for MOLARIS for
all the possibly variants of phosphoryl transfer reactions and examples of using
these files in modeling biological reactions. This will allow students and
scientist to model key reactions in a user friendly way and could be used in
molecular modeling classes over the world. (iv) The project will continue to
provide advanced training in modeling key biological processes to postdocs and
PhD students.