* 0836539
* The Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO) and Tropical Deep Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,10/31/2013
* Marvin Geller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2013
* USD 421,729.00

The extent to which the quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO) of the equatorial
stratosphere affects tropical systems has been an open question for some time,
but little has been resolved. In recent years, there has been great interest in
dynamical interactions between the stratosphere and the troposphere, but little
work on how stratospheric changes affect tropical deep convection. Some
forecasts of Atlantic hurricane activity have used the QBO as one of the
predictors, but the physical connection between the QBO and hurricanes has not
been explored. This project is an effort to make systematic advances on these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses of observations and modeling will be
used to investigate the possible influence of the QBO on tropical deep
convection. Previous observational analyses and general circulation studies
found significant effects of the QBO on tropical deep convection; this project
addresses several weaknesses in these studies. A cloud product that eliminates
the ambiguity between deep convection and cirrus clouds in OLR (Outgoing
Longwave Radiation) data will be used, and ENSO (El Nino-Southern Oscillation)
influences on deep convection will be separated from those of the QBO. Because
it is difficult, if not impossible, to address causality through statistical
studies, cloud-resolving and single-column modeling will be employed to
investigate how the QBO might affect tropical deep convection. Background states
for the cloud resolving model will be obtained from high vertical-resolution
radiosonde data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include
the training of a PhD student in a project that combines multiple research
approaches: statistical analysis, cloud-resolving modeling, and general
circulation modeling, and using state-of-the-art high-performance computing.
This work should shed light on the physical basis for one of the predictors of
Atlantic hurricane activity and on the vertical resolution needed in models of
the upper troposphere-lower stratosphere region to properly account for upper
troposphere-lower stratosphere interactions with deep tropical convection.