* 0836763
* CAREER: Fundamental Studies of Contact Fatigue in Metallic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2008,05/31/2012
* T. Venkatesh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 05/31/2012
* USD 439,515.00

TECHNICAL: Research is directed towards obtaining a comprehensive understanding
of the contact fatigue phenomenon in metallic materials. Through an approach
that combines modeling and experimentation, the study will lay the foundation
for a framework that explains the four stages of contact fatigue damage, namely,
crack initiation, crack propagation under load, crack propagation under the
influence of far-field loads, and fast fracture. A unique adhesion-based
analytical model will be applied, which together with the formulation of a
finite element based numerical model, would provide quantitative guidelines for
crack initiation and life prediction. From experiment on materials (single
crystalline- and polycrystalline-nickel, and duplex- and lamellar- titanium
aluminide) with widely different microstructures, key insights on contact
fatigue crack initiation will be obtained. Microstructure characteristic of
contact fatigue such as the formation of dislocation structures and/or
persistent slip bands preceding and contributing to crack nucleation will be
identified through the study of single crystalline nickel. The role of grain-
boundaries in inhibiting or enhancing contact fatigue cracking will be discerned
through the study of polycrystalline nickel. The effects of phase distribution,
i.e., duplex vs. lamellar forms, and domain orientations with respect to contact
geometry, on contact fatigue crack initiation and propagation will be evaluated
in the titanium aluminide system. NON-TECHNICAL: Research would have scientific
and technological impact in the aircraft, automotive, and bio-medical industry.
The scientific understanding would help in the development of materials with
microstructures that provide enhanced resistance to contact fatigue in safety-
critical components in aircraft structures and biomedical implants. The
activities will enhance Louisiana State's research base and educational efforts
in the field of advanced materials. The research would integrate a three-tier
educational plan involving outreach programs addressing K-12 students through
the Tulane Science Scholar Program; class-room and research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at Tulane and Xavier University (a
Historically Black College and University) and dedicated research training for
graduate students. Additionally, nearly 100 high school students, 350
undergraduates, 105 minorities, and 25 graduate students would benefit from the
effort during the five-year period. An online archive incorporating information
about course contents and lectures will also be created to provide easy access
to all students and faculty through the department web site. This grant is being
co-funded by the Metals Program in DMR and EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;