* 0836459
* Polarizable Force Fields for Biological Molecules: Applications to Integral Membrane Ion Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Charles Brooks, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2012
* USD 341,023.00

The objective of this project, jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, is to develop a
polarizable CHARMM force field, based on the charge equilibration formalism,
applicable to classical statistical mechanical computations with a particular
focus on membranes and integral membrane proteins and to apply it to study ion
translocation properties in a simple, model ion channel, Gramicidin A, for which
there has been long-standing indication of the need for explicit treatment of
electronic polarization to quantitatively describe channel conductance derived
from potentials of mean force computed from detailed, all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations. The project will build on ongoing preliminary work toward
a first-generation polarizable force field for proteins; focusing predominately
on deriving relevant parameters for lipids and membrane bilayer components, and
a series of monovalent ions. This will involve application of a combination of
quantum mechanical and classical simulations (MD of pure bulk liquids) to
determine the electrostatic and non-bonded parameters defining the CHARMM-FQ
potential. Following modification of force constants of intramolecular
potentials, the force field will be validated via application to simulations of
lipid bilayers as membrane models. Finally, umbrella-sampling methods will be
employed to compute a potential of mean force for a series of monovalent ions
translocating through the Gramicidin A channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
significant potential for broad impact on the general scientific community of
biophysicists, and more specifically on those modeling membrane systems such as
ion channels and transporters. The rigorous development and application of
polarizable force fields for to large biomacromolecular systems is a necessary
step in advancing understanding of these systems. Furthermore, for ion channels
there is a vast amount of information to be gleaned from simulations using
polarizable force fields, since the physics of such systems is critically
dependent on a precise balance between interactions that will be provided by
polarizable interaction potentials. This research also provides educational and
training opportunities for postdoctoral scholars and graduate students. Due to
the broad spectrum of methodologies (ranging from ab initio/DFT methods to
continuum based macroscopic methods such as Brownian Dynamics and electro-
diffusion theory) required to address the various aspects of force field
development and application to ion channels, there is tremendous scope for
learning; equally important, the integration of techniques will allow a broad
understanding of the interconnections of available technologies in solving
scientifically oriented problems, in this case within the realm of biophysics.
Finally, all of the code development and force field parameters associated with
the CHARMMFQ force field will be available to academic laboratories via
distribution of the CHARMM academic license and from our web site (for the force
field parameters). &lt;br/&gt;