* 0836325
* Field and Lab-based Activities for Undergraduate Students to Study the Hydrologic Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mohammad Iqbal, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Geology (42) Experiential learning opportunities are being integrated into the
hydrology curriculum at Northern Iowa University. Undergraduate students in
water science courses are conducting field projects within several tributaries
and main channel sites of the Cedar River watershed in northeast Iowa.
Additionally, they are using the on-campus monitoring well site as an outdoor
laboratory to learn scientific concepts in hydrology. The students are
collecting stream water, groundwater, and sediment samples, and analyzing them
to understand the temporal variability in prevalent chemical, biological, and
hydrological characteristics. Working in teams, the students are learning how
the polluted areas are linked to their source components. Nutrients in
agricultural runoff are unintended exports from the state of Iowa, having
adverse environmental consequences as far away as the Gulf of Mexico. Nutrients
from eastern Iowa watersheds contribute to the formation of a hypoxia zone
commonly referred to as the "dead zone" in the Gulf of Mexico. This project is
providing an opportunity for undergraduate students to study the local as well
as the regional hydrologic environment and related water quality issues. The
students are learning to develop sampling protocols, to use environmental field
equipment, and to conduct on-site and laboratory analyses. &lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of this project is to develop scientific literacy among undergraduate
students by facilitating a variety of sensory experiences. An important aspect
of this project involves the integration of life sciences into the geo-hydrology
curriculum. While working on their assignments, or solving problems, the
students are learning from one another in an interdisciplinary setting. The
broader impact of this project includes providing students the opportunity to
conduct field and laboratory research to learn about the applied nature of
interdisciplinary scientific research and to investigate a significant
environmental problem. The problem of hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico is currently
a prioritized national issue that will require policy changes and the
development of a management model that likely will involve broad citizen
participation.