* 0836590
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Household Economic Organization and Commercialization in Postclassic Highland Chiapas
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Marilyn Masson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,541.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Marilyn A. Masson, Ms. Elizabeth Paris will
investigate the participation of household producers in local, regional, and
interregional trade networks at Postclassic period sites in the San Cristobal
(Jovel) Valley of highland Chiapas. During the Postclassic period (A.D.
900-1500), interregional exchange networks expanded in several regions of
Mesoamerica with an unprecedented increase in the volume and diversity of goods
in circulation. At Moxviquil and La Hermita, two small Postclassic period
hilltop sites in the Jovel Valley, amplified interregional connections may have
provided agricultural and craft producers with new opportunities to gain
economic wealth, if not social status, through the exchange of surplus goods. In
response, elites likewise may have endeavored to restrict such opportunities, by
banning, restricting, or monopolizing external exchanges, and taking advantage
of tribute obligations to reap the benefits of surplus production by
specialists. Excavations at elite and commoner household refuse disposal areas
will identify the degree of autonomy of local producers from political control,
and examine houselot variation in participation in local, regional, and
interregional exchange networks. As economic networks expand within and across
regions, they can have significant impacts on individual households and
communities, presenting both new opportunities and challenges. This project will
provide an archaeological test case for distinguishing two potential responses
by these households and communities, as enacted through the exchange of
household surplus production through tribute versus trade. If household products
were exchanged through marketplaces, houselot assemblages would reflect greater
affluence through the high volume and diversity of imported goods they obtained
through trade. In contrast, if goods were transferred through the mechanism of
heavy tribute, then the net effect should be a drain of wealth away from the
household and traded imports should be poorly represented. Analyses will compare
tools, waste materials, and facilities utilized in the production of ceramics,
lithic tools, shell, cloth, animal products, amber, salt and metal items to
those used and discarded through household daily activities. Ethnohistorical
documents suggest that highland Chiapas was rich in natural resources such as
amber, quetzal feathers, mountain lion pelts, jade, gold, salt, fish and game,
and that these resources may have been important not only for subsistence and
local exchange, but in long-distance trade with other areas of Mesoamerica.

Through continued collaboration with the Museo Na Bolom in San Cristobal de las
Casas, Ms. Paris and colleagues will make the results of the project available
to both local audiences in San Cristobal, and internationally through the Museo
Na Bolom and Institute of Mesoamerican Studies websites. Publications for the
academic community will include a dissertation, peer-reviewed journal articles,
and conference presentations. Project staff residence at the Museo Na Bolom
during the field season will facilitate the creation of temporary displays
during the field seasons in which visitors will be able to see recently
excavated artifacts and ask questions of investigators. The project will also
contribute to the professional development of graduate and undergraduate project
staff through training in excavation methods and artifact analysis.