* 0836048
* THE INNER CITY CIVIL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING ACADEMY FOR SECONDARY TEACHERS AND STUDENTS
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Jean Pierre Bardet, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This exploratory project will expose leading K-12 students to the same
educational materials and activities that have dramatically improved the
retention of freshman in engineering at the University of Southern California
(USC). This approach, which has yielded 98% retention rate in engineering
freshman classes at USC, includes well-prepared lectures by well-known
practicing engineers in various fields of engineering, such as the construction
industry, and wireless telephones, as well as extra-curricular activities such
as engineers without borders. All the existing materials and activities will be
scaled up from about 400 engineering freshman to a larger number of K-12
students using the web resources of the Distance Educational Network of the
Viterbi School of Engineering, the largest e-learning program in the Nation. The
proposed research will build an infrastructure called the ?Inner City Civil and
Environmental Engineering Academy? (ICCEEA), which combines five existing
infrastructures to form an interdisciplinary engineering academy for urban
middle and high school students and their teachers. The focus of the academy
will be STEM secondary education and teacher professional development with an
emphasis on increasing students? science literacy. In this exploratory phase,
this research will be limited to a particular field of engineering, such as
civil and environmental engineering, and to a few high-schools which have
previously collaborated with the USC Rosier School of Education. The strengths
and weaknesses of the proposed approach will be documented in detail so that
they can be available to other engineering schools and high-schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The percentage of students studying engineering in the
U.S. is far lower than many of our economic competitors, and increasing the
visibility and attraction of engineering to high school students is vital to
increasing participation in engineering. This research will utilize the
educational materials and extra-curriculum activities that have proven
successful in retaining freshman in engineering and the scalable power of well-
established e-learning distribution systems to reach K-12 students. This will
help build a large-scale web-pipeline from high schools to engineering schools,
and contribute to rebuilding the size and leadership of the engineering
workforce in California and the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;