* 0836386
* CEDAR: Whole-Atmosphere Modeling of Ionospheric Responses to Atmospheric Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Arthur Richmond, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 11/30/2012
* USD 300,500.00

The scientific objective of this investigation is to evaluate the contribution
of lower atmospheric dynamics to the variability of ionospheric electrodynamics
and electron densities. The investigation addresses the two scientific
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How well can winds generated internally in a
whole-atmosphere model explain observed quiet-day ionospheric electric fields
and currents? What information can model-observation discrepancies give us about
atmospheric processes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. How much of the observed quiet-
day variability of ionospheric electric fields, currents, and electron densities
can be attributed to variable winds from the lower
atmosphere?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model
(WACCM), a numerical simulation model of atmospheric dynamics, chemistry,
energetics, and electrodynamics from the ground to about 500 km altitude, will
be upgraded to simulate ionospheric dynamics and electrodynamics realistically,
and to calculate geomagnetic perturbations produced by ionospheric electric
currents. Comparisons between simulated and observed ionospheric electric fields
and electron densities, as well as geomagnetic perturbations on the ground and
at low-Earth-orbit satellite altitudes, will indicate how well WACCM can
simulate winds in the ionospheric dynamo region. Additional simulations using
adjustments to uncertain WACCM parameterizations, to achieve improved model-data
agreement, will provide information about the parameterized processes,
especially the effects of momentum transport by gravity waves. The WACCM results
will then be analyzed to evaluate the variability of electric fields, currents,
and ionospheric densities associated with variability in atmospheric tides and
planetary waves produced in the lower and middle atmosphere. This variability
will be assessed in relation to that caused by magnetospheric electrodynamic
effects on the ionosphere, through additional simulations that vary the
magnetospheric electric potential imposed at high latitudes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will contribute to the development of
WACCM, a community model for exploring and understanding effects of coupling
between the lower and upper atmosphere. The WACCM documentation will be expanded
to include the new model developments, and the enhanced version of WACCM will be
made available to the scientific community for use in other studies. The
developments of WACCM components in this investigation will also be used to
improve other upper-atmosphere models on which the research team are
collaborating. &lt;br/&gt;