* 0836495
* Planning Workshop for a Regional Native American Graduate Research Center
* O/D,EPS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Margrit von Braun, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,562.00

This workshop is focused on exploring the feasibility of a Regional Native
American Graduate Research Center. The workshop will engage a diverse group of
stakeholders in Native American education, training, and research from the
Northwest region, and from the broader U.S. Participants in this collaborative
process will include leaders from Native American tribes and inter-tribal
organizations in the Northwest, representatives from Tribal Colleges and
Universities (TCU) across the western U.S., representatives from NSF-sponsored
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) and Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) projects, and administrators and
faculty from the University of Idaho (UI) and other majority institutions in the
western U.S. that have strong Native American programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will explore creative, original, and potentially transformative
concepts that could, in the long term, become a model for Native American
graduate education, improving STEM degree attainment and strengthening the
workforce. A goal of the workshop is to create a consensus vision for a magnet
center for Native American graduate students to engage in research relevant to
their cultural backgrounds and interests. Such an interdisciplinary center would
feature research opportunities in natural resources, health, education, law and
policy, and economics. On the education side, such a center would develop
holistic curricula that reflect the integrated world view of Native Americans,
such as forest science in the context of ecosystems, with relation to tribal
health, lifestyle, law and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop topics will
include discussion on the needs of each tribe represented; discussion with the
TCUs represented on what has been successful with graduating their students in
STEM fields, and discussion on best practices for transitioning baccalaureate
STEM graduates into graduate degree programs; discussion on research
opportunities, their relevance to tribal needs, and identification of natural
partners; presentation by Native American graduate students from various
institutions on what has and has not worked, and what a center could do for them
and their successors; a culture discussion on how a center could transform the
experience of Native American graduate students; an education discussion on
integration within existing curricula and new curricula; and discussion on
follow-on activities, including exploration into sources of funding for a
center. Discussions will be led by a facilitator, and the workshop will include
an evaluation component. A final report will assimilate information from the
workshop and follow-on activities, and is expected to include an initial roadmap
for a center and identification of potential funding sources.&lt;br/&gt;