* 0836885
* Research Module for Organic Chemistry Laboratory Instruction.   Parallel Library Synthesis, Stereochemical Synthesis, and Integrated Spectroscopic Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Craig Jasperse, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 137,569.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;The impact of integrating student research into
undergraduate organic chemistry&lt;br/&gt;laboratory instruction is being
investigated at Minnesota State University Moorhead (MSUM). A six-week,
research-based investigation module is being developed for application in the
second semester of organic chemistry laboratory with an enrollment of 60-70
students per year. The responsibility for experimental design, the planning and
execution of experiments, and the analysis of spectroscopic and chromatographic
data is largely transferred to the student. The fundamental goals of this
project are to: 1) enhance the ability of students to conduct relatively
independent experiments, 2) engage students in critical thinking and analysis,
and 3) enhance the integration of research instrumentation into the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum. The new organic chemistry research module
involves a multistep synthesis of a library of chemicals, many of which have not
been previously reported. Students are involved in target selection; in
experimental analysis, planning, and execution; in outcome analysis; in kinetic,
spectroscopic, and chromatographic analysis; and in analysis of
structure/activity relationships within the library of compounds. Students gain
experience in conducting some of the most important fundamental organic
reactions in modern chemical synthesis. The integrated module also involves
extensive use of modern chemical instrumentation including a new Gas
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) unit and an automated preparative flash
chromatography unit. The targeted outcomes for this project include students
focusing more on the process of learning, inquiry, and discovery than on
achieving the "right answer," students becoming better learners, and students
gaining the confidence to better understand the scientific process. Through the
proposed changes in the learning process, students are expected to have an
increased interest and ownership in science. In addition, students are enhancing
their learning about many important chemical reactions and about important
modern chemical techniques. The learning materials and teaching strategies being
developed are expected to be transferable for implementation or adaptation by
other science educators. A variety of assessment tools are being used to
evaluate the educational success of the project. These address student attitudes
and confidence toward science and scientific research, student learning and
competence in technical areas, and the development of skills in critical
thinking and experimental design. The GC-MS unit and the automated preparative
flash chromatography unit also are being used in other portions of the organic
chemistry laboratories and in laboratories in general chemistry, inorganic
chemistry, and analytical chemistry, and in undergraduate student research
projects. MSUM, located in western Minnesota, has about 7,500 students, about
65% of whom are women, and serves an area with a substantial Native American
population and a substantial and growing minority population (about 24%). The
findings of the project and the teaching materials and strategies that are
developed will be shared within the MSUM educational community, and with other
educators at the state and national level. &lt;br/&gt;