* 0836892
* The Virtual Chesapeake Bay Watershed
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Kathleen Warner, University of Maryland University College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/2010
* USD 139,998.00

Interdisciplinary / Multidisciplinary (99). The online environment has become a
major delivery mode for general education science courses, presenting a variety
of unique problems and obstacles to teaching and learning. Using the Chesapeake
Bay as a unifying theme, this project is addressing these challenges by creating
and implementing the Virtual Chesapeake Bay Watershed (VCBW), an interactive,
inquiry-based, integrated, and inter-disciplinary online laboratory for students
and faculty. The VCBW is an innovative online version of the large
multidisciplinary teaching labs and science resource centers found at most
universities, and will consist of a comprehensive set of interactive online
instructional materials. Materials will be aligned with state and national
scientific literacy standards and with online pedagogical standards. The project
includes a faculty training and support program that provides guidelines for the
effective use of the VCBW in teaching, as well as best practices in online
science education. The VCBW will be developed by the University of Maryland
University College (UMUC) in partnership with the Center for Watershed
Protection. It will be used in UMUC classes, shared freely with UMUC's fourteen
community college alliance partners, and made available to all science educators
through licensing agreements. A description of the VCBW will be linked to the
NSDL and DLESE web sites. The project evaluation plan will assess the impact of
this approach on student learning and provide new insights regarding the
pedagogical strategies that are distinctive to success in the online
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in
the implementation of a comprehensive approach to online general education in
science that integrates the design and creation of instructional materials,
assessment of student learning outcomes, and faculty training and support. The
broader impact of the project lies in its potential: 1) to reach a very large
number of students, including many from groups that are underrepresented in the
sciences, 2) to serve as a pedagogical model for online science education, and
3) to create a network of scholars focused on new applications of technology to
science education.