* 0836133
* SGER: Computational Thinking for Practicing Engineers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Anthony Lattanze, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This is a SGER request that addresses both industry's and academia's need for
computer professionals with solid foundational knowledge in computational
thinking. Declining computer science enrollment at all levels is making such a
need hard to meet, with the result that experienced practitioners are not fully
realizing their potential because they may lack formal training in computer
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By and large, suitable alternatives to mastery on
computing foundation do not exist for the population of computing practitioners.
Taking a large number of undergraduate courses in foundational computer science
topics is inappropriate because of the time commitment and the fact that such
courses are oriented towards students with little experience or domain
expertise. Moreover, most graduate courses typically assume this knowledge as a
prerequisite. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SGER project proposes to address this
critical need by condensing the foundational knowledge into a set of modules
that streamlines its presentation and relates it to practical engineering
examples, targeting students with some experience in software development. Such
a course will help bridge the gap between the practical nature of todays
software systems and the foundations needed to apply advanced techniques and
theories to solve real problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project will address the current gap between engineering practice and
educational materials related to computational thinking and computer science
foundations by: &lt;br/&gt;1. Distilling the essential elements of computational
thinking for practicing engineers, &lt;br/&gt;2. Providing ways to relate those
concepts to practical applications, &lt;br/&gt;3. Packaging the material in
modules that can satisfy diverse backgrounds and needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project team proposes to develop a course that
directly addresses the requirements outlined above. Specifically, it will
distill and package the set of core, foundational concepts of computational
thinking that have stood the test of time and are relevant broadly to
professionals working in software development or other disciplines that have a
significant computational component, for example computational biology,
computational astronomy, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation strategy will
be put in place to assess the quality and effectiveness of the project. The two
main areas of evaluation will be evaluation of course content, and evaluation of
course delivery.