* 0836316
* Mesoscale Airflow Over Mountains: Orographic Drag and Upstream Convective Initiation
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2012
* USD 617,541.00

Mountains exert a profound influence on the weather and climate. This project
will investigate two important aspects of the interaction between mountains and
the atmosphere. The first will be to examine how the drag exerted by mountains
on an air stream is distributed among different vertical levels in the
atmosphere and how that drag feeds back on the larger scale flow. The second
effort will examine the circumstances in which low-level blocking can trigger
deep convective thunderstorms upstream of a mountain and how the resulting
convection evolves in the presence of the mountain and a time-varying large-
scale flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: When an air stream
encounters a mountain barrier, mountain waves may be set up above and downstream
of the barrier and the low-level flow may be blocked and diverted around the
flanks of the mountain. These disturbances are too small in scale to be resolved
in global weather and climate models, but they produce an important drag on the
large-scale flow that must be parameterized. This project will attempt to place
such parameterizations on a firmer theoretical footing and also determine the
large-scale responses to orographic drag through the analysis of high-resolution
numerical simulations. Similar high-resolution simulations will be conducted to
examine the conditions under which a moist air stream blocked by a mountain can
undergo sufficient low-level destabilization and lifting to trigger deep
convection upstream of the mountain itself. The resulting thunderstorms are
inherently non-steady, and we will examine their onset and decay in time varying
large-scale flows. Such upstream convective triggering is thought to be a
significant factor in regulating the distribution of precipitation in the south
Asian monsoon. The Principal Investigator also will examine the influence of
thermally driven circulations on the generation of these convective events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research and professional development
of two graduate students will be supported. Results should help improve the
parameterization of low-level gravity wave drag in large-scale models essential
for global weather forecasting and much climate research. Global climate models
suggest there will be shifts in winds and moisture fluxes in response to global
warming, but the resolution of those models is too coarse to allow them to
directly simulate changes in the convection. Therefore, understanding the role
played by mountains in triggering deep convection, both in the south Asian
monsoon and in other regions, will be helpful in the management of water
resources as the climate warms. &lt;br/&gt;