* 0836070
* Studies of NOx photochemistry on surfaces as a heterogeneous source of nitrous acid
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jonathan Raff, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Jonathan Raff of the University of California
- Irvine as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Raff will study
the heterogeneous reactions of NOx compounds under atmospherically-relevant
conditions. Specifically, he will investigate the mechanism for the
heterogeneous production of HONO from nitrogen dioxide. Raff will work in
collaboration with scientists at Irvine as well as at the Environmental
Molecular Sciences Laboratory at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. In
his plan for broadening participation, Dr. Raff will work with students and
teachers (Grades 7-12) from the Los Angeles metropolitan area to develop
curriculum materials that explore the chemistry of nitrogen oxides in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Raff is aimed at
developing a better understanding of the chemistry that takes place in the
atmosphere. The presence of minute quantities of some chemical species can have
profound effects on the chemical composition of the atmosphere. The collection
of all of these species, and their interactions is like a horrendously
complicated puzzle. Dr. Raff is exploring one of the missing pieces of this
complex chemical puzzle. The curriculum development work that Raff is
undertaking is devoted to increasing the interest in chemistry by
underrepresented students in the Los Angeles area. &lt;br/&gt;