* 0836854
* SGER: Improving the efficiency of conjugated polymer-based photovoltaics with ordered nanoscale morphology
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Jinsang Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 12/31/2009
* USD 75,000.00

The objective of this research is to explore and gain fundamental understanding
of new ways to increase the power conversion efficiency of organic photovoltaic
devices. The approach is to improve charge separation and transport in such
devices by creating ordered nanoscale interface between an electron donor and
acceptor layer in a conjugated polymer based solar
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Since the
discovery organic photovoltaic made with bulk heterojunction polymer blend in
1995 that resulted in the relatively high efficiency, major efforts in the past
many years have been developing various annealing methods to modify the
heterojunction morphology as a means to improve the efficiency. It becomes
evident that these approaches based on the self-organization of blend materials
are reaching its limit, and a new methodology is needed to realize the
theoretical efficiency for the organic photovoltaic. The most promising one is
to "artificially" create the ordered nanoscale interface between the donor and
acceptor layers. This program exploits a top-down nanofabrication technology
that can not only produce ordered nanoscale morphology with tunable properties,
but also scalable to high-throughput roll-to-roll manufacturing in the
future.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Power efficiency is an
important factor that determines if the organic photovoltaic technology will
become a viable green energy in the future. Therefore the success of this
program has transformative impact on the critical fields of renewal energy,
sustainable environment and the society. Both graduate and undergraduate
students (including minority student) will be involved in the research. The
results will be incorporated into courses offered in the EECS and MSE
departments