* 0836756
* Mesoscale Vegetation-atmosphere Feedbacks
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Somnath Baidya Roy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,148.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land is an integral component of the
climate system and changes in land cover can significantly influence terrestrial
weather and climate. This project aims to investigate regional-scale vegetation-
atmosphere feedbacks over seasonal timescales in the context of deforestation in
Rondonia, a Brazilian state in southwestern
Amazonia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deforestation along highways and secondary roads
has created a unique "fishbone" pattern that forces organized mesoscale
circulations similar to sea-breezes, often referred to as "vegetation breezes."
These vegetation breezes affect local hydrometeorology, enhancing cumulus clouds
and convective precipitation over the deforested patches. This project will test
the hypothesis that deforestation in Rondonia exerts a negative feedback on
itself via the atmospheric pathway. The hydrometeorological effects of fishbone
deforestation are most prominent during the dry and transition seasons when
excess rainfall can enhance plant growth over deforested regions. This
constitutes a negative feedback because accelerated vegetation recovery over
deforested patches partially compensates for the effects of deforestation. This
project will also study the role of background hydrometeorology in the
vegetation-atmosphere feedback process. In particular, it will investigate if
the system exhibits threshold behavior, i.e., whether the response to
deforestation can switch from a negative (self-healing) to a positive (runaway)
feedback if the background temperature, precipitation and cloud cover exceed
certain threshold values. Sensitivity studies will be conducted with a plant
growth model to estimate the magnitudes of these thresholds, if present.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be among the first studies on vegetation-
atmosphere mesoscale feedbacks in the coupled biosphere-atmosphere system over
an intermediate scale - regional in space and seasonal in time, thereby filling
the spectral gap between the turbulence and climate scales. The project will
support and train a Ph.D student and also an undergraduate intern to develop the
java-version of the dynamic vegetation model. This model will be used as a
hands-on tool in a course for students to conduct simple numerical experiments
and explore key processes driving biosphere-atmosphere interactions. It will
contribute to the research and teaching curriculum of the new Undergraduate
Major in Atmospheric Sciences starting in the fall of 2008 at the University of
Illinois.