* 0836873
* U.S.- Africa Workshop on Globalizing Engineering Education:   Lessons Learned from US-Africa Partnerships
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Andy Ward, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 12/31/2009
* USD 60,000.00

This award funds an international workshop with the following goals: to identify
effective learning models that incorporate a global dimension in the education
of engineering students, and to identify the infrastructure and resources
required to maintain that global dimension. On October 17-18, 2008 the workshop
will bring together invited engineering faculty from the United States, their
African university partners, and participating students from the U.S. and
Africa. The workshop will be held in Cape Town, South Africa prior to the
American Society for Engineering Education's 7th Annual Global Colloquium and
the International Federation of Engineering Education Societies' Global Summit.
Many of the workshop's participants will also be attending the ASEE and IFEES
meetings and so can immediately discuss the workshop's conclusions with
engineering educators from around the world.

Engineering is increasingly becoming a globalized profession by involving multi-
national teams in engineering design, technical services, and marketing.
However, the typical undergraduate engineering curriculum is often too full of
required technical courses to allow time for any foreign language or study
abroad courses. The Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET)
requires eleven outcomes of all accredited U.S. engineering programs, including
one that says programs must demonstrate that their students attain "the broad
education necessary to understand the impact of engineering solutions in a
global, economic, environmental and societal context." Furthermore, the U.S.
National Academy of Engineering predicts that "the engineer of 2020 will have to
understand how to adapt solutions, in an ethical way, to the constraints of
developing countries."

In order to become more multi-culturally sensitive, globally competent, and
globally competitive, the U.S. engineering profession must provide opportunities
for aspiring young engineers to learn the requisite skills and attitudes.
Despite widespread accolades from students on the benefits of international
initiatives, these initiatives often flounder because of lack of resources, lack
of institutional support, and logistical problems. At this workshop,
participants will share knowledge gained from their experience in running
engineering education projects in Africa, including NSF-funded activities such
as Research Experiences for Undergraduate-Sites and International Research
Experience for Students projects, as well as capstone courses, and other
curricular initiatives such as partnerships with the Peace Corps. The workshop
participants will summarize the lessons learned, challenges, and opportunities,
and so contribute to a better understanding of how to globalize American
engineering education and how to effectively partner for mutual benefit with
engineering educators from other nations.

This award is co-funded by NSF's Division of Engineering Education and Centers.