* 0836799
* Intra-specific habitat variation and social systems: Integrating behavioral genomics and neuroscience in the Taiwan field vole.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Larry Young, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 08/31/2011
* USD 8,850.00

This award supports PIs Loren Hayes and Larry Young to undertake a ten-day
planning visit to National Taiwan University in Taipei in March 2010. The
planning visit will bring together scientists interested in the behavioral
ecology of social rodents with scientists interested in neurobiology and gene
expression to discuss a proposed evolutionary-mechanistic model for sociality
and to develop a long-term collaboration to test hypotheses linking behavioral
ecology, genomics and neuroanatomy and to generate international research
opportunities for U.S. graduate students and junior researchers. Hayes, a
behavioral ecologist, and Young, a neuroscientist, will collaborate with
behavioral scientist Kirk Lin of the Institute of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology and Alex Hon-Tsen Yu of the Institute of Zoology, both at National
Taiwan University. The collaborators will each be joined by a graduate student
or postdoc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study species (Microtus kikuchii)
is thought to be socially monogamous. Understanding the sociality and mating
systems of this species could lead to comparisons with other socially monogamous
mammals (e.g. Microtus ochrogaster), increasing understanding of convergent
evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will assess the long-term potential for
collaboration, including assessing potential field sites, evaluating laboratory
capabilities in Taiwan, developing preliminary projects for affiliated graduate
students/postdocs to generate data for long-term study, and discussing
strategies for collaborative and independent grant-writing to support the long-
term goals of the project. &lt;br/&gt;