* 0836250
* SGER: Nanosupramolecular Hexacontayttrium/lanthanide (Y60, Eu60, Gd60, Tb60) Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Louis Messerle, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports the
work of Professor Louis Messerle from the University of Iowa on studies of the
solution structure, mechanisms of formation, syntheses, and lanthanide
(Ln)-analog chemistry of unprecedentedly large, amino-acid coordinated, sixty-
yttrium nanosupramolecular clusters ("Y60"(OH)32). Alternative synthetic routes,
intermediates and the synthetic role of small polyyttrium clusters will be
examined by 89Y NMR spectroscopy. New, technologically-relevant, large
hexacontalanthanide clusters of Eu, Gd and Tb will also be prepared and their
photophysical properties (emission and luminescence lifetimes) will be measured
by spectrofluorimetry and spectroscopy in order to develop cluster-chemistry
platforms for high-sensitivity, biomedical imaging probes and contrast agents.
Gd60's magnetic susceptibility and in vitro MR relaxivity will be used to assess
its cooperative magnetic behavior and MRI potential. Undergraduates at nearby
Coe College will participate in time-resolved spectroscopy studies and the
project will provide opportunities for minority graduate students through the
University of Iowa's Department of Education GAANN (Graduate Assistance in Areas
of National Need) program. Cluster chemistry will be introduced to junior
undergraduates in an inorganic chemistry synthesis laboratory and, at relevant
points, to the large-enrollment general chemistry lectures. &lt;br/&gt;