* 0836740
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental Study of H, S, Cl, and F Partitioning Between Apatite, Fluid(s), and Melts: Applications to Magma Evolution and Volatile Component Exsolution
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Philip Piccoli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2015
* USD 71,553.00

Intellectual merit. The volatile components water, carbon, sulfur, chlorine, and
fluorine affect magma rheology and differentiation, control processes of
volcanic degassing and eruption, and influence the dissolution and transport of
magmatic components in fluids that cause metasomatism and hydrothermal
mineralization. The degassing of magmatic volatiles from volcanoes also
fundamentally affects the geochemistry of the atmosphere and oceans - thus
influencing Earth's climate. The efficacy of these processes varies directly
with the abundances of volatiles. Despite extensive study of magmatic volatile
components via analyses of trapped silicate melt inclusions and hydrous minerals
in volcanic and plutonic rocks, and complementary experimental and theoretical
research, current knowledge of the behavior and abundances of volatiles is
insufficient for accurate modeling of fluid processes during magma evolution. In
particular, we must better understand when volatile-rich magmatic fluids first
exsolve, how their compositions change during magma evolution, and how these
fluids accumulate in the apices of magma chambers to control magmatic processes
and volcanic activities. The ubiquitous mineral apatite [Ca5(PO4)3(OH,F,Cl)]
contains fluorine, chlorine, and hydroxyl ions as essential constituents and may
also contain trace- to major-element levels of sulfur. If we have quantitative
knowledge of element partitioning, apatite potentially can be used to monitor
volatile contents in the magmas from which it forms. The proposed investigation
aims to provide that essential calibration information via controlled
experiments and detailed analysis of run products formed at known pressure,
temperature, and melt composition. The ultimate goal is to develop apatite as a
geochemical tool for: (1) estimating magmatic volatile contents at various
stages of melt evolution (not always represented by presence of primary melt
inclusions), (2) tracking the behavior of volatile components during progressive
magma evolution, (3) elucidating the role of magmatic fluids in processes of
degassing and volcanic eruption, and (4) improving thermodynamic models that can
predict these exchange processes and apply to natural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will likely result in
development of powerful alternative methods for assessing magmatic volatile
contents. The scientific results and their relevance to society will be conveyed
to summer interns participating in an NSF-supported Research Experiences for
Undergraduate students (REU) program at the American Museum of Natural History,
and to teachers and the generall public via a lecture program (focused on
volatiles and geologic processes) at the museum. The museum offers numerous
other opportunities to share the results of scientific research with the public
through electronic media in exhibition halls. The results will also be shared by
training undergraduate students at the University of Maryland and by educating
the public through an open-house event on Earth science at the University of
Maryland.