* 0836867
* 2008 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers International Symposium on Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Gregory Wornell, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 08/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

The 2008 International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)was held at the
Sheraton Center in Toronto, Canada, from July 6th to the 11th. &lt;br/&gt;NSF
support for ISIT covered the travel expenses of junior participants from the
U.S., such as graduate students, research associates, and new assistant
professors. These participants are individuals whose papers had been selected
for presentation at the symposium, but who lacked funds and would not be able to
attend without travel support. &lt;br/&gt;The IEEE International Symposium on
Information Theory has always been the primary meeting place of the leading
researchers in the field. It has a strong tradition of participation by junior
researchers that has helped it maintain its reputation as a leading forum for
new ideas. This is where researchers get an increased awareness of the
relationships between theory and practice and the impact of different kinds of
work. It is also where the more application-oriented workers gain realization of
the importance of the conceptual structure of the field. &lt;br/&gt;Typical
attendance at these symposia averages about 700 registrants from more than 20
countries. On average each submitted paper is scrutinized by 2 to 3 reviewers,
which results in the acceptance of roughly 500 papers out of 1000 papers that
are submitted on average each year. &lt;br/&gt;