* 0836803
* Cereal Genomics Workshop to be held at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, October 2009
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2009
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 10/31/2009
* USD 47,384.00

The Cereal Genomics Workshop at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory will give plant
biologists the skills necessary to navigate the increasingly complex genomics
information landscape, and to identify and encourage young researchers who might
choose plant genomics as a career by exposing them to the field's practice and
practitioners. A major aim will therefore be to enable students and post docs to
take advantage of emerging genomics data in the cereals. Specific problems and
unique challenges exist in cereal genomics. Many of the genomes (for example,
maize, wheat, barley) are large and complex, and it is unlikely that we will
have completely mapped and sequenced genomes for these species in the
foreseeable future. The cereals also provide the primary source of nourishment
to the world's human and domesticated animal populations. This workshop will
provide young students and scientists with the tools and skills they need to
exploit the emerging genome data in all cereal crops including complete genome
sequences (rice, maize, sorghum) and extensive EST and genome survey sequence
from wheat and other grasses.

The broader impacts of this workshop will be in exposing young students to the
excitement of cereal genomics, as well as enabling more senior researchers to
develop cutting edge research and curricular activities. It will also foster
development of collaborations and cooperation among the participants.

