* 0836983
* Collaborative Research:   The Textbook Reconsidered - Creating the Shortbook of Geomorphology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Montgomery, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 08/31/2011
* USD 20,583.00

Geology (42) This project is creating and assessing a new style of textbook - an
economical, succinct, and focused guide to the most important tenets of
Geomorphology, the study of Earth's dynamic surface. This "Shortbook" is made up
of 15 chapters, each 15 to 18 pages long, and each focused specifically on core
concepts identified though a process of community consensus building. The goal
of this book, and its accompanying public-domain e-media, is to organize and
present the most important knowledge about Earth's surface in a concise fashion
relevant to the way in which todays students deal with information. This project
addresses a dynamic discipline of the geosciences and serves as a model for
textbook creation in the STEM disciplines. The textbook is being designed,
printed, and distributed by a commercial publisher and is linked to a public-
domain website that hosts a suite of e-media, referred to as "Vignettes". These
are short (&lt;1000 word) case studies that supplement the text and allow
customization of the learning environment. Some vignettes are place-based
examples; some are quantitative treatments of significant equations or problems
in geomorphology; and others feature videos or animations that clarify difficult
concepts. The vignettes are being created by experts, vetted by others, linked
to the textbook, searchable on line, and available free, both on line and as PDF
versions. The "Shortbook" concept comes from the recommendations of a 2006
NSF/National Academy of Sciences workshop, "Reconsidering the Textbook", which
suggested that textbooks of the future would be short, economical, reflect
community consensus, be student-centered, and be well and purposefully
integrated with e-media. This project is testing the workshop recommendations by
creating a new textbook in the growing discipline of geomorphology for which the
existing texts were first published between 12 and 30 years ago. The assessment
plan, which is integral to this proposal and the textbook development process is
designed to improve the quality of the final product and determine whether the
project has met its goal of creating a book that is widely accepted and useful
for both students and faculty.