* 0836237
* Development of the laboratory-based course in Lean Six Sigma nanomanufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Zhanjing Yu
* 02/29/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Engineering - Engineering Technology (58)

The project is implementing an introductory nanotechnology course for
undergraduate Applied Engineering Technology (AET) students. The course includes
hands-on laboratory and project-based components using the Lean Six Sigma
methods and principles. These are introducing AET students to the foundations of
nanotechnology and exposing them to exciting discoveries and applications in
this emerging field through classroom instruction, guest lectures, and
laboratory practices. The course includes the characterization of nano-
manufacturing pilot-scale processes using lean manufacturing principles and
statistical control methods for these processes. The course is also being
offered at several community colleges and high schools that have an ongoing
partnership with the principal investigator's institution. The evaluation
effort, led by an independent expert, is using document analysis, surveys, and
direct observations to monitor the project's progress. The instructional
materials and project results are being disseminated through website postings,
through presentations at conferences, through journal articles, through the
community college partnerships, and through programs for K-12 teachers. Broader
impacts include the dissemination of the materials, the outreach to community
college faculty members and high school teachers, and a special focus on
recruiting minority students.