* 0836017
* EFRI-COPN: Neuroscience and Neural Networks for Engineering the Future Intelligent Electric Power Grid
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Ronald Harley, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2012
* USD 2,053,923.00

The basis of this project is a new and deep partnership between Steve Potter, a
world pioneer in searching for functional capabilities of neural circuits in
vitro ("living neural networks, LNN"), and the Venyagamoorthy team, which has
led the application of adaptive, anticipatory optimization to components of the
electric power grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two groups are combining together
to address the challenge of spatial complexity. Previous work on LNNs has
focused on challenges like managing a single control variable, but electric
power grids entail thousands of interconnected variables which must be managed
in real-time. The new work in vitro will probe the ability of LNNs made up of
thousands of neurons and glia to predict the behavior of a complicated power
grid simulator, and test the ability of new biological learning models to
explain their capabilities. New mathematical concepts for how to cope with
complexity will also be tested in addressing the same prediction challenge, and
in attempting to apply adaptive, anticipatory control for the first time to
large scale power grid control in simulation. Testing on commercial electric
power grids will mainly occur through their collaborations with Mexico, Brazil,
China, Nigeria, Singapore and South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of wind
power to displace coal and reduce CO2 emissions is currently limited to about
20%, because of the lack of anticipatory optimization (and optimal time-
shifting, as demonstrated in the work of Venayagamoorthy et al.) and storage. If
combined with adequate storage, the new algorithms aimed at here should make it
possible for both China and the US to assimilate enough wind (or solar) power to
be able to zero out their emissions of CO2 in power generation. It currently
appears that the US and China both have enough onshore wind resources to make
this possible.