* 0836388
* The Archaeological Signatures of Empire: Excavations and Survey at the Iron Age Fortress of Oglanqala, Azerbaijan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Lauren Ristvet, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 253,587.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lauren Ristvet will conduct a
three-year archaeological investigation into the nature of imperialism in the
Achaemenid (Persian) Empire and its effects on local communities in Naxçývan,
Azerbaijan. The team will bring together experts in archaeology and physics from
the US, Azerbaijan, Italy, and England to conduct surveys and excavations at the
fortress of Oðlanqala, in the Sharur plain of Naxçývan. Oðlanqala probably
served as the center of a local polity beginning about 800 B.C., and later
became incorporated into the northern frontiers of the Achaemenid Empire
(550-330 BC). The area offers, therefore, an extraordinary opportunity to
investigate the imperial and economic strategies of the Achaemenid Empire.

Scholars recognize the Achaemenid Empire as the apogee of Ancient Near Eastern
imperialism and as a model for later Mediterranean and Middle Eastern empires,
including Rome and Sassanian Persia. Yet so little is known about the
archaeology of this empire outside its Western Iranian heartland that until
recently some scholars questioned the empire's very existence. Excavations in
Iran, Anatolia, the Caucasus, and Central Asia during the last twenty years
provided new data affirming the existence and extent of the empire, but its
imperial nature and the reasons for its ephemeral impact still await analysis.
How did imperial Achaemenid centers interact with local populations? How did
imperialization change the production and consumption of wealth? How did local
elites negotiate power in a new imperial framework? To investigate the nature of
Achaemenid imperialism at Oðlanqala, researchers will test four models of local
and imperial interaction through excavation, multiple instrument geophysical
survey, satellite imagery analysis, surface survey, archaeobotany,
zooarchaeology, soil micromorphology, ceramic analysis and 3D GIS construction.
Research will examine how imperialism transformed the use of space at this
provincial center and in the Sharur plains and will define the economic and
cultural impact of imperialism by analyzing how it affected ceramic and
agricultural production, consumption, and distribution at Oðlanqala.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in its ability to move theoretical
understandings of imperialism beyond dichotomous definitions, by exploring the
actual operation of an empire that combined "hegemonic" and "territorial"
strategies. This investigation of interaction, acculturation, and identity-
building provides a comparative perspective for similar debates in other modern
and ancient empires. The project will also develop a three-dimensional GIS that
incorporates data from surveys, excavations, and analyses to help investigators
connect their research across disciplines, and to create a broad understanding
of the relationship between space, political power, and economic production at a
range of scales. The study will provide significant information about a region
that has lacked any major investigative work during a little-known historical
period. It will thus fill a major gap in Near Eastern and Eurasian archaeology
and provide the basis for major revisions in the scholarly understanding of
imperialism in this dynamic region.

U.S. and Azerbaijani undergraduate and graduate students from several
institutions will participate in the fieldwork to gain interdisciplinary
training in techniques appropriate to 21st century investigations and enhance
their knowledge of the archaeology of Azerbaijan.