* 0836625
* SGER: NANOPOROUS THIN-FILM OXIDE ELECTRODES FOR PHOSPHATE SENSING
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Marc Anderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 01/31/2011
* USD 117,898.00

CBET-0836625 M. Anderson, University of Wisconsin Madison

Intellectual Merrit: It has been shown that a phosphate sensor can be fabricated
using a microporous iron oxide thin film electrode. The reduction potential of
Fe (IIII) to Fe (II) is shown to be a function of phosphate concentration. The
adsorption of phosphate to the surface of the iron oxides alters current vs.
voltage behavior of the electrode. Phosphate levels in solution as low as 10-9M
and several orders of magnitude have been measured. The hypothesis of the
proposal is that the potential of the oxidation-reduction peak of iron is a
function of phosphate adsorbed as well as its speciation in solution. Coupled
with an in-situ pH probe and chemical equilibrium modeling using it may be
possible to develop a unique sensor capable of measuring the concentration and
speciation of additional analytes such as arsenates, silicates, carbonates,
acetates, etc.

Broader Impacts: The importance of phosphorus as the limiting nutrient in
aquatic systems was first documented in whole lake fertilization experiments
conducted by Schindler in the Ontario Experimental Lakes Area in 1974. Excess
phosphorus can lead to undesired growth of algae and other aquatic vegetation,
ultimately causing the eutrophication of natural water bodies. The development
of an in-situ electrochemical phosphate sensor would allow for near-
instantaneous measurements in natural waters, making analysis more convenient
and less expensive. A real-time sensor would allow for the synchronization of
phosphate monitoring data with transient weather events, and would facilitate
rapid feedback for phosphate control strategies. While commercially available
sensors exist for the nitrogen nutrients, no such sensor exists for phosphate.
This proposal addresses this need. In this project, Prof. Anderson, and Dr.
Isabel Tejedor, will train one PhD student. Dr. Tejedor serves as a role model
for young undergraduate and graduate students and especially for woman in
science and engineering. As a native Spanish-speaking person, Dr. Tejedor
provides not only the academic and laboratory skills as a mentor but as well the
cultural and language exposure that the students would otherwise not obtain
working under the guidance of other English-speaking individuals.