* 0836093
* Emerging Topics in Biogeochemical Cycles (ETBC):  Cheju Atmospheric Brown Cloud (ABC) Plume-Monsoon Experiment [CAPMEX] during the Summer Olympics of 2008
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Venkata Muvva, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/2010
* USD 514,835.00

The research consists of two components: (A) basic research into atmospheric
brown clouds (ABCs) and their influence on climate, the water cycle and the
carbon cycle; and (B) new environmental measurement technologies. It is co-
supported by NSF's Geosciences and Engineering
Directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(A) The Principal Investigators (PIs), their
students and post-docs will investigate how atmospheric brown clouds (ABCs)
reduce photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) and broad band solar radiation
reaching the western Pacific Ocean off of East Asia. In addition, they will
document the long range transport of black carbon; the impact of ABCs on clouds;
the role of biogenic and anthropogenic aerosols on cloud condensation nuclei
(CCN); and attempt measurements of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) using
nanosensors. It will also make first time observations of how East Asian black
carbon mixed with dust and other pollutants increases the solar heating of the
low level atmosphere over the ocean; and first time measurements of solar
radiation fluxes using gyro-stabilized platforms. These are all important
components of the biogeochemical cycles of the region. The research consists of
three parts: (a) creating an integrated observational data set of aerosol-cloud-
dynamics-radiative forcing. This will include Unmanned Air Vehicles (UAV) data,
surface observatories in China, Japan and Korea (thru collaborations with E
Asian scientists); and satellite data; (b) estimating the 3-D structure of the
radiative forcing of clouds and aerosols; and (c) developing an aerosol-cloud-
chemical- transport-radiation model that accounts for the observed fields and
forcing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(B) A parallel major thrust of Cheju ABC Plume-
Monsoon Experiment (CAPMEX) is that it will bring the latest development in
instrument technology including Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) and
nanotechnology and further stimulate an era of autonomous (through Autonomous
Unmanned Air Vehicles (AUAV) observations of air pollution and its impact on
regional environment and climate, thus advancing new techniques for robotic
observations. The timing of the campaign takes advantage of the reduction in
emissions from Beijing during the 2008 Olympics. CAPMEX will observe pollution
levels before, during and after the so-called "great shutdown" (of Beijing
pollution) by integrating ground-level and high-elevation measurements with NOAA
and NASA's in-situ and satellite observations, documenting the effects
particularly downwind from East Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
CAPMEX analyzed observations will be used for validating global climate models'
treatment of aerosol and cloud impacts on climate. They will also be used for
developing and constraining an aerosol-cloud-chemical-transport-radiation model.
The forcing estimates and climate impact studies will be used in national and
international assessments of human impacts on climate. The collaborations with
East Asian scientists will be of great value for obtaining reliable data for the
Asian region, and the students and post docs involved in the project will have
an opportunity to get exposed to a challenging new avenue of research and
participate in international collaborations. Finally, it will set the stage for
future evolution of robotics (unmanned) observations of the atmosphere.