* 0836757
* CAREER: Intricate Molecules from Nature as an Avenue for the Development of New Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2008,02/28/2014
* Armen Zakarian, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2014
* USD 544,820.00

With this CAREER Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
supporting the research of Professor Armen Zakarian of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida State University. This research project is
directed toward the development of new methods for the synthesis of complex
natural products. Several methods based on sigmatropic rearrangements and
enolization chemistry form the foundation of the project. These include a Lewis-
acid mediated hetero-Cope rearrangement that will be used to assemble oxazine
rings, a tandem reaction for the synthesis of functionalized cyclohexenols
incorporating a stereogenic quaternary center, and the stereoselective
generation of tetrasubstituted acyclic enolates. This project, which will
improve efficiency of chemical synthesis, will expand the scope of organic
compounds available for research in areas such as drug development and materials
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Zakarian will also initiate variety of
educational programs designed to increase awareness of the benefits of chemical
research to society. These programs include the development of a museum-based
series of activities that will expose the general public to state-of-the-art
organic chemistry and have the potential to attract young students to careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;