* 0836038
* Collaborative Research: In-Class Peer Tutoring: A Model for Engineering Instruction
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Larry Flick, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2009
* USD 54,992.00

This research project will implement an in-class peer tutoring (ICPT) program in
statics and mechanics of materials at two land grant universities, and
investigate the relationship between the peer tutoring program and student and
tutor attitudes about retention, within the framework of social capital. For
this project ICPT is defined as trained and more experienced students assisting
students in these two courses with active learning exercises during lecture. The
ICPT also strategically includes a tutor training program and out-of-class
weekly tutoring. The construct of social capital includes social interactions,
norms, and the value of these networks and norms. Social capital has been
broadly implemented to assess the value of social interactions and norms at the
national, community, business, and education levels. This proposal aims to
further investigate a proven instructional model and to develop and share a
deeper understanding this model?s effect on student retention, social capital,
and attitudes towards the engineering discipline. Broad implementation of ICPT
and social capital evaluation measures can transform the undergraduate education
culture. The proposed work builds upon two external sources of foundational
research. Theoretical cognitive research provides extensive evidence of the
value of peer tutoring programs, and social capital research provides the
theoretical framework to investigate the socially robust ICPT program.

Increasing the number of engineering students prepared for the challenges of the
global economy is important for national competitiveness. Current classroom
instructional practices in engineering education fall short of recognized best
practices, lacking the social resources for students to participate in
meaningful interactions with more experienced students. Social integration is
consistently shown to be a vital factor in the retention and academic success of
engineering students. There is a shortage of assessment methods and instruments
to evaluate effective socially integrative teaching in the business of
engineering education. Research findings from this project will add to existing
research on the effectiveness of peer tutoring on student social integration and
retention and provide a framework for developing more broadly implementable
assessment methods. New knowledge about peer tutoring, social capital and
retention will add to a presently sparse base in engineering education.