* 0836718
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: DUSEL Experiment Development and Coordination
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Daniela Leitner, Department of Energy
* Interagency Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 97,329.00

ABSTRACT

The proposed Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) will
house an extensive portfolio of experiments in physics, biology, geosciences and
engineering to address important science questions across these disciplines. An
Initial Suite of Experiments (ISEs) must be assembled to address these questions
and to present a compelling, safe and cost-effective plan for their
implementation. A fully developed suite of ISEs will be a major component of the
MREFC document to be assembled for the DUSEL in December 2009 for subsequent
implementation in 2012.

Objectives and Intellectual Merit: To address the development of the ISEs this
proposal seeks support for activities of the DUSEL Experiment Development
Committee (DEDC), representing the physics, biology, geosciences and engineering
communities. This Committee will: Develop the framework for a superset of the
ISEs consistent with the community-driven efforts reported in the S-1 and other
plans, and consistent with the capabilities of the proposed activity.

Coordinate the activities of the community in defining the portfolio of ISEs and
in completing the necessary design and evaluation of experiments to ensure safe
and successful operation within a DUSEL.

Liase between the scientific community and both NSF and the Homestake design
team to ensure on-schedule development for the superset-ISE plans and for the
timely completion of an MREFC application.

Approach: These objectives will be met through a series of workshops and
meetings detailed in the following proposal. The DEDC will: (1) Review key ISEs
identified within the site-independent activities conducted to-date and identify
any new ISEs through workshops with key proponents and the broader community;
(2) Organize working groups around ISEs or logical groupings of experiments
towards developing a compelling science plan for DUSEL; (3) Organize this
superset of ISEs into a coherent framework and galvanize the working groups to
develop detailed science and engineering plans for these experiments to reach
readiness for an MREFC application anticipated for December 2009; and (4)
Coordinate these activities throughout with NSF and the Homestake design team,
to insure engineering feasibility, to maximize efficient use of multi-user
facilities and to guarantee that the ISEs are mutually compatible within the
Homestake environment, and be responsible for articulating the science vision to
the community and to government.

Expected Results and Broader Impacts: These activities will contribute to the
form and quality of the science plan for the superset of ISEs and to the timely
submission of an MREFC application. These are essential components in the path
to the development of a successful long-term multi-user facility developed at
optimal cost and schedule that will serve the physics, biology, geosciences and
engineering communities.