* 0836937
* Studio Physics: Understanding and Implementing the Transformation
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Patrick Kohl, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,860.00

This project seeks to transform second-semester introductory physics (Physics
II) into a Studio-based format, focusing primarily on the creation of new
learning materials and teaching strategies. Several years ago, the first
semester of this course (Physics I) at the school underwent a similar
transition, resulting in substantial gains in student performance and
satisfaction. Now, space is available for the second semester.

Pilot results from the Physics II courses held in Studio have identified a
number of specific avenues for reform, including increased problem difficulty to
better provoke group interactions, careful use of problem scaffolding, and an
emphasis on written explanation of work. This project involves careful
assessment of the current state of the class, followed by significant curriculum
development and implementation.

The primary outcome of this project is a substantially improved Studio
curriculum. With systems in place to track curriculum improvements over time,
these changes are intended to be permanent. The changes are designed to improve
student learning of conceptual material, problem-solving strategies, student
attitudes, and student understanding of the nature of science. There are also
three secondary outcomes that make use of new Studio course: 1. Faculty and
student training in research-based teaching techniques. 2. Disseminated
knowledge regarding how to effectively transform from a traditional model to a
Studio or hybrid Studio model, aiding other institutions in making similar
changes. 3. Opportunities for physics education research of significant
interest, including longitudinal studies comparing students who have had Studio-
based classes to those who have not, and studies comparing Studio to other
large-lecture reforms implemented in the region.

The intellectual merit of this work includes a model for implementing the
transition to a Studio Physics or hybrid course at other universities. Careful
assessment of the transition enables identification of more and less effective
course features. In addition, the transformed Studio allows future research of
considerable interest, including comparisons between the School's studio and
other institutions' approaches to reform.

The broader impacts of this work include the 800-1000 students served by the
course each year, as well as the involvement of 15-20 student teaching and
research assistants in implementing and assessing these improvements each
semester. Student benefits should include higher performance on conceptual and
problem-solving tasks, and improved attitudes towards physics. Faculty at the
school who teach Physics II are able to experience research-based educational
practices and their positive effects. The experience also allows faculty at
other institutions to benefit from the results.