* 0836910
* Collaborative Research: A Universal Cooperative Communication System-On-Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Xinmiao Zhang, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 07/31/2010
* USD 104,541.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems Youjian Liu, University of Colorado at
Boulder Xinming Huang, Worcester Polytechnic Institute Zhongfeng Wang, Oregon
State University Collaborative Research: A Universal Cooperative Communication
System-on-Chip

Intellectual Merit: Events such as the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001
and Hurricane Katrina have made disaster-tolerant and interoperable
communications a national priority. A disaster-tolerant communication network
must work despite interference among users as arises when first responders
converge at a disaster site. Conventional interference avoidance methods offer
diminishing capacity per user as the user density increases. Cooperative
communication can solve the problem by taking advantage of the interference,
thus saving total network transmit power. However, the performance of existing
cooperative communication algorithms vary significantly with the channel
statistics for which they are designed and, also, waste received mutual
information when the channel is better than the transmission rate or suffer an
outage when the channel cannot support the transmission rate. This research
explores the design of a cooperative communication system, composed of single or
multiple antenna nodes, that works across varying channel conditions in the
sense that outage is eliminated and received mutual information is not wasted.
The goal of the project is to take an information theoretic solution all the way
to a single-chip implementation to advance communication and coding, as well as
system-on-chip (SoC) implementation. The project tackles research problems that
are at the intersection of three areas: (i) communication theory, (ii) very
large-scale integration (VLSI) signal processing, and (iii) system-on-chip
architecture and design.

Broader Impact: The project advances interdisciplinary communication system
research and design. The system-on-chip realization has the potential for
application in future fixed or mobile ad-hoc wireless networks with the
capability to work under strong interference as required by first responders,
potentially strengthening national security and emergency preparedness. The
proposed project provides an educational opportunity to expose students to the
diverse aspects of communication system theory and practice. It will also
involve undergraduate students and students from underrepresented groups through
an integrated research and education program.