* 0836068
* SGER: Surface Reactivity of Nanostructured Light Weight Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2011
* Henry Rack, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 02/28/2011
* USD 150,000.00

TECHNICAL: This SGER project will examine the role of substrate microstructure
on the structure and electrical characteristics of native oxide films formed
under ambient temperature conditions. This examination is intended to examine
the hypothesis that observed differences in surface reactivity between the
nanostructured, ultra-fine grained and normal coarse grained metals arise as a
result of electrochemical differences, as evidenced by variations in local
surface charge, these believed to arise from differences in amorphous oxide film
thickness and structure between regions of native oxide films formed immediate
above high angle grain boundaries and amorphous films which are formed above the
substrate at distances removed from these boundaries. Furthermore as the grain
boundary surface area per unit volume increases with nanostructuring, the
differences between matrix and boundaries associated surface oxide surface and
charge will become of increasing importance. The primary intellectual merit of
these studies resides in the attention given to understanding the immediate
region and interface lying between the native oxide film and the substrate, this
being at length scales between 0.5 and 2 nm, and how this nanoscale structure is
affected by the substrate microstructure, in particular by the presence of grain
boundaries intersecting the metal substrate. EFM and HRSEM will be used, the
former within a length scale below that previously attained. Finally the results
obtained within this nanoscale region will be compared with those obtained at
distances far removed from substrate defect. High Risk/High Payoff: The risk
resides within the length scale capabilities of the techniques used for the
examination. The EFM and HRTEM procedures required will be operating at and
beyond the margin previously obtained - EFM being applied at 0.5-2 nm in the
vicinity of the substrate grain boundary, while HRTEM will be examining the
interface and atomic structure of amorphous films approximately 0.5-1 nm thick
lying on a metallic substrate. While it is expected that these limits can be
obtained, other approaches including field ion microscopy and scanning probe AFM
are also under consideration. NON-TECHNICAL: Success of this high risk endeavor
will provide a gateway to tailoring substrate structure and chemistry to define
surface charge distribution. It can be envisioned that this knowledge will lead
to enhanced osteointegration, utilization of nanostructured metals for cell
growth scaffolds, self-healing mitigation of cell attachment, improved corrosion
resistance, and catalytic response, all without recourse to surface treatment or
coatings.