* 0836222
* 2008 Rock Deformation Gordon Research Conference at Tilton School, New Hampshire, August 3-8, 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2009
* USD 24,825.00

The 2008 Gordon Research Conference, held August 3-8, 2008 at Tilton School, New
Hampshire, highlights the latest research and future trends in brittle and
ductile rock mechanics, with experimental, field and theoretical contributions.
This conference brings together experts and students in these research areas
with experimentalists and theoreticians studying the same processes.
Participants discuss and assess where agreement exists on rheological
constraints derived at different length and time scales using different
techniques - and where new insight is required. Thematic sessions are: 1) the
dynamics of earthquake rupture; 2) the rheology of the lower crust and coupling
with the upper mantle; 3) the measurement and interpretation of seismic
attenuation and anisotropy; 4) the dynamics of ice sheets; 4) the coupling of
reactive porous flow and brittle deformation for understanding geothermal and
chemical properties of the shallow crust that are important for developing ideas
in carbon sequestration, geothermal and petrochemical research. Participants
include specialists in rock mechanics, seismology, tectonics, rheology, geodesy,
and structural geology reflecting the multidisciplinary nature of the conference
theme. The program includes significant time for all conference participants to
debate current problems and future research directions. The principal goal of
this conference is not so much to assess or present what has already been
accomplished, but rather to look towards the future and open up new research
directions. The conference format is designed to involve established leaders,
both men and women, in a range of disciplines, in discussion with all
participants, and to inspire the postdoctoral scientists and graduate students
who will carry the field forward.