* 0836318
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Tomographic Array for Lightning and Ionospheric Studies (TALIS)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Kenneth Eack, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2012
* USD 113,500.00

In order to fully characterize the effect of lightning on ionospheric density
structures, this project will deploy co-located ionosphere and lightning RF
arrays at HF (1-30 MHz) for D- and E-region imaging, and VLF (0-500 kHz) and VHF
(120-150 MHz) radars for lightning studies. The observational program will be
augmented by computations from the Ionospheric Data Assimilation Four-
Dimensional (IDA4D) model. The model will perform tomographic reconstruction of
the ionosphere for heights extending from the E region to above using the
observations obtained as well as other opportunistic E region data sources, most
notably from the Los Alamos Portable Pulser (LAPP) with the Cibola Flight
Experiment (CFE) satellite. The goal of these activities is to elucidate
coupling processes between the troposphere and ionosphere, in particular the
interaction between lightning and E region ionization enhancements known as
sporadic-E. Current thinking suggests that there are two primary mechanisms that
transport energy from the troposphere to the lower ionosphere: the first is
mechanical wave activity and the second is electrical effects associated with
lightning, including electromagnetic pulses and relativistic electrons. The
mechanical coupling of waves may increase the peak plasma densities of
sporadic-E layers before propagating into the F-region. Discharges from
lightning couple electromagnetically and may increase the peak plasma densities
by creating more long-lived metal ions from the ambient population of meteoric
metal atoms found at these altitudes. However, very little is known about the
electromagnetic coupling between lightning and the ionosphere, even though
observations of Transient Luminous Events (TLE) indicate that interactions
between thunderstorms and the middle and upper atmospheres do occur. The goal is
to make significant progress in answering the following questions on
ionosphere/troposphere coupling: (1) What is the coupling mechanism between
lightning emissions and the development of sporadic E layers? (2) What is the
relationship between lightning emissions and the variations of conductances in
the ionosphere? (3) To what degree can we use measured RF values of the
lightning emissions and characterization of the ionosphere to simultaneously
model and analyze the physical characteristics of lightning emissions and the
detailed structuring of the ionospheric response?