* 0836540
* Assessing, Quantifying, and Predicting the Role of Large Woody Debris as a Driver of Hydrologic Connectivity
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Meinhard Cardenas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 282,683.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessing, Quantifying, and Predicting the Role of
Large Woody Debris&lt;br/&gt;as a Driver of Hydrologic
Connectivity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: M. Bayani
Cardenas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This study seeks to understand
and quantify the role of large woody debris (LWD) in driving hydrologic
connections and exchanges of fluid, mass, and energy between rivers and their
sediment. LWD is ubiquitous in the fluvial landscape and controls fluvial
hydrology, geomorphology, biogeochemistry, and ecology at all scales. Because of
this, LWD reintroduction is now a popular tool for habitat and river
restoration. However, the success of restoration and management programs depends
on a thorough scientific understanding of LWD?s many functions in streams. We
know little about how LWD, as a flow obstacle in channels, drives surface water-
groundwater exchange. Through flume, numerical, and field experiments, we will
quantify the relationship of groundwater-surface water exchange to LWD
configuration and channel hydraulic condition. We will conduct flume experiments
to quantify integrated and local groundwater-surface water exchange metrics
under various conditions. We will vary LWD diameter and depth as well as channel
Froude number in flume runs. The flume experiments will also consider non-
isothermal conditions where we will impose diurnal warming/ cooling of the
channel and monitor heat transfer through the sediment induced by LWD-current
interaction. Supplementing the limited flume experiments are sensitivity
analyses using coupled computational fluid dynamics simulations of turbulent
free-surface open channel flow with groundwater flow and heat and solute
transport. The simulations will test the influence of permeability and scour
morphology on LWD-induced groundwater-surface water mass, momentum, and energy
exchange and address a broader range of LWD geometry and channel conditions.
Complementing the controlled actual and numerical experiments is a field
campaign in where we will quantify the reach-scale effects of introduced LWD
simultaneous with detailed three-dimensional monitoring of pressure and
temperature in the vicinity of one log. This allows concurrent characterization
of reach-scale signals and local physical processes. Using the combined
information from field, flume, and numerical experiments, we will develop a
predictive relationship for LWD-induced groundwater-surface water exchange as a
function of easily measured parameters such as the Darcy-Weisbach friction
factor, Froude number, sediment permeability, and LWD gap and blockage ratios.
The resulting predictive relationship can guide stream management and
restoration decisions as well as biogeochemical and ecological research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;