* 0836833
* Understanding Biophysics using Microsoft Excel
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Peter Nelson, Benedictine University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,196.00

This project involves using Excel spreadsheets to help undergraduate students
develop an understanding of advanced topics in biophysics even if they do not
have a calculus background. It expands upon and brings to maturation an approach
that has been in development for the last six years. It is being disseminated to
others for beta testing, evaluation, revision and adoption so that a wide
spectrum of physical and life science undergraduate students can be exposed to
important topics in biophysics that are absent from the traditional (calculus
reliant) undergraduate curriculum.

Intellectual Merit: The project advances teaching of quantitative biophysical
concepts to a broad audience including undergraduates with no calculus
background. The project is: 1) developing teaching modules suitable for students
both with and without calculus backgrounds; 2) assessing the modules as a
learning tool in the actual classroom; 3) disseminating these modules to the
wider teaching community; 4) strengthening student understanding of current
research techniques, particularly for women and minorities; and 5) increasing
interdisciplinary interactions between different disciplines. The simulations
developed in the modules involve students in developing their own simulations
"from scratch" using the basic assumptions of the physical model. The students
then discover the predictions of the model by analyzing the simulation output.
Fundamental biological processes covered include: diffusion; membrane transport
and equilibrium (including the Nernst Potential and osmotic pressure);
development of simple ion channel models and comparison with experiment;
directed random transport processes (including sedimentation, electrophoresis
and motor proteins); the fundamentals of computational molecular biology
(including molecular dynamics techniques); and fluid dynamics (Poiseuille flow).
All of the proposed modules are activity-based.

Broader Impacts: The immediate goal of the project is for individual modules (or
small subsets) to be included in biology courses, or in mathematics and physical
science courses in accordance with the second recommendation in the National
Research Council's recommendations for interdisciplinary teaching (see Bio2010:
Transforming Undergraduate Education for Future Research Biologists).
Implementation of the modules requires only modest computing resources, namely
an inexpensive PC capable of running Excel software, thus greatly facilitating
adaptation by a wide range of institutions. In order to maximize the potential
impact of the material being developed the work is being presented: at a variety
of national conferences in areas such as biology, physics, biochemistry and
physiology; in articles submitted to appropriate journals in these same
disciplines; and is being considered for dissemination through the Biological
ESTEEM Collection, a project of the BioQuest Curriculum Consortium, a consortium
that disseminates peer-reviewed Excel simulations to biology and mathematics
educators.