* 0836920
* RUI: Gravity Wave Effects in the Mesosphere/Lower Thermosphere (MLT) Region with a 2-D, Nonlinear, Multiple-Airglow Chemistry-Dynamics Model
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Tai-Yin Huang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2012
* USD 183,868.00

The project will develop a 2-D time-dependent nonlinear chemistry-dynamics model
of the mesosphere/lower thermosphere region to simulate the response of two
airglow emissions to atmospheric gravity waves. Gravity waves are important
because they transport energy and momentum from the lower atmosphere to the
upper atmosphere, where they can deposit their energy and momentum through wave-
mean flow interactions. These interactions can result in perturbations to the
distributions of atmospheric species by the combined effects of chemical
perturbations and vertical transport; exothermic heating variations may also be
induced. In addition to gravity waves, airglow in the mesosphere/lower
thermosphere region constitutes another important research topic in the
atmospheric science community: variations in airglow intensity can oftentimes be
used to deduce characteristics of gravity waves or other types of waves that
cause the variations. The project includes both elements, gravity waves and
airglow emissions, by constructing a model that includes a monochromatic gravity
wave dynamics code and a chemistry code that simulates two airglow emissions: OH
and the O2 atmospheric (0,1) band. The model will be used to study the following
topics: 1) gravity wave effects on the OH and O2(b1) airglow emission layers in
a windless atmosphere and for a constant background wind condition; 2) the
airglow response to a variety of different gravity wave characteristics; 3)
wave-induced secular variations of the airglow intensities and the intensity-
weighted temperatures of the two airglow layers; 4) the amplitude growth factor
associated with the various simulations of the airglow layers; 5) wave-induced
secular variations of gas species concentrations; and 6) wave-induced exothermic
heating associated with the passage of different gravity waves. Comparisons with
observations will be made to test and validate the model. Undergraduate students
will participate in the project by analyzing the simulated airglow emissions to
determine the effects of gravity waves, co-authoring the papers describing the
work, and presenting some of the results at professional meetings such as the
annual CEDAR meeting. The model resulting from this research will provide a
unique tool to the community.