* 0836986
* Building on Success: Indigenous Alliance Expansion
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Herb Schroeder, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2013
* USD 720,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project will add the following expansion
schools to the Indigenous Alliance: South Dakota School of Mines and Technology,
University of Colorado Boulder, University of Idaho, and University of North
Dakota. Under the leadership and guidance of the founding institution, the
University of Alaska Anchorage, each of these Alliance Universities has formed a
partnership with high schools and industrial participants. The goal of this
project, which builds upon and adds to an existing alliance of six institutions
--University of Alaska Anchorage, University of Alaska Fairbanks, University of
Hawai?i Manoa, University of Washington, Kapiolani Community College, and
Kuskokwim Community College?is to effect a systematic change in the hiring
patterns of Indigenous Americans in the fields of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by increasing the number of individuals on a
career path to leadership in STEM fields. Basic to the work of each of these
teams is the Pre-College portion of the model. Each team works with high schools
and industrial partners in order to establish computer labs in Native
communities and/or in schools with substantial indigenous populations. In the
labs, high school students assemble computers, train on specific engineering and
science software packages, and teach others how to build computers. Students are
required to successfully complete chemistry, physics, and trigonometry prior to
graduation. Students who meet all of the programmatic requirements earn the
right to keep the computer. The work will advance the knowledge and
understanding of key elements that serve to motivate native students and to
sustain their interest through successful degree
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the project focuses primarily on the
replication of the pre-college model developed at the University of Alaska
Anchorage, it will also contribute to the strengthening of the STEM pipeline
including summer bridge programs, university retention programs, and graduate
education at the participating universities. The proposed pre-college project
has the potential to bring about a substantial increase in the number of
Indigenous Americans studying engineering and other STEM fields at the
participating universities. NSF funding will be substantially leveraged by
matching funds from participating universities and their industry school system
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners central to this Indigenous Alliance
activity include University of Alaska Anchorage(lead institution), universities:
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, University of Colorado Boulder,
University of Idaho, and University of North Dakota; high schools: Lapwai
Junior-Senior HS (Nez Perce), Four Winds Community High School; Boulder Valley
Schools; Leadership Institute: Boulder Valley Schools; non-academic
organizations: Ford Foundation, Sloan Foundation, 3M, and J.D. Abrams Native
American Support Fund; evaluator(also a non-academic organization): Urban
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;