* 0836961
* Improved Student Learning of Microprocessor Systems Through Hands-On and Online Experience
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Carolyn Plumb, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 05/31/2012
* USD 148,733.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project endeavors to
improve student learning in undergraduate microprocessor courses by adding a
measurement capability through the use of logic analyzers. The current practice
in undergraduate microprocessor courses is to have a companion laboratory in
which students can program microprocessors and observe some basic functionality
through devices such as light emitting diodes and switches. The addition of a
logic analyzer to the laboratory allows students to measure and visualize the
operation and functionality of the microprocessor more directly and in more
detail than basic input and output devices allow. In order to assess the impact
of the additional measurement capability on student learning a study is being
conducted using a control and treatment group design and both quantitative and
qualitative instruments. The second component of the project involves making the
microprocessor laboratory with the logic analyzers available remotely over the
internet to rural and tribal colleges in the state of Montana. The efficacy of
the remote laboratory with respect to student learning is also being formally
studied using a control and treatment group design. The project includes
outreach efforts to tribal colleges in order to increase awareness of
engineering and to encourage these institutions to adopt the remote laboratory.
Results of the studies are being disseminated through conference and journal
publications.