* 0836137
* Bio-Physical Variability in Regions of the Southern Ocean with Contrasting Climatic Response  - The Eastern Amundsen & Ross Seas
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Xiaojun Yuan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,699.00

The Office of Polar Programs, Antarctic Science Division, Atmosphere & Oceans
Program has made this award to address a combination of unusual biogeochemistry
and changing ocean and ice conditions in the Amundsen and Ross Seas via a
research cruise on the Icebreaker Oden. The biogeochemical focus is motivated by
recent observations of high uptake of the nutrient phosphorus relative to
nitrate and carbon in surface waters of the Southern Ocean accompanied by
relatively rapid regeneration in underlying waters. Mechanisms controlling
unusually low N:P ratios in intermediate and deep waters of the Southern Ocean
are yet to be determined but both models and observations suggest that ratios
set in this region and transported to lower latitudes, could simulate
nitrification in the low latitude gyres. In this way processes in the Southern
Ocean could influence global marine nutrient cycling. Moreover, marine sediment
evidence suggests that Southern Ocean productivity has varied significantly in
time. To better understand global nutrient cycling and its variability, it is
important to better document the situation in the Southern Ocean. The Amundsen
and Ross Sea regions are additionally of interest because they exhibit out of
phase climate anomalies with the Atlantic sector centered on the Weddell Sea.
The seesaw pattern of anomalies in sea ice cover and wind patterns, known as the
Antarctic dipole, seems to be governed by connections with larger scale
atmospheric pressure patterns such as the El Ni√±o Southern Oscillation. The role
of the ocean in these connections remains to be clarified. Additionally, the
Amundsen and Ross seas with narrow and broad shelves respectively present
contrasting situations for the delivery of warm circumpolar deep water that can
melt ice shelves. It is proposed to carry out basic hydrographic surveys
including biogeochemical measurements along two cross-shelf transects to examine
1) Circumpolar Deep Water intrusions on the shelf, 2) changes in freshwater
inventories, 3) the unusual ratios of nitrogen to phosphorus of Southern Ocean
waters and their influence on the global oceans. A third XBT/XCTD/CT transect
through the Pacific center of the Antarctic dipole is proposed that would
complement a separately funded mooring based project. The planned work extends
the times series of similar, previous hydrographic surveys. The acquisition and
interpretation of hydrographic data is directly collaborative with participating
Swedish investigators and will provide necessary context for other science
projects that will be carried out on this Oden cruise. Broader impacts: The
proposed cross-shelf hydrographic lines are extensions of internationally vetted
priority hydrographic lines for the WOCE/CLIVAR program. Data will be made
available through the National Ocean Data Center. An undergraduate intern will
be engaged in the climate data manipulation. The research program will be
featured as part of the Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory Annual Open House which
is visited by more than a thousand people. Two of the PI?s are female and so
this project will increase participation of a group particularly
underrepresented in physical oceanography.