* 0836545
* Conference Proposal: Constitutive Modeling of Biomaterials; Pittsburgh, PA, September 2008
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Anna Vainchtein, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,000.00

The conference "Constitutive Properties of Biomaterials" at the University of
Pittsburgh will be held under the auspices of the Society for Natural Philosophy
in September 2008. Mechanics plays an important role in biology at every length
scale, from molecular to tissue level. The complexity of cell microstructure and
organic nature of living materials require new theoretical frameworks for design
and interpretation of new classes of experiments. Behavior of biomaterials
results from interactions of constituents on multiple length and time scales
which cannot be treated by theories developed with traditional materials in
mind. Recent advances in this field include development of more general
continuum theories and derivation of average properties of structured materials
from microscopic and molecular level considerations. The goal of this conference
is to facilitate a fruitful interaction between the experts in experimental
study of biomaterials on one hand and mathematical modeling and nonlinear
continuum mechanics on the other. Particular emphasis will be placed on
characterizing the response of biomaterials at the continuum level within the
framework of finite elasticity and related theories and the development of new
theories of mechanics of living matter that account for growth, aging and
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomechanics is a highly interdisciplinary
scientific field that has already provided crucial contributions to
understanding of human health, diseases, injuries and their treatment. Continued
progress in this area will make it an integral part of health care delivery in
the future. This conference contributes towards this goal by promoting the
exchange of ideas in this important field and enabling new interdisciplinary
collaborations that will advance understanding of the role of mechanics in
biology. The conference also serves a vital educational purpose by promoting
participation of students and junior researchers and exposing them to an
exciting and rapidly developing interdisciplinary field that will become even
more important in the future.