* 0836792
* Workshop: Studying Earth-Surface Processes with High-Resolution Topographic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Ronald Martin, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This project is a 3-day-long workshop designed to explore the applications of
high-resolution laser mapping to analyzing changes at the surface of the
Earth.The objectives of this workshop are 1) to bring together scientists who
are using high-resolution topographic datasets to develop and test
intellectually significant ideas regarding Earth surface processes, and 2) to
provide scientists with direct, hands-on opportunities to learn about new
research advances and future directions of research in Earth surface processes.
The workshop includes ~12 oral presentations which will be up to 1.5 hours in
length. Each of these will be followed by relatively long discussion periods in
which participants can ask questions about the data, the scientific goals, the
results, and the techniques used to obtain the results. All participants have
the opportunity to present posters in one large room for the entire duration of
the workshop. Blocks of time will be devoted toviewing the posters, and we
anticipate that this will provide many opportunities for students to interact
with experienced investigators. The workshop participants will prepare a report
thaht will be used as a basis for stimu;ating research in this area.

The general themes of the workshop include the following topics: 1. Geomorphic
transport laws: current knowledge and future directions 2. Landslides,
landscapes, climate and land use 3. Bedrock fracturing, topography, and
landscape evolution 4. The significance of topographic scaling 5. Channels in
three dimensions 6. Tectonics, climate and topography 7. Landuse legacies, river
restoration and rivers revealed 8. Glacial and periglacial landscapes 9. Coastal
and tidal landscapes 10. Forest and ecosystem dynamics 11. The state of the art
in Earth surface processes, and future directions of research. The outcomes of
this workshop will have significant benefit for investigating major problems of
value to society, such as river flooding, landslides, effects of agriculture and
development on the landscape, and water resources issues.