* 0836662
* 2008 Summit on the Globalization of Engineering Education, November 4-6, 2008
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* John Grandin, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Win Aung
* 06/30/2009
* USD 32,213.00

The University of Rhode Island International Engineering Program proposes to
organize and oversee a 1.5-day, invitation-only summit meeting on the
globalization of engineering education, with approximately 20 carefully selected
invitees in attendance. The goals of the summit are to convene practitioners and
academicians with the best expertise and experience in providing international
experiences for their engineering students to: 1.) Clarify the rationale and
need for such programs. 2.) Identify the barriers and challenges which must be
addressed as faculty attempt to build such programs. 3.) Identify best practices
as well as those faculty most able to help other institutions wanting to move in
this direction. 4.) To provide feedback to the National Science Foundation
regarding the best use of its resources in supporting the globalization of
engineering education. 5.) To prepare to disseminate the material and
information assembled at this meeting to educational leaders across the country
and through venues such as national conferences. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
&lt;br/&gt;This project will begin to systematically identify the best practices
and methods to prepare the nation?s engineering students to be global scientists
and engineers. This will include providing information on exemplary
international educational experiences for U.S. students and faculty to prepare
them to work effectively in global teams. It will also provide the impetus to
develop new replicable models for international collaborative research and
education. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project involve enhancing the potential for students and faculty to adapt to an
increasingly global economy. This project will open up lines of communication
regarding international collaborations and will encourage development of new
international curricula at all levels of the education and scientific research
enterprise. The results of this summit will be broadly disseminated among
engineering educators, international educators, and higher education leaders in
general. This summit will serve to raise the profile and increase awareness of
the importance of international collaborative research and education within the
U.S. research and education community.