* 0836262
* Collaborative Research: Social Networking Tools to Enable Collaboration in the Tobacco Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Evaluation Network (TSEEN)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2007,02/29/2012
* Noshir Contractor, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 02/29/2012
* USD 860,774.00

A highly publicized report by the American Cancer Society noted that cancer has
surpassed heart disease to become the number one killer of adults under the age
of 85 in the United States today. At the top of the list was lung cancer, a
disease that is eminently preventable. Addressing public health threats like
cancer are acute, system-wide challenges that would benefit from network-centric
approaches. For example, when the tobacco research community realized it had
taken over a decade to discover that they had already collected substantial
empirical evidence, distributed across its network of tobacco researchers,
indicating that 'light' (low-tar/low-nicotine brands) cigarettes reduced neither
exposure to nor risk of cancer, researchers began to understand the importance
of effectively sharing resources and information across the entire community. In
response, government agencies involved in public health have made a substantial
foundational investment in developing a digital government cyberinfrastructure--
Tobacco Systems integration Grid (TobacSIG)--to enable collaboration within the
Tobacco Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Evaluation Network (TSEEN). While such
an underlying cyberinfrastructure is a prerequisite, delays in discoveries (such
as the carcinogenic effects of 'light' cigarette mentioned above) have prompted
the TSEEN community to underscore the need for social network referral tools as
a crucial component of any effort to enhance the efficacy of their collaboration
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop, deploy and assess social
networking tools to enhance collaboration among members of TSEEN using the
TobacSIG cyberinfrastructure. The proposed project brings together researchers
in information science, social science, and public health who have established
strong collaborations with government partners on the development of networks to
support transdisciplinary research in public health. The researchers have
assisted the government partners in formulating the challenges and envisioning
solutions; hence the research team is will positioned to leverage the
substantial financial and human resources being invested by NIH National Cancer
Institute and its partner government agencies in the TobacSIG
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
project is a pioneering effort at incorporating social network referral tools as
an integral part of collaborative systems within the context of digital
government. First, the proposed project will extend theoretical understanding of
the emergence of collaboration network structures involving multidimensional
networks, where nodes may be individuals, documents, data sets, services (such
as visual-analytic tools), or keywords/concepts. Second, it will pioneer theory
development and testing about the influence of network referral systems on
collaboration outcomes. Specifically, the proposed project will assess the
extent to which collaboration outcomes are influenced by (i) different
theoretically-derived structures of network referrals, (ii) different incentive
structures provided to users of the network referral system, (iii) different
types of network data used to generate referrals, and (iv) different information
visualizations used to represent network referrals. Third, the research will
extend the exponential random graph modeling techniques that have been largely
used to estimate structural dependencies in relatively small (typically no
larger than 500) one-dimensional networks. The proposed project will extend
these techniques to multidimensional networks containing over 10,000
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As cyberinfrastructure is deployed
to support collaboration among large communities in government and elsewhere, it
is increasingly obvious that social network tools have immense potential. In
this project the researchers will seek to respond to the refrain 'if only the
Tobacco Surveillance Epidemiology Evaluation Network knew what it knew.'
Generalizing the relevance of this same refrain to a wide spectrum of other
contexts is suggestive of the broader impacts of the proposed research. The
findings and deliverables of the proposed research will be immediately
generalizable to the design and deployment of social network referral tools to
support collaboration among other digital government efforts within public
health and beyond. Further, the government and non-government partners in this
project are exceptionally well-equipped to incorporate into their regularly
scheduled education, training, and outreach workshops the skill sets of
collaborative fluency afforded by the judicious use of network referral systems.
Finally, by definition, social network referral systems have the potential to
increase the likelihood of drawing in more diverse constituents within the
public health community (in terms of gender, ethnicity, age, seniority,
disciplinary perspectives) than heretofore possible. This extended network will
also offer opportunities for mentoring of previously disadvantaged members
within these communities.