* 0836569
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--A Novel Technique for Estimating Oxygen Density in the Mid-Latitude Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Steven Watchorn, Scientific Solutions Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Anja Stromme
* 06/30/2012
* USD 138,049.00

This project aims to develop an accurate technique for determining the atomic
oxygen density in the mid-latitude thermosphere by combining modern
instrumentation with state of the art modeling. The method will combine optical
and radar measurements to constrain a forward model of a key thermospheric
O-atom emission, the twilight airglow at 8446 A, and in turn use the constrained
model to develop an [O] estimation scheme suitable for application at other mid-
latitude locations. The 8446 A emission has long been considered an ideal
candidate for [O] remote sensing owing to its relatively simple emission model,
and the project will acquire an unprecedented set of 8446 A spectral data under
various observational conditions at two distinct mid-latitude facilities:
Millstone Hill (MH) Observatory in Massachusetts and Arecibo Observatory (AO) in
Puerto Rico. Additional parameters derived from nested incoherent scatter radar,
Fabry-Perot interferometer, and photometer measurements will not only serve as
additional forward model constraints, but also help assess the validity of
current model assumptions, specifically with regard to the role of secondary
sources of 8446 A production. Together with a thorough quantification of model
parameter dependencies, the constrained forward model will be used to develop a
novel inverse-theoretical technique to estimate thermospheric [O] from measured
8446 A brightness at mid-latitudes. Quantification of neutral atomic oxygen, the
dominant constituent in the Earth's thermosphere between 200 - 600 km, is
important for several reasons. In this region, its resonant charge exchange with
O+, the principle ion in the F-region ionosphere, plays a vital role in both the
momentum and energy exchange between the thermosphere and ionosphere. Similarly,
its charge exchange with H+ has long been recognized as an important influence
on ion transport between the ionosphere and plasmasphere. Owing to this strong
chemical coupling, the accuracy of many fundamental aeronomical calculations --
such as the derivation of transport coefficients, neutral wind speeds, energy
deposition rates, chemical reaction rates, or photochemical emission
brightnesses -- hinges on accurate specification of [O]. Thus, current
uncertainties in thermospheric composition and density limit the understanding
of the coupled thermosphere-ionosphere system, both with regard to its
climatological variability as well as its response to impulsive forcing from
above and below. The development of a new, ground-based capability of measuring
thermospheric [O] will benefit both of these central priorities of the NSF CEDAR
program. One graduate student will be trained in this Aeronomy-related area with
support from the project. The student will gain familiarity with acquisition and
analysis of ISR spectra as well as that of optical SHS, FPI, and photometer
data. Available internal funds for undergraduate research support, together with
the strong involvement of AO in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program, presents another opportunity to introduce undergraduate students
to aeronomy as well.