* 0836095
* ACC-F: Development of Hydrogenation Catalysts for the Deoxygenation of Polyols
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Takiya Ahmed, University of Washington
* Fellowship Award
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Takiya Ahmed of the University of Washington
as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Ahmed will study the
catalytic conversion of low-value polyols to higher-value chemical products. Dr.
Ahmed will conduct her research at the University of Washington's Center for
Enabling New Technologies through Catalysis (Prof. Karen Goldberg, Director) and
The Dow Chemical Company (Midland, MI). In her plan for broadening
participation, Dr. Ahmed will develop a virtual mentoring network for
underrepresented minority scientists using the AccessGrid. Dr. Ahmed will
concentrate on developing this primarily in the Pacific Northwest, where the
numbers of underrepresented minority scientists tend to be small and
geographically dispersed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ahmed's research is of
potential practical importance, in that it may lead to a process enabling the
conversion of a low-value byproduct from biodiesel manufacture (glycerol) to be
efficiently converted into a more valuable chemical (e.g. 1,3-propanediol). The
ultimate aim of research like this is to make liquid biofuel processing more
economically competitive. The efforts at broadening participation being pursued
by Dr. Ahmed are aimed at increasing the participation of young people from
underrepresented groups in the sciences.