* 0836053
* Akamai Workforce Initiative
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Lisa Hunter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,847,171.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Akamai Workforce Initiative (AWI)
is an interdisciplinary project that partners the University of Hawaii Institute
for Astronomy, the Center for Adaptive Optics, and the University of Hawaii -
Maui Community College. The AWI will support the training and retention of a
diverse student population in electro-optics through an inquiry-based,
equitable, culturally relevant, and resourcefully taught curriculum that is
designed to meet workforce needs in astronomy, remote sensing, and other
technology industries in Maui and the state. The AWI will improve current
scientists' and engineers' skills in contemporary education, and will use their
new teaching skills to advance Maui's students into the technology workforce.
The AWI will immediately build an innovative curriculum-development
infrastructure on Maui, an electro-optics certificate program at Maui Community
College, and a service-learning recruitment and retainment effort, while also
establishing the foundation for further statewide and four-year electro-optics
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AWI will include (1) a novel curriculum that
will integrate culture, inquiry processes, skills, and equity together with
modern electro-optics content, all chosen to meet workforce needs; (2) unique
training in inquiry-based teaching, curriculum design, and diversity
considerations for a generation of Hawaii's scientists and engineers; (3)
support for public- and private-sector research of national importance in
astronomy and remote sensing through a strategically designed, local program;
(4) a team that is qualified and experienced in the unique mix of content,
processes, and partnerships required. Ultimately the AWI will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM-related fields including women,
Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders. It will also benefit society as a
whole by enhancing the infrastructure for research and education in Hawaii by
partnering and integrating education, research, industry, and community
interests.