* 0836008
* Collaborative Research:Using RoboBooks To Build Scalable K12/Engineering Partnerships
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* David Crismond, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 12/31/2010
* USD 75,000.00

This exploratory project will develop and investigate a scalable model of
engineering education through K12-Engineering partnerships composed of
engineering schools, K12 institutions and teacher trainers. The materials and
context for building these partnerships will use new LEGO-based digital
portfolio software called RoboBooks. Members of the Tufts Center for Engineering
Educational Outreach [CEEO] will develop two interactive RoboBooks to teach
middle school science through the engineering of assistive devices. Partners at
the City College of New York [CCNY] will develop a Workshop Partnership Manual.
The project?s Student RoboBook will support grade 4-8 students in learning about
force and motion and simple machines by having them build and program robots,
and giving feedback on their prototypes? performance to help them improve their
designs. The project?s Teacher RoboBook will help grades 4-8 teachers learn to
use RoboBooks with their students, understand the relevant science and
engineering concepts, and begin building pedagogical content knowledge related
to engineering design. The project will be evaluated in two ways: by assessing
the impact RoboBooks have on student and teacher learning, and by pilot testing
the use of project materials to support an analogous partnership between CCNY?s
Schools of Engineering, CCNY teacher trainers and NYC teachers.

The project?s approach to achieving scalability involves providing potential
partnership groups with copies of the two RoboBooks, which they then adapt for
use by local teachers and students. Engineering faculty and teacher trainers
will use the manual to customize RoboBooks for use in local school districts and
design summer teacher workshops on using RoboBooks, all the while sharing their
mutual expertise, which will enhance the chances of building a sustainable K12-
Engineering Partnership and improving the awareness of engineering education?s
value in the classroom.