* 0836518
* CEDAR:  Nonlinear Wave-Wave Induced Diurnal Tidal Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Scott Palo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 12/31/2014
* USD 262,500.00

This project focuses on trying to identify the sources of the short-term day-to-
day variability in the migrating diurnal tides, with a specific focus on
nonlinear wave-wave interactions between the migrating diurnal tide and both the
westward propagating Rossby-gravity two-day wave and with ultra fast Kelvin
waves. The migrating diurnal tide is a dominant and persistent feature of the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere. It is forced in the troposphere through the
absorption of solar radiation by water vapor and propagates vertically into the
upper atmosphere. As the tide propagates vertically its structure is modified
through interactions with the intervening mean wind field, planetary waves and
dissipation. While observations clearly show significant day-to-day variations
in the migrating diurnal tide, little modeling work has been conducted to date
to understand the source and impact of these variations. The current hypothesis,
to be tested in this project, is that the mechanism involves the nonlinear wave-
wave interactions between the migrating diurnal tide and the global scale
Rossby-gravity two day wave and the ultra fast Kelvin waves. This hypothesis
will be investigated using the National Center for Atmospheric Research
Thermosphere-Ionosphere-Mesosphere-Electrodynamics General Circulation Model
(TIME-GCM). The TIME-GCM is a fully nonlinear three-dimensional global
circulation model with a domain spanning from 35 to 500 km. By conducting
controlled numerical studies and modifying the lower-boundary of the model to
include the two-day wave and ultra fast Kelvin wave the potential for nonlinear
interaction between the tide and these waves will be explored. This research
will result in an improved understanding of the potential for nonlinear wave-
wave interactions in the atmosphere and the impact of these interactions on both
the migrating diurnal tide and global scale waves, such as the westward
propagating Rossby-gravity two-day wave and eastward propagating ultra fast
Kelvin waves. Additionally, because the migrating diurnal tide can affect the
lower-boundary of the thermosphere and day-to-day variations will impact the
weather of the thermosphere/ionosphere system, results from this research will
be of interest for space weather.