* 0836531
* CRI: CRD:  iSim - Simulator of Internet-Scale Events
* CSE,CNS
* 02/07/2008,08/31/2010
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,890.00

Dynamics of Internet-scale events such as worm propagation, distributed denial-
of-service attacks, flash crowds, routing instabilities, and DNS attacks depend
on the configuration of all the networks that generate or forward legitimate and
malicious traffic. To fully understand these events researchers need simulation
tools that reproduce all the relevant event details and event traffic?s
interaction with the Internet architecture. Collaborative defenses against
Internet-scale attacks have also been proposed. The effectiveness of these
defenses depends on the underlying Internet topology and the deployment
locations, so high-fidelity Internet simulation is necessary to properly
evaluate these defenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current network simulators cannot
be used to study Internet-scale events. They are general-purpose, packet-level
simulators that reproduce too many details of network communication, which
limits scalability. Even distributed versions of network simulators such as
GTNetS and PDNS, designed for large-scale events, have limited scalability
because each packet and its handling are simulated in minute detail. For
example, PDNS requires powerful, 100+ CPU clusters, to simulate worm propagation
with up to 1.28 M vulnerable hosts. Many researchers do not have an access to
such a large cluster. Another drawback of the current network simulators is that
they lack a built-in Internet model. Researchers that aim to simulate Internet-
scale events must themselves assemble the Internet topology, and determine end-
host communication patterns, link bandwidths and routes. The effort required to
set up a realistic Internet model from scratch is considerable so many
researchers adopt simplfied models (e.g., assuming infinite bandwidth links,
assuming highly symmetric Internet topology etc.) which leads to incorrect
results. The iSim work builds upon our recent achievements in creating an
Internet-scale simulator of worm propagation events, called PAWS. PAWS is a
distributed simulator, deployed on the Emulab testbed. This project will explore
the potential of the PAWS simulator as a community resource.