* 0836228
* Workshop on Instrumentation Needs of Computer and Information Science and Engineering Research
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2009
* USD 36,728.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-36228 PI(s): Fortes, Jose A. Institution: University of
Florida Gainesville, FL 32611-2002 Title: Workshop on Instrumentation Needs of
Computer and Information Science and Engineering Project Proposed: This
proposal, planning a workshop to examine the nature, needs, importance,
challenges, and funding mechanisms of instrumentation development, acquisition,
utilization, and sharing, for purposes of ongoing and/or anticipated research in
different CISE areas, brings together recognized CISE research leaders to
conduct such an assessment and produce a report that can be shared with the CISE
community, colleagues, academic administrators, government funding agencies, and
industry. CISE research is increasingly concerned with extremely large and
complex objects whose behavior cannot be entirely distilled from first
principles or investigated using reduction models. Among other factors, scale is
a consequence of Moore?s law and pervasive networking. Complexity arises from
the embedding of computing into artifacts, interconnection of many components
and/or multiple layers of functionality. Research needed to design and/or model
such objects often requires special instruments to either peer into individual
components at very small space/time granularity or to observe/emulate/simulate
many objects at large enough scale and during long enough times.

Over the last two decades the CISE research instrumentation needs, and
mechanisms to address them, have changed as a reflection of the evolution of IT
technology, both from the standpoint of the research challenges to be faced and
the instruments enabled. The amazing progress of computer and information
technologies (IT) has led to the current era of microprocessors with billions of
transistors, software environments with millions of lines of code, multi-layered
IT systems, and networks of thousands of computers, users, and applications. As
a consequence, the objects computer scientists and engineers study often have an
unprecedented scale and complexity. CISE instruments often grow by connecting
many other artifacts (in some cases, on the fly) leading to complexity that
cannot be mastered by any single designer or user of those objects. Thus, an
urgent need exists for such assessment. Broader Impact: IT is increasingly being
embedded into artifacts which might include non-IT components whose natures
include mechanical, electrical, communication, energy production, chemical,
transportation, entertainment, medical, and defense. Thus, instrumentation
touches society overall.