* 0836735
* Effects Of Fresh And Aged Sea Salt On The Chemistry Of Urban And Remote Regions
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William (Bill) C. Keene
* 11/30/2011
* USD 658,137.00

It is now widely recognized that halogen atoms play a major role in tropospheric
chemistry. However, models under-predict the concentrations of photochemically
active precursors by at least an order of magnitude. This project is directed to
resolving this discrepancy through a series of laboratory studies of the thermal
and photochemical reactions of sea salt that have not before been investigated.
The objectives are to: (1) measure chlorine (Cl2) production from reactions of
salt mixtures representative of fresh and aged sea salt; (2) quantitatively
assess the change in the photochemistry of sea salt particles as their chemical
composition changes in a manner similar to that during transport in air; (3)
elucidate the kinetics and mechanisms of oxidation of organics on sea salt "from
the bottom up" by hydroxyl radicals generated in and on particles from nitrate
and nitrite ion photochemistry. The intellectual merit lies in a deep
understanding of sea salt chemistry that can be used in models of the marine
boundary layer and other regions having suspended salt particles, and that will
help to resolve the large discrepancies between measurements and model
predictions of halogen atom precursors in the troposphere. This large disconnect
is important to elucidate because tropospheric halogen chemistry impacts the
formation and removal of O3, a toxic air pollutant, greenhouse gas and precursor
to highly reactive OH radicals, as well as particle formation and growth that
impacts public health, visibility and climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide new insights into the importance and impacts of the
photochemistry of the nitrate and nitrite anions which are incorporated into sea
salt as it is transported in air, and into the impacts of organic coatings
believed to exist on these particles. This research will also provide training
to undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral scientists that is both
broad in terms of atmospheric chemistry, yet deep in terms of the specific
chemical knowledge that is developed and experimental experience gained.