* 0836793
* Specificaton and Patterning of the Animal-Vegetal Axis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2007,12/31/2008
* Athula Wikramanayake, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2008
* USD 8,100.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is interested in the maternal
mechanisms that regulate the specification of the animal-vegetal (A/V) axis in
the sea urchin embryo, and in elucidating how this maternal information is used
in germ layer segregation. One of the first molecular asymmetries seen along the
A/V axis is the entry of B-catenin into vegetal cell nuclei. Nuclear B-catenin,
which is the transducer of the canonical Wnt signal, is essential for
specification of endomesoderm, and also for pattern formation along the A/V
axis. Elucidating how canonical Wnt signaling is activated in vegetal cells will
provide insight into the mechanisms that specify this axis. Work done during the
previous granting period has shown that the Dishevelled (Dsh) protein becomes
localized to vegetal vesicular cortical structures following fertilization. Dsh
interaction with these membrane vesicles then regulates the nuclear entry of
B-catenin and activation of canonical Wnt signaling. An early nuclear target of
B-catenin in vegetal cells is the signaling molecule SpWnt8. Results from the
previous granting period have shown that SpWnt8 is required for primary
mesenchyme differentiation and the continued specification of the endomesoderm.
These data suggests that SpWnt8 has an early function to maintain nuclear
B-catenin levels in vegetal cells, and a late function at the late blastula
stage to regulate endomesoderm gene expression and gastrulation. The late
function of SpWnt8 appears to require a non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway that
also involves Dsh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To further understand Dsh and SpWnt8
regulation and function in the sea urchin embryo, three specific aims will be
pursued: 1) To identify molecular mechanisms that regulate Dsh activity in early
embryos. These studies will reveal the mechanisms that selectively activate
canonical Wnt signaling in vegetal cells of the sea urchin embryo, and have the
potential to reveal the molecular basis for the animal-vegetal axis; 2) To
functionally analyze the role of key planar cell polarity pathway (PCP) genes
animal-vegetal axis patterning. These studies will reveal if signaling through
this non-canonical Wnt pathway regulates endomesoderm formation and gastrulation
in the early embryo; 3) To determine the intracellular pathways activated by
SpWnt8 to regulate endomesodermal cell fates. These studies will reveal if
SpWnt8 can signal via the canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways, and further,
will reveal the specific PCP pathway activated by
SpWnt8.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, these studies will increase our
understanding of how the sea urchin A/V axis is specified and patterned and may
provide insight into the evolution of the A/V axis in bilaterians. These studies
will also include postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate students from
groups underrepresented in science. Results from the work will also be
communicated to students enrolled in the PI's Developmental Biology classes.
&lt;br/&gt;