* 0836859
* Collaborative Research: A Trial-and-Failure Project Tutoring System
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Boris Peltsverger, Georgia Southwestern State University
* Standard Grant
* Suzanne C. Fitzgerald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 42,988.00

Computer Science (31)

This project involves the construction of an interactive project tutoring tool,
APOGEE, and a collection of companion laboratory modules. APOGEE adopts a trial-
and-failure teaching strategy. Students can submit projects multiple times to
APOGEE before a deadline. Each temporary submission is graded instantly, with
each project requirement evaluated fairly and consistently by APOGEE. Any
failure scenario is displayed to students interactively online, step by step.
Students learn from failures, refine project design, and resubmit. The cyclic
improvement model can greatly enrich students' learning experience without
burdening faculty in grading.

The project consists of four parts: (1) expansion of the APOGEE tool based on a
prototype system that has been completed, (2) development of companion lab
modules (including formal project specification and testing scripts) for two
popular Web platforms JavaEE and ASP.Net, (3) experimental adoption and
evaluation of APOGEE and lab modules within a learning community, and (4)
integration of APOGEE with online course management tools such as Sakai and
WebCT.

Intellectual merits: (1) APOGEE encourages life-long learning. The trial-and-
failure model allows students to actively sharpen their skills. (2) APOGEE
promotes self-monitoring and reflection. Students can challenge each other by
authoring their own project evaluation scripts. (3) APOGEE increases faculty
productivity by providing automated project grading and tutoring. (4) APOGEE is
platform independent. (5) APOGEE extends the application of automated Graphic
User Interface testing techniques, going beyond many automated grading tools in
CS1/2 that only deal with text-mode input and output.

Broader impacts: (1) A learning community has been built, ranging from regional
research universities to 4-year colleges, spanning five states. Eleven
universities are adopting APOGEE in their Web programming courses. (2) Two
popular textbooks in the area are used to disseminate the results. APOGEE and
corresponding lab modules are included as their companion materials. (3) All
tools and course materials are licensed using the GNU public license. They are
made available on a public web site, with connections to the National Science
Digital Library.