* 0836028
* Application of Statistical Classification Analysis to Engineering Student Recruitment
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Edward Anderson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 12/31/2010
* USD 99,006.00

This exploratory project will apply statistical classification analysis to
college admission data to identify those variables that impact a student?s
choice of engineering as the first and perhaps only major field of study.
Variables, such as entrance exam scores, high school GPA, socio-economic status,
ethnicity, gender, pre-engineering courses completed, and other factors that are
suspected to influence an adolescent?s decision to study engineering, will be
examined to determine their role in this decision. Specifically, statistical
logistic regression, classification tree, and recently developed random forest
techniques will be applied to a sample of students admitted to Texas Tech
University. Once accomplished, these techniques will classify the variables and
yield a predictive model for student recruitment to study engineering. These
findings can then be used by the engineering community to design courses,
curricula and recruitment programs that both attract students and also introduce
students to the study of engineering in a manner more consistent with their
expectations and abilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved recruitment and
retention strategies will help increase the number of engineering graduates
needed by the nation?s workforce, and the results of this project will be a
resource for guidance about recruiting students to engineering programs. This
project will apply recently developed statistical classification techniques to a
large data sample and can filter through many variables simultaneously and
identify the significance of each variable. General recruitment of engineering
students can be improved by taking advantage of this additional insight into why
students select engineering prior to entering college. Using these results
efforts and initiatives directed towards increasing the number of students
enrolling in engineering can be focused on to the significant decision
variables. The findings will also be important for college recruiters as they
design and implement engineering student recruitment programs. &lt;br/&gt;