* 0836616
* Information Seeking Support Systems (IS3) Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Gary Marchionini, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2009
* USD 49,950.00

information such as facts or pointers to rich information resources are well
met. However, support for the more difficult challenges of information seeking
is not provided by the current search engines. There are only a few models of
human behavior or practical support tools for open-ended, exploratory,
discovery-oriented, or recall-oriented tasks that depend as much on results
examination and interpretation as on query specification. Meeting the needs of
people who seek information to discover and learn is a grand challenge, and the
tools and services needed to meet this challenge will be fundamental to the
emerging cyberinfrastructure. The time and conditions are right to develop the
theory, techniques, and tools to support such information seeking needs. This
two-day workshop aims to bring together leaders in information retrieval,
library and information science, and human-computer interaction to shape the
short- and long-term agenda for research to support information seeking. In
particular the workshop focuses on the following three themes: (i) Understanding
/ modeling exploratory search behavior; (ii) Providing system support for
exploratory search; and (iii) Evaluating systems to support exploratory search.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will have impact on the emerging information
seeking research and development community by defining directions for short,
mid, and long-term research. Workshop results will be widely disseminated via
the workshop website (http://www.ils.unc.edu/ISSS_workshop/). It can be foreseen
that general population of WWW users will benefit from this effort, as better
tools and services to support information needs for ongoing work and learning
will be developed. These results will also impact diversity in the IT research
and development area by opening up this area to underrepresented students,
researchers and practitioners.