* 0836082
* Variable Band-gap Block Copolymers Made from n-type Organoborane Polymers and p-type Thiophene Polymers for Photovoltaics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Diane Hinkens, South Dakota State University
* Fellowship Award
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Diane Hinkens of South Dakota State
University as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Hinkens will
synthesize and study the properties of new types of variable band gap block
copolymer materials for phtovoltaic applications. Hinkens will work in
collaboration with scientists at South Dakota State University, and at the
Center for Nanoscale Materials at Argonne National Laboratory. In her plan for
broadening participation, Dr. Hinkens will develop hands-on activities
describing photovoltaic materials for inclusion in the mobile science laboratory
"Science on the Move" that travels across South Dakota, reaching small rural
schools as well as schools on Native American reservations. In addition, she
will develop a photovoltaic laboratory for the Chemistry Van of the Chicago
Science Alliance -- which supports science teachers in the Chicago Public
Schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Hinkens is aimed at
developing new kinds of materials for photovoltaic devices as well as developing
a better understanding of how these materials behave. The ultimate aim of
research like this is to develop better materials for solar energy conversion.
The efforts at broadening participation being pursued by Dr. Hinkens are aimed
at increasing the participation of young people from underrepresented groups in
the sciences.