* 0836130
* Collaborative Research:    Creating Status Characteristics and Breaking Them Down
* SBE,SES
* 11/05/2007,08/31/2010
* Alison Bianchi, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 75,000.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Creating Status Characteristics and Breaking Them
Down&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Murray Webster, Lisa Rashotte, and Alison
Bianchi&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: University of North Carolina at Charlotte;
University of Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental tests
of a new theory describing how status value can spread from status
characteristics to unevaluated, nominal characteristics. The research question
is how characteristics come to carry connotations of esteem, social worth, and
performance skills instead of being simply descriptive terms. Theoretically,
under specified conditions, status value can spread from existing status
characteristics to new nominal characteristics, changing them from simple
descriptors to indications of social worth and ability. The research strategy is
to design and conduct laboratory experiments to test the theory by attempting to
create a new status characteristic in Year 1 at UNC Charlotte, and using
complementary techniques to break down an existing status characteristic in Year
2 at Iowa. The research will improve the theoretical model and contribute to a
large body of empirical research on status
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work will appear in
schools and organizational settings as applied researchers develop ways to
control the status creation process using techniques similar to those we develop
in the laboratory. For several decades, status generalization theories have been
used to design interventions to reduce harmful effects of existing status
characteristics such as ethnicity and gender; from this work we will understand
ways to head off the creation of new characteristics, and to eliminate their
status value. Such approaches should be very useful, eliminating status effects
rather than partially overcoming them, or creating new status characteristics
instead of temporarily conferring some status advantages and disadvantages. Even
without interventions, understanding the process of status creation can allow
observers to guard against it in their assessments of other individuals.
Finally, this collaborative project links experienced PIs with a younger PI,
strengthening the research infrastructure at both of the institutions.