* 0836046
* NSF EFRI-RESIN: Sustainable Infrastructures for Energy and Water Supply (SINEWS)
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2016
* Ke Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,324,821.00

PI name: John C. Crittenden&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0836046&lt;br/&gt;EFRI-RESIN: Sustainable
Infrastructures for Energy and Water Supply (SINEWS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the
sustainability and resilience of the water and energy systems, and to offer
solutions that span infrastructure design, management of the physical
environment, and socio-economic policy. SINEWS has four major research elements:
(1) THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT. The project will model the growth of urban (built
and natural) environment and the associated endogenous infrastructure risks. The
technological, engineering, and ecological options for mitigating these risks
over the life of the infrastructures will be identified. (2) THE
INFRASTRUCTURES. The project will examine and model the resilience and
sustainability of water and energy supply system options. Benchmarks will be
identified for power and water supply systems that are resilient to the expected
range of shocks, that are flexible, modular, adaptive, and efficient, and that
reflect the interdependency of infrastructures and their environment. (3) THE
SOCIO-ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT. The project will model the infrastructure risks
associated with the socio-economic environment - the demographic, economic,
institutional and social drivers of water and energy demand, and identify risk
management options under different socio-economic conditions. (4) LIFE CYCLE
IMPLICATIONS of infrastructure options, e.g., decentralized versus centralized
power and water systems. Overall, the proposed research represents a new systems
approach to engineering the resilience and sustainability of critical
infrastructures in the context of their physical and socio-economic
environments. Simulations for integrated regional-scale models for Greater
Phoenix will generate insights into the resilience and sustainability of water
and energy infrastructures under a range of environmental scenarios. These
insights are expected to contribute to a national research agenda for integrated
urban sustainability science and engineering.