* 0836852
* Workshop on Networking Research Challenges; September 28-30, 2008;  Seattle, Washington
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Keren Bergman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2009
* USD 35,000.00

The Workshop on Network Research Challenges in late September 2008 builds on
results from past workshops organized under the auspices of the Joint
Engineering Team (JET), but now has an agenda to address the challenges and
goals set forth by the 2008 Federal Plan for Advanced Networking Research and
Development (available from http://www.nitrd.gov). The workshop aims to identify
and prioritize networking research challenges for realizing the vision of
advanced, secure networking in 2015 and beyond, and to meet four overarching
goals: 1) Provide secure network services anytime, anywhere; 2) Make secure,
global, federated networks possible; 3) Manage network complexity and
heterogeneity; 4) Foster innovation among the Federal, research, commercial, and
other sectors through development of advanced network systems, strong security
services, and newly enabled applications.

Broader Impact: Advanced networking has numerous global benefits as increasingly
our economic, political and societal functioning and its associated information
flows occur across the networking infrastructure, and depend completely on
network and security services. Security and reliability, key foci of the
workshop, play central roles in advancing networking toward the four identified
goals. Envisioning the research agenda for investing in advanced networking is a
central broad impact outcome of the proposed workshop. Communicating the outcome
of the workshop widely is clearly a crucial aspect of the broader impact - to
realize the greatest impact the organizing executive committee of the workshop
is producing a highly directed and substantive paper following the workshop. The
first draft is scheduled less than a month after the workshop.