* 0836029
* One Day's Pay: Educating K-16 Engineers to Create Affordable Innovations
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Brian Argrow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,613.00

This effort will create a new organization, Engineering for American Communities
(EFAC) at the University of Colorado at Boulder to involve students in
community-based projects for service learning. The role of EFAC, which in
concept is a derivative of Engineers Without Borders, is to provide innovative
and reasonably-priced design services for local, low-income customers aimed at
creating significant impact on lives while being extremely affordable ? costing
less than a single day?s pay. The products either result directly in an improved
quality of life or provide customers with tools and solutions that might allow
them to earn more money and attain a higher standard of living. This project
represents an opportunity to conduct groundbreaking engineering education
research to fully understand the impacts of altruistic engineering on student
learning and attitudes, including commitment to engineering as a career. It
integrates design for affordability throughout the K-16 engineering curriculum.
Its ramifications will be assessed with a multitude of metrics, layered
repeatedly throughout design activities. The investigation will develop an
understanding of how participation in these activities changes student attitudes
towards engineering, what students learn from participation, and whether the
social context provided by these design activities may differentially recruit
and retain students who have not traditionally been attracted to
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EFAC program provides powerful academic
experiences for students in the University of Colorado at Boulder?s College of
Engineering and Applied Science and its partner K-12 institutions, while
building community with people in urban Denver and rural Colorado. This project
seeks to discover how altruistic engineering affects a diverse audience of
students and how to better prepare engineering students to meet the needs of a
changing society. This model is replicable at almost any American university,
where either an urban or a rural customer focus is within easy reach of its
engineering students. It generates an opportunity to help U.S. citizens living
below the poverty line, provides an innovative and unique learning situation for
engineering students, and lays the framework for large-scale engineering
education research with a cross-disciplinary set of set of researchers, teachers
and learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;