* 0836721
* Unveiling the contributions and regulation of picoeukaryotic phytoplankton in oceanic environments.
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Alexandra Worden, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 204,033.00

The growth rates and fate of primary producers in the oceans are key factors
regulating carbon flux in the biosphere. While resource limitation is known to
play a major regulatory role, the specific factors controlling growth and
mortality of picophytoplankton (<2 microm diameter) are poorly understood. In
particular, due to the small size and low sinking quotient of these dominant
primary producers, determinants of their fate and transport in the water column
are critical to the development of predictive models of carbon flux and its
likely perturbation due to climate change. Picophytoplankton is composed of
cyanobacteria, (Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus) and small eukaryotes. While
the picocyanobacteria have received much attention, little is known about the
distribution and dynamics of picophytoeukaryotes, particularly in oceanic
settings. The few comparative measurements made to date indicate that the
productivity of picophytoeukaryotes can rival that of picocyanobacteria. Hence,
knowledge regarding the role of picophytoeukaryotes in open ocean environments
is urgently needed. However, this knowledge is only valuable when put in the
context of the total picophytoplankton community and, therefore, quantification
of picocyanobacteria must be also be included.

The overall goal is to develop a method for determining underlying physiological
controls of picophytoeukaryotes. A targeted approach will be used, combining
flow sorting, cDNA libraries and Expressed Sequence Tags (EST), allowing real-
time expressional responses to be identified. This knowledge will highlight key
physiological constraints and information on molecular underpinnings of
picoeukaryotic population dynamics as well as aiding future efforts to isolate
open-ocean picoeukaryotes. This is an important additional benefit from the work
since environmental clone library data has demonstrated that such picoeukaryotes
are poorly represented in culture collections. Long-term, the environmental
genomic approach developed will also provide a high throughput mechanism for
profiling expressional responses (mRNA) in the field. In the proposed work,
expressional responses will be evaluated in two ocean basins, the equatorial
Atlantic and the South Pacific.

Broader Impacts. The experimental functional genomics approach taken to
elucidate real-time responses to environmental forcing factors is applicable to
all eukaryotes, and of value to other microbial ecologists seeking to identify
molecular underpinnings of in situ responses. Moreover, sequences derived from
uncultured picoeukaryotes, in combination with advances in molecular phylogeny,
have led to a dramatic reconsideration of eukaryotic evolution; the sequences
generated herein should aid refinement of evolutionary studies and the "Tree of
Life". The project will provide training for students at several educational
levels, including at-risk minority high school students, undergraduates and two
Ph.D. candidates. Information from the project will be incorporated into
graduate and undergraduate level courses on Marine Microbial Ecology (taught by
the PI). Project results will be available via two internet based formats, one
tailored to the general public and one for the scientific community.

