* 0836649
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: Discovery of Succinct Dynamical Relationships in Large-Scale Biological Data Sets
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Bhubaneswar Mishra, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:&lt;br/&gt;0836656 (Peter Doerschuk, Cornell
University)&lt;br/&gt;0836649 (Bud Mishra, NYU)&lt;br/&gt;0836720 (Sanjoy Mitter
and Emery Brown, MIT)&lt;br/&gt;Title: Discovery of Succinct Dynamical
Relationships in Large-Scale Biological Data
Sets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many types
of information in neuroscience and molecular biology can be described as a set
of measurements taken repeatedly as some index changes its value. In some
situations, such as transcriptomic data measuring gene activities, the index is
time while in other situations, such as in genetics association study, the index
is position in a genomic DNA sequence and, in any case, the complete collection
of data is referred to as a time series. Inference is the process of taking such
time series, probably corrupted by errors, and computing answers to the
following sorts of questions: (1) What is the system that generated the time
series? For instance, if the system is known to be a differential equation of a
specific type, what are the parameter values in the differential equation? (2)
Given a completely specified system and a time series, did that system generate
that time series? For instance, if a biologist has hypothesized a system that
describes gene expression for a particular set of genes and then measures
expression data, is the data compatible with the system, or equivalently, the
hypothesis? (3) Given two time series, were they generated by the same system?
For instance, if the pattern of nerve firings in a neural system is recorded in
two different experimental situations, is the pattern the same or is it
different? The four Principal Investigators are focused on three different
biological application domains at three different biological scales: (1) the
phenotyping of animal and human ethanol-consumption behavior (whole organism
scale), (2) the pattern of action potentials measured on ensembles of neurons
(cell-population scale), and (3) the time course of gene expressions as governed
by the regulatory circuits of the cell (cellular scale). The types of challenges
that are encountered in these applications include the following
characteristics: the information is distributed over long periods of time rather
than concentrated in time; the systems include delays and feedback paths; and
the systems are highly nonlinear, including switching behavior, rather than
linear. The major methodologies that will be developed and combined to solve
inference problems in these application areas are: (a) information theory and
stochastic control, (b) multi-scale approaches to learning the geometry of the
data, and (c) computer algebra and symbolic computation. For example, to deal
with the presence of delay and feedback in neuroscience systems, especially in
the context of the interaction between information and stochastic control,
requires a fundamental rethinking of classical information theory as it is
employed in technology-based communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
cost of computing decreases, computing becomes increasingly pervasive. A major
purpose of pervasive computing is the real-time collection of high-dimensional
time series of very diverse types of data including biological, medical,
financial, communication systems status, power systems status, etc. The project
will provide computational algorithms and software to analyze this data in more
sophisticated ways and thereby extract more sophisticated information. Action
taken upon this more sophisticated information, e.g., personalized medicine
based on individualized genomic information or more accurate and flexible
control of power systems thereby avoiding blackouts, will have important human
and economic benefits to society. An important component of the project is
educational, e.g., three graduate students working on the project will receive
tuition and stipend and an unrestricted number of undergraduates will
participate through a variety of ways, e.g., project courses. By attracting
talented students to science and technology and providing challenging research
experiences, the project will have important work force benefits to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;