* 0836891
* Collaborative Research: Development of New Prototype Tools, and Adaptation and Implementation of Current Resources for a Course in Numerical Methods
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Autar Kaw, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 07/31/2011
* USD 39,859.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, a collaboration among
University of South Florida, Old Dominion University and Arizona State
University, is developing state-of-the-art prototype web-based learning tools
for open courseware in undergraduate numerical methods courses. These tools
include game based simulations, a virtual tireless internet instructor, endless
self-assessment tests, and audio-based Flash/PowerPoint presentations. In this
pilot project, these tools are being developed for one topic (simultaneous
linear equations). They are enhancing student learning by using simulations to
improve the classroom and self-learning experience, personalizing learning via
the internet instructor, self-assessing the level of learning via multiple-
choice questions tests, and providing multiple contexts for understanding the
same material. The evaluation effort includes formative and summative aspects
using instruments to measure content knowledge and skills, attitude surveys for
students and faculty members, student focus groups, and faculty member
interviews. Instructional material and results are being disseminated through
website postings, through presentations at the ASEE and FIE conferences, and
through journal articles. Broader impacts include the collaboration of the three
universities and the dissemination of the instructional material.&lt;br/&gt;