* 0836047
* EFRI-RESIN: Assessing and Managing Cascading Failure Vulnerabilities of Complex, Interdependent, Interactive, Adaptive Human-based Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Karlene Roberts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,999,964.00

PI name: Robert Bea Institution: University of California-Berkeley Proposal
Number: 0836047

This award is an outcome of the competition as part of the Emerging Frontiers in
Research and Innovation (NSF 07-579) solicitation under the subtopic Resilient
and Sustainable Infrastructures (RESIN). The research project is a collaborative
interdisciplinary study to create, validate, and apply new Risk Assessment and
Management (RAM) methods to assess and improve the design, operation, and
maintenance of interdependent complex infrastructure systems (ICISs).

The recent failures of ICISs for the Greater New Orleans area due to Hurricane
Katrina demonstrate unequivocally that human, organizational, social, cultural,
and political considerations are major factors in assuring the reliability and
performance of ICISs. To understand and improve the behavior of ICISs, it is
necessary to integrate the physical / environmental sciences (technology) with
the social sciences (human and organizational factors). The research team will
study the California Sacramento - San Joaquin Delta flood protection, water
distribution, and power supply systems. These systems are embedded in a complex
and sensitive ecosystem. They also co-exist with other important ICISs such as
communications, transportation, and emergency services. Like ICISs in other
parts of the U.S., their effectiveness and performance have eroded over time due
to age, deferred maintenance, increasing societal demands, and natural hazards.
The ultimate goal of this research is to learn how to improve the resiliency and
sustainability of ICISs, while maintaining other vital performance
characteristics such as serviceability, safety, durability, and compatibility.

The research builds on more than two decades of collaborative interdisciplinary
research during which over 600 major accidents and disasters involving ICISs
were studied. The past research has resulted in the formulation and testing of
engineering RAM methods for ICISs. This research addresses two vital components
in the development of next generation RAM methods: (1) the probability of
failure, P[F], of ICISs, and (2) the consequences of failures, C[F]. In turn,
P[F] incorporates two different types of uncertainties: (1) Intrinsic (natural
and analytical), P[I], and (2) Extrinsic (human and organizational), P[E]. The
goals of the research are to achieve more realistic assessments of P[F] and
C[F], to identify new means for mitigating and controlling P[F] and C[F], and to
improve how risk information is delivered to policy and decision makers.

The proposal's primary intellectual merit is the integration of the
environmental, physical, and social sciences for the development of
comprehensive RAM methods for the effective design, operation, and performance
of ICISs.

The primary benefits of this research to the research and practice communities,
and to society, are to: (1) enable improved assessments and management of ICISs,
(2) improve the education of future engineers and, (3) build advanced Geographic
Information Systems (GISs) to implement the technologies required to improve the
reliability and quality of ICISs