* 0837839
* Workshop: Paleoclimate Modeling Intercomparison Project on Coupled Simulations; Estes Park, Colorado; September 14-19, 2008
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Bette Otto-Bliesner, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2011
* USD 20,000.00

This award helps support a workshop to discuss the potential contributions of
the Paleoclimate Modeling Intercomparison Project (PMIP) to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment (AR5). A
possible outcome of this workshop is the identification of key climate targets
for model simulations and data synthesis that can help reduce uncertainties in
future climate projections. The planned workshop discussions will focus on the
evolution of Earth System modeling, climate variability and abrupt changes, and
how to develop appropriate methodologies to reduce uncertainties in climate
projection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researcher requests funds
from the NSF to help provide partial participant support for approximately sixty
scientists to attend a workshop in Estes Park, Colorado from September 14-19,
2008. Participants at the workshop will have expertise in paleoclimatology and
related aspects of climate research and will discuss the pros and cons of
specific simulations of key past time periods that could be proposed to the
World Climate Research Program (WCRP) for inclusion in a proposed suite of
simulations to be done by international modeling groups for the IPCC AR5.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants will include seasoned researchers, new
investigators, and students. In this manner, an open and lively exchange of
views on the science and the concept of a paleoclimate modeling will be
enabled.&lt;br/&gt;