* 0837863
* IDBR: Workshop on Transformative Instrumentation for Biological Research - A Vision for the Future to be held in Arlington, VA, September, 2008
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Gil Lee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 06/30/2009
* USD 70,000.00

Given the need for new instrumentation that enables discovery in the biological
sciences, a workshop will be held in Arlington, VA in September 2008 that brings
together instrument development experts and biological researchers across the
disciplines to identify emerging needs. The workshop will identify areas of
instrumentation development that have the highest potential for transforming
biological research as well as on fostering inter-/transdisciplinary research
between biologists and instrument developers. The need for such a workshop
arises from exceptionally high potential instrumentation has for transforming
biological research and training new generation of the workforce. Scientists
representing an exceptionally broad range of biological disciplines as well as
instrumentation developers will participate in one and a half days of
discussions. The outcomes of the workshop include: 1) identification of the most
urgent needs of the biological community for instrumentation that would
transform and move the field (and its many sub-disciplines) forward; 2)
Identification of the best approaches for interdisciplinary collaborations
between biologists and instrument developers from recent successful biological
instrumentation projects; 3) Highlighting of the most recent breakthroughs in
technology and instrumentation that could potentially be applied to the field of
biological research and have a transformative impact; 4) Identification of the
most efficient ways and approaches for involving students in biological
instrumentation development as such programs provide some of the best
opportunities for training the next generation workforce; and 5) Foster the
development of entrepreneurial activities that would allow for the first proof-
of concept prototype to be transformed into commercial instrumentation.