* 0837795
* Infusing Advanced Sensor Network Research into Cross-disciplinary Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Heidar Malki, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Zhanjing Yu
* 12/31/2011
* USD 199,882.00

Engineering - Engineering Technology (58)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
integrating current technological advances of smart sensor networks into the
undergraduate engineering and technology curriculum. It is developing
instructional materials and project-oriented laboratories to provide students
with extensive hands-on experiences on smart sensor networks in order to enhance
their knowledge and understanding of the design principles in next generation
data acquisition systems using off-the-shelf components, modern testing
equipment, and software tools. This project-driven curriculum is guiding
students through the process of designing, implementing, evaluating, and
maintaining sensor networks while applying this process to real world problems.
The materials are being used in several different schools ranging from a
research university to a community college and they are being used in K-12
through several existing efforts. Evaluation efforts, under the direction of two
expert evaluators, are using an analysis of student products, observations, and
the Student Assessment of Learning Gains (SALG) survey to monitor progress.
Instructional materials and evaluation results are being disseminated through
website postings, conference papers, journal articles, and workshops with
National Instruments and with the Instrument Society of America. Broader impacts
include the dissemination of the material, the outreach to K-12, and the
collaboration of three very different schools.