* 0837163
* Smart Biomaterials for Tissue and Regenerative Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Donald McEachron, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2011
* USD 150,368.00

Interdisciplinary(99) This project provides integrated laboratory experiences
for undergraduate students in biomaterials and regenerative tissue engineering.
Seven laboratory modules focus on the development of smart biomaterials to
engineer soft tissues. Faculty members from two universities are involved in
project development. The hands-on laboratory experiences are enriched by
workshop/seminars that employ the active learning mode as opposed to the use of
traditional passive lectures. The labs are improving the educational experiences
of undergraduate students enrolled in several Engineering and Science
Disciplines. The project targets an unmet need in an interdisciplinary field of
science and engineering education. The interdisciplinarity of the topic makes it
challenging to prepare students adequately for work in the field. The plan is to
develop lab modules in tissue engineering. The modules are addressing technical
methodologies and biocompatibility of test tissues. These modules are applicable
to programs in various departments nationwide, such as Chemical Engineering,
Materials Engineering, Biomedical and Biological Engineering, Chemistry and
Biosciences, all of which now teach courses at the interface of biomaterials and
tissue engineering. A strong component of the approach is the ability to utilize
an automated assessment system to quantify the learning outcomes and suggest
improvements based on information collected during the laboratories. The
particular technical area of Smart Biomaterials for Tissue and Regenerative
Engineering has seen recent intense activity in the private sector as
technologies mature and reach commercialization potential. This trend has
attracted several commercial companies to participate in the program. Educating
students with practical experiences using these technologies and enabling them
to be interdisciplinary partners is of value and transferable across K-12
educational levels.