* 0837535
* Collaborative Project: Participatory-based approach on Teaching and Learning Biometric Security and Privacy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Bon Sy, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 05/31/2012
* USD 90,007.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project improves
undergraduate education and student learning in the area of biometric security
and privacy. The specific objectives of this project are: (A) to develop
courseware modules that focus on three topics: (i) biometric technologies, (ii)
privacy, and (iii) techniques for privacy preserving biometric security; and (B)
to explore the notion of connective and collective intelligence grounded on peer
collaboration and competition for promoting active learning, and through which
to identify the conditions under which the courseware materials are effective to
create a positive impact on undergraduate learning in biometric security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique characteristic of this project is to
engage students to actively contribute selected case studies and problem
solutions to be accumulated and included in the learning guide. Engaging in the
active contribution of content materials is significant in two regards. First,
it allows the courseware to capture the collective intelligence that reflects
diverse viewpoints on usable biometric security and privacy expectation. Second,
engaging students in the process of contribution requires them to connect
knowledge and information sources to achieve connective
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project produces three deliverables: (A)
a student learning guide on the concepts, principles, and technologies on
biometric security and privacy; (B) biometric data and privacy preserving
biometric data retrieval software; and (C) lab manuals for experiments that help
students gain hands-on experience on the biometric data and technologies, their
applications, and their privacy implications.