* 0837928
* Support for the International Council for Science (ICSU) Environmental and Global Environmental Change Activities 01 September 2008 - 31 August 2013
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Thomas Rosswall, International Science Council
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2014
* USD 3,395,618.00

The International Council for Science (ICSU) will coordinate international
science, bringing together the best minds to address global issues and to help
make investments in science more cost-effective, particularly through
implementation of its new Strategic Plan. ICSU will address a number of global
environmental change activities, emphasizing its reviews and analyses of the
Earth System Science Partnership (ESSP), the International Geosphere-Biosphere
Program (IGBP), the World Climate Research Program (WCRP) and DIVERSITAS (an
international program of biodiversity science). ICSU will conduct these
activities in large part through the efforts of its Environment Science
Officer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other ICSU environmental activities will include:
representation of science (especially research) interests in activities of the
international Group on Earth Observations (GEO), in particular in development of
the Global Earth Observing System of Systems (GEOSS); promoting and encouraging
international efforts to assure the effective and timely international exchange
of scientific data and information; and the convening of international
scientific meetings to advance research in the geosciences and environment, in
particular, in the area of global change research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assuming
that ICSU's reviews of the ESSP and WCRP referred to above are positive, ICSU
will continue its partial funding of the ESSP and WCRP program coordination
activities. The WCRP will continue to provide the structure that enables
physical climate system researchers to develop long-term and short-term
international strategic plans addressing key research questions, coordinate
international activities on a tremendous range of scales, and engage in and seek
out new opportunities for interdisciplinary research activities. The WCRP will
also be responsible for development of the increased knowledge and tools needed
for operational and experimental climate forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICSU
will expand and improve its efforts to advance research in the geosciences in
developing countries - most especially in Africa - but in other parts of the
developing world as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A focus of ICSU's efforts will be
to more effectively address the need to assure that the results of international
research under its aegis are transmitted effectively to policy-makers and stake
holders.