* 0837980
* Application of Boron Isotopes to Constrain the Depositional Environment of the Precursors to Proterozoic Granulite-Facies Borosilicate Paragneisses, Larsemann Hills, Antarctica
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Edward Grew, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2013
* USD 190,718.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Intellectual Merit. Major challenges in understanding high P-T granulite facies
terranes are identifying the original protolith rocks and the tectonic
environment in which they were originally deposited. This project focuses on
granulitic gneisses exposed in the Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay (East Antarctica).
These rocks are considered to be metasediments (paragneisses), but, despite more
than 20 years of intense study, the tectonic framework of deposition of the
original rocks is still debated. However the origin of these rocks has important
implications for determining the assembly of the ancient Gondwana continent. The
unique B-rich character of the rocks offers potential insight into the original
environment of deposition as well as the subsequent tectonic and metamorphic
history. Because of its relative affinity for aqueous fluids and silicate melts,
B typically is strongly depleted in such high-grade metamorphic rocks; the fact
that some remain extremely B-rich (with up to 20% tourmaline) is highly
enigmatic. In this study, B isotopic composition will be used to investigate the
initial cause of boron enrichment as well as processes that redistribute boron
during metamorphism. Boron has two isotopes that differ significantly in atomic
weight: 10B and 11B. As an example of the discriminating power of B isotopic
measurements, non-marine evaporates are characterized by unusually depleted in
10B relative to 11B, whereas typical marine sediments have high 11B/10B (i.e.,
inherited from seawater). B isotopic composition will be measured in situ using
secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) of tourmaline and other borosilicate
minerals from samples obtained in the Larsemann Hills during the 2003-2004 field
season. B isotope data will be used to constrain compositions of the protolith
rocks, and these data combined with results of petrologic studies to constrain
the effects of metamorphism, anatexis, devolatilization leading to formation of
B-rich gneisses. By analogy with similar rocks from Broken Hill, Australia, he
proposed research will test the hypothesis that the Larseman Hills protolith
originated as B-rich non-marine evaporates, that the original B was partly
mobilized by submarine hydrothermal fluids that reacted with clastic sediments
and volcaniclastic rocks to form tourmaline-bearing rocks (the protolith), and
that the B-rich character of the gneisses was preserved via preservation of
tourmaline and other borosilicate minerals during metamorphism and anatexis.

Broader Impacts. The project will support one graduate student, who will analyze
borosilicate and associated minerals in the Larseman Hills gneisses as a MA
thesis project. This student will learn how to (1) use the electron microprobe
to measure chemical composition, (2) become acquainted with measurement of
lithium, beryllium and boron with the ion microprobe, (3) relate chemical
composition to geologic environment, (3) develop reactions based on chemical and
textural data (4) present her results orally before her peers, and (5) write a
scientific paper for publication in a peer-reviewed journal.