* 0837922
* Quantifying Syntectonic Weakening in Deep Orogenic Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Christopher Gerbi, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 238,686.00

The primary intellectual impact of this project will be in improving our
understanding of the mechanics that shape the Earth's crust. In recent years,
earth scientists have used the increasing body of geodetic data towards that
end, but the mechanical properties of the middle and lower crust remain only
loosely constrained. This project focuses on the magnitude of strain weakening
in shear zone networks. In detail, the research will explore the grain-scale and
outcrop-scale deformation mechanisms in minerals that lead to this weakening,
followed by modeling of the results to understand the weakening process on the
larger scale. These conceptual and numerical models will allow better prediction
of where and how fast the continental crust will deform and in turn this will
benefit society. In the future, locations that have recently been deglaciated,
and those in tectonically active areas where earthquakes are likely, may be
interesting targets for further application of this research. This project also
serves as a vehicle to continue and enhance ongoing educational and outreach
initiatives at the K-16 and graduate levels. Support for students enrolled in
the University of Maine's Master of Science in Teaching program will allow pre-
service K-12 teachers to become involved in an active research project and to
participate in creating an environment where science is more accessible. The PI
and colleagues will develop new content based around supercomputer,
visualization, and field video library projects, the combined results of which
will enhance professional development, graduate and undergraduate courses, and
outreach to K-12 students in Maine's rural areas.

Throughout the lithosphere, strain localization plays a fundamental role in
tectonic processes affecting, for example, seismicity, exhumation, fluid
migration and mineralization, magma transport, and topographic and plate
boundary evolution. Previous research involving field observations and numerical
modeling has produced many constraints on the causes and consequences of strain
localization, but researchers lack a thorough understanding of the magnitude of
strength variation in the deep crust in particular. Due to exceptional exposure
and deep exhumation this research group will use the Parry Sound domain of the
Grenville Province, southern Ontario, as a natural laboratory. Along one margin
of the domain, granulite facies mineral assemblages have been transformed under
upper amphibolite facies conditions along meter-scale shear zones. After field-
based mapping, the PI will quantify the change in strength associated with the
development of the interconnected meter-scale shear zones through model
calculations using the natural geometric framework. In addition, to develop
better tools to predict weakening of this magnitude elsewhere, he will determine
the mechanisms by which the shear zones developed and the weakening occurred.
The PI has hypothesized that one such mechanism involved pegmatite-derived
fluids that infiltrated adjacent zones, allowing mineralogical changes along
which shear zones could nucleate. Establishing the crustal-scale significance of
strength changes requires determining if meter-scale processes produced, for
example, the regional-scale, domain-bounding Twelve Mile Bay shear zone.
Preliminary observations indicate that fractures with no lateral offset assisted
full transposition of the fabric as they evolved into interconnected meter-scale
shear zones during progressive deformation. This research group will evaluate
whether these preliminary interpretations are valid through the mapping of
thermobarometric and geochronologic patterns along the inferred length of the
Twelve Mile Bay shear zone.