* 0837722
* A Centralized Resource Management Model for Computer Networking Laboratory Equipment Sharing among Collaborating Institutes
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Kwabena Agyepong, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2014
* USD 199,986.00

Information Science and Systems (33) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
two-year collaborative study among three institutions consisting of a two-year
community college, a regional four-year teaching university and a national
comprehensive university, located in the states of Texas, Mississippi and North
Carolina. It develops a framework for teaching computer networking and security
labs using virtualization technologies for the distance education students and
sharing lab resources among classes and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project makes innovative use of mature and off-the-shelf software applications
in the delivery of lab-based distance education. The primary novelty of this
project lies in its utilization of products like VMware to provide environment
for working with heterogeneous operating systems, and Dynamips to emulate
physical networking equipment including routers, switches, VPN severs, and
firewalls to provide a rich blend of internetworking experiences for the
students. The proposed equipment sharing model through a central reservation and
management system solves a complex problem of scheduling, prioritizing, securely
accessing, and accounting resources from multiple locations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from this project benefit more than 20 high
schools and community colleges that are listed as the local academies through
the Cisco Networking Academy program. Eight faculty members are involved in this
study, while more than 200 students, enrolled in the pilot undergraduate
courses, are directly impacted. Anticipated outcomes include adaptation of the
fundamental ideas of managing and sharing physical laboratory equipment by other
STEM disciplines.