* 0837540
* Development of an Inquiry-Based Cell Biology Laboratory with Emphasis on Scientific Communication Skills
* EHR,DUE
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2011
* Deborah Switzer, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 10/31/2011
* USD 149,168.00

Among the most important skills that students of science must acquire are
critical thinking, effective communication, and ethical reasoning. Moreover,
inquiry-based learning is a project-based pedagogic strategy that involves the
formulation of questions and the development and implementation of strategies to
answer such questions, and this type of learning has been shown to significantly
enhance critical thinking skills. This project addresses these attributes by
their inclusion in a novel inquiry-based cell biology laboratory course at
Clemson University that consists of three research modules (four weeks each)
designed to allow students to ask and answer questions via experimentation and
collaboration. The modules have been designed around important cell biology
concepts such as cell-cell and cell-substrate interactions, cell growth, death
and differentiation, vesicle trafficking, and signal transduction. Students are
acquiring "hands on" experience in a variety of techniques including
fluorescence microscopy, spectrophotometry, and fluorimetry. Importantly, each
week's lab session ends with a guided group discussion to interpret the results
of experiments and to develop hypotheses for the next set of experiments. To
address communication, each module culminates with the dissemination of the
scientific data through a poster presentation, oral presentation, or manuscript
in standard journal format. A crucial, but often overlooked, dimension of
scientific communication is ethical reasoning so, as a part of the scientific
inquiry and communication processes, students also engage in the discussion of
the ethics of scientific communication. Extensive assessment in critical
thinking and technical communication is part of the evaluation of the course as
are science-related attitudes of course participants since evidence suggests
that acquiring critical thinking skills may positively impact retention of
students in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, approximately two
hundred and twenty-five biological sciences, microbiology, genetics,
biochemistry, bioengineering, chemical engineering, and animal and veterinary
sciences undergraduate students are being directly impacted by the project. The
project team includes an interdisciplinary team of faculty from biological
sciences, technical communication, and education. The creation and dissemination
of a distinctive cell biology laboratory course that significantly combines
inquiry-based research, science communication, and ethical reasoning components
is expected to significantly contribute to research in STEM education.