* 0837455
* Americas Dissertation Research:  Heterologous and Comparative Genomic Hybridizations to Acropora Palmata and Montastraea Faveolata Coral Microarrays
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Monica Medina, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2010
* USD 14,786.00

This award to Dr. Monica Medina at the University of California - Merced
supports graduate student Michael DeSalvo to conduct doctoral dissertation
research at the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM). Mr. DeSalvo will
be supervised in Mexico by Dr. Roberto Iglesias-Prieto from UNAM's Instituto de
Ciencias del Mar y Limnología. Mr. DeSalvo's investigation will focus on the
molecular basis of stress susceptibility and resistance in coral. Specifically,
heterologous hybridization (the binding of nucleic acids onto DNA microarrays
from other species) will be used to analyze gene expression patterns in corals
across different phylogenetic distances. Coral fragments collected in Puerto
Morelos, Mexico, will be subjected to thermal stress under laboratory
conditions, and mRNA from the samples will be used to analyze stress-responsive
genes and pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the evolutionary
analysis of stress response, a main objective of this study is to measure the
efficiency of the heterologous hybridization process, building a foundation for
other researchers to use these genomic tools. The research will also strengthen
the ongoing collaboration between UC Merced and UNAM, provide international
training and experience for a U.S. Ph.D. student, and supply valuable
information about the mechanisms of coral bleaching and other climate-change
induced stress.