* 0837904
* Interfacing Major Field Experiments with Physical Parameterizations in Atmospheric General Circulation Models
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Minghua Zhang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2012
* USD 498,578.00

An important physical process that must be well represented in climate models is
horizontal momentum transport. This is the motivation for this project, the goal
of which is to improve and validate momentum transport schemes in global climate
models. Toward this end, the PI will develop integrated datasets, from major
field campaigns, of large-scale forcing and sub-grid sources and sinks of
horizontal momentum. These will be used to force and evaluate Single Column
Models (SCM), Cloud System Resolving Models (CSRM), and physical
parameterizations to improve General Circulation Models (GCM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator (PI) will use a new variational
approach, based on his group's previous research on advective tendencies of
temperature and water using balloon sounding arrays, to analyze atmospheric
momentum budgets in which column-integrated conservations of dry air and water
vapor mass, enthalpy and momentum will be preserved. Apparent momentum sources
and sinks will be derived for four field experiments in the tropics, the
Tropical Ocean Global Atmospheres/Coupled Ocean Atmosphere Response Experiment
(TOGA-COARE), The Kwajalein Experiment (KWAJEX), The South China Sea Monsoon
Experiment (SCSMEX), and the Tropical Warm Pool - International Cloud Experiment
(TWP-ICE) and several in the middle latitudes (the Department of Energy
(Atmospheric Radiation Program Southern Great Plains (ARM-SGP) sites).
Uncertainties of the data products will be quantified through sensitivity
studies and Observational Simulation System Experiments (OSSE).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed integrated data products will be used to
answer three main questions: (a) Under what large-scale conditions is subgrid
momentum transport upscale and under what conditions is it downscale? (b) How do
GCM parameterizations of momentum transport compare with observations? (c) How
can we improve the momentum source/sink parameterizations in atmospheric models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work are in advancing our
understanding of atmospheric momentum sources and sinks from observations and
their better parameterizations in climate models, which is necessary for them to
predict future climate changes, and of the mechanism of atmospheric variability
in the tropics. A postdoc and a graduate student will be mentored and trained in
research.