* 0837626
* Improving Students' Visual Penetration Ability and Substrata Visualization in the Geologic Sciences with 3D Interactive Animation
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Laura Leventhal, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Geology (42) Spatial thinking can be characterized as the ability to solve
problems that require both external and mental representations of spatial
information while engaging reasoning abilities that generate information not
provided in the original problem. This project includes: (1) understanding the
nature of visual penetration, a form of spatial thinking in the geosciences; (2)
creating a learning module that uses three-dimensional interactive animation
(3DIA) to support the acquisition of visual penetration skills by all students;
and (3) evaluating the effectiveness of the learning module within the context
of an introductory laboratory course in geology. This project builds upon the
findings of a prior CCLI project that developed an instructional module designed
to teach students how to interpret topographic maps and visualize topographic
profiles. The use of this instructional module contributed to improvements in
performance and learning. This project is examining the nature of spatial
thinking in tasks involving geologic blocks and involves developing and
evaluating an instructional module designed to improve students' abilities to
perform those tasks. The same approach is being taken to develop 3DIA modules
designed to improve visual penetration ability and subsurface visualization for
a college-level geology course. The results of this project are adding to the
knowledge in the fields of cognitive science, multimedia learning, science
education, and differential psychology. This project is helping to advance our
understanding of the role that technology plays in aiding persons disadvantaged
by low spatial ability in domains where spatial problem solving is central. As
those domains readily exist in STEM areas, the outcome of the proposed work
contributes to the improvement of delivery of undergraduate instruction in those
areas. Because the proposed work uses low-cost technologies, the potential for
widespread distribution is high. The approach being used to develop 3DIA
learning modules can be applied to any domain in which spatial thinking is used
(e.g., anatomy, chemistry, and mathematics).