* 0837182
* Implementing a Physics Education Research-Based Curriculum at Community and Four Year Colleges and Extending it Through Use of Regional Characterization User Facilities
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Benjamin Stottrup, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/2013
* USD 198,901.00

Physics (13) Intellectual Merit: Modern quantum-mechanics-based tools are used
daily in industries like nanotechnology and materials science. However, in most
traditional physics curricula, quantum mechanics is treated only as a
mathematical abstraction, and common techniques such as Scanning Electron
Microscopy (SEM) and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) are at most
only footnotes. The challenge of a successful modern workforce is to engage
these technologies and educate students within the Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) pipeline.

Augsburg College, Saint Paul College, and the University of Minnesota have a
unique opportunity to develop a partnership model to meet this demanding
challenge. Through an NSF-funded National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network
(NNIN) user facility at the University of Minnesota, faculty and students are
learning to use advanced instrumentation and developing curricular materials.
The development of expertise for Saint Paul College faculty supports a new
state-funded clean room and user facility for high-tech start-ups. These
laboratory experiences build on existing pedagogy developed through Physics
Education Research at the University of Colorado. This curriculum was designed
for a large lecture course of engineering students with an emphasis on real-
world applications of quantum mechanics and modern physics. Modifications are
being made to incorporate these materials into two and four year physics and
technology settings. To support the synergistic activities between faculty,
students, and technical staff, an interactive discussion series with practicing
scientists stimulates ideas for new student projects. A focal point for this
series is the use of tools and techniques in real-world situations to address
technical problems.

Broader Impacts: The Twin Cities is home to numerous two and four year colleges,
all of which have access to the user facilities described here. These academic
institutions educate students to continue on in further study as well as to
serve the thriving community of high-tech companies in the region. Therefore,
making laboratory materials freely available through these regional user
facilities serves as a starting point for other institutions seeking to provide
similar learning experiences. Explicit interaction with industrial scientists
provides an infrastructure for educators to more consistently assess the
preparation of students for today's workplace. The use of advanced
instrumentation and the adoption of a research-based curriculum are both
exciting and well reasoned modifications at these institutions. An evaluation of
the efficacy of this approach and insights into how best to educate and
encourage students in the STEM pipeline is also being disseminated. Finally,
work here is developing institutional expertise in partnership at three very
different academic settings.