* 0837015
* Show Me the Evolution!  Assessing Effectiveness of a New Teaching Resource
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Allen Rodrigo, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The project, a joint effort of the University of California Museum of
Paleontology's Understanding Evolution (UE) and the National Evolutionary
Synthesis Center (NESCent, centered at Duke University), is designed to both
enhance and assess Evolution in the News, a web-site updated monthly that
features cutting edge evolutionary research, the relevance of evolutionary
biology in everyday life, and the pervasiveness of evolutionary theory in
informing and enabling advances in other disciplines. The site uses a current
news item as a jumping off point to showcase an important evolutionary concept,
integrating an illustrated article, a multimedia podcast featuring scientist
interviews, supporting educational materials, and links to popular and
scientific literature. The pilot of this web-site has garnered more than 30,000
page requests during its first month. Features to be assessed with an
undergraduate audience include: accessibility of the material, audience appeal,
use patterns, and educational effectiveness. See http://www.NESCent.org/eog/eitn
or http://evolution.berkeley.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Evolution education is an essential component of a modern understanding of how
biological systems at all levels function and interact with one another. Current
research indicates that many students hold misconceptions about basic
evolutionary concepts and the scientific status of the theory and may
additionally perceive evolution as having little relevance to their lives. The
Evolution in the News program is designed to provide undergraduate instructors
with compelling, up-to-date examples of evolution to use in class that can be
easily deployed in a pedagogically sound manner. Assessing the site's
effectiveness will add to its intellectual merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This project is designed to promote teaching and learning, reach a broad
audience, and contribute to the generation of a more scientifically literate
society. The multimedia approach is designed to engage a broad range of learning
styles, and have benefits for non-traditional students and non-native English
speakers. Distribution of the material via the web takes advantage of technology
to transcend geographic barriers, serving both rural and urban groups and making
new research in evolutionary biology accessible to faculty at community and
teaching colleges, who may have less direct access to those at the cutting edge
of the field. By linking easily deployable educational tools with both advanced
content and strategies for teaching that go beyond the lecture format, the
project provides an opportunity for independent professional development for
instructors. However, in order to continually upgrade the effectiveness of any
web-site and to engage a broad community in its use, it is necessary to
continually assess usage and outcomes of that usage. As more science content
continues to be made available online, the formal assessment within this project
will continue to contribute to the educational community's understanding of how
to effectively leverage web-based media in the classroom, making the classroom
potential of these materials more apparent.