* 0837452
* CS Education: Computer Game Course Curriculum and Gender?
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Elizabeth Sweedyk, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 02/29/2012
* USD 149,784.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a redesign of
the software engineering course. The objective is to use games, while appealing
to women as well as men. The course focuses on games as outreach. In particular,
collaboration is planned with a secondary school in southern Tanzania, Africa to
develop educational games. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project contributes to pedagogical research on ways to attract and retain women
in Computer Science. It explores how games in the computing curriculum can serve
to disrupt rather than reinforce gender stereotypes. And it provides an approach
to teaching software design that makes explicit the ways in which software is a
cultural artifact, one that reflects and reinforces social norms, and encourages
students to understand the implications of their
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The explosion of games and game
building in the computer science curriculum may work in opposition to efforts to
recruit and retain women. It is crucial to understand if and how this opposition
works and to discover remedies. This work informs a broad range of institutions
that have gaming programs. It also serves to attract women to careers in game
design. And it helps train game designers who are able to serve a wider
audience.&lt;br/&gt;