* 0837057
* Implementation of Modern Pedagogy, Reactions, Technology, and Techniques into the Synthetic Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Anne Wilson, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,819.00

Chemistry(12) The curricular changes are introducing a synergistic combination
of modern pedagogy, reactions, instrumentation, and experimental techniques into
the organic and inorganic synthetic laboratories. Four new experiences, which
include a solid-supported amide synthesis, a multi-component Diels-Alder
reaction, a multi-week synthesis project, and faculty mentored research, are
providing the synthetic training. These experiences, as part of a four phase
pedagogical approach, are encouraging undergraduates to make experimental
choices, design experiments, and communicate results, in order to provide a
strong foundation for scientific thought and research. These curricular changes
are affecting three areas of intellectual merit: the development of students'
synthetic skills; the development of faculty engagement in pedagogy and
research; and the innovative use of communication technology in the organic
laboratory. There are three main broader impacts of the curricular change.
First, the addition of a GC/MS/MS for quantification and verification of
synthetic products is improving the instrumentation available for teaching and
student research. Second, this project is impacting a significant number of
women. Third, the new research training exercises are impacting students in
earlier stages of their science curriculum. The research training exercises and
the new synthesis experiments are broadly applicable to other institutions. The
exercises will be submitted to the larger community in the form of research
papers and presentations at local, regional, and national conferences.