* 0837751
* CCLI:  Undergraduate Labs and Microanatomy in the Health Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Orianna Carter, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lee S. Ledbetter
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Interdisciplinary (99) This project develops a comprehensive laboratory
curriculum to improve biology courses that specifically engages undergraduate
STEM students in the Appalachian Southern Ohio population. Appalachian residents
are interested in pursuing science degrees or health-related professions that
allow them to stay in the area. Before this project, residents had to leave the
area to gain this type of education. The new curriculum enhances the first two
years towards a B.S. (to be completed at the Ohio University-Athens campus),
provides previously unavailable course credits towards completion of a minor in
Biology at the resident campus, and expands the resident campus program
associates degree in health technologies. In addition, the outreach program, HS
to College STEM, is expanding to inform and recruit more students from area high
schools. New partnerships with Tri-State area (OH, KY, WV) medical facilities
are forming for the purpose of training students, and employing the
histotechnicians that graduate from the expanded health technologies program.

Notable elements of this curriculum are (1) inquiry-based investigations and
case-studies include endogenous species and environmental concerns which are
locally relevant to students in the rural Appalachian region; and (2) hands-on
projects involving laboratory-based imaging techniques in the areas of biology,
microanatomy, and histopathology, which were not previously available to these
students. Furthermore, not only is this curriculum engaging to the student
population, but is relevant to the community through its focus on addressing
community problems.