* 0837284
* Project-Based Modeling &amp; Simulation and Experimental Modules for MEMS Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Julie Zhili Hao, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 05/31/2012
* USD 149,455.00

Engineering Mechanical - (56)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently,
MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) courses are offered in many universities
nationwide. Because this course encompasses four traditional engineering themes
(i.e. solid mechanics, dynamic systems, transduction mechanisms, and electrical
circuits) that need to be simultaneously coupled to describe the behavior of
MEMS devices; teaching this theory course has been extremely challenging.
Additionally, student understanding and comprehension of concepts taught as well
as level of interest and engagement in this area has been limited. This project
addresses these concerns by creating new learning materials and teaching
strategies for MEMS undergraduate courses. The learning materials developed
include project-based modeling and simulation activities as well as experimental
modules on various MEMS devices. Students work in teams to design MEMS devices
starting from the conceptual phase of development through manufacturing and
testing of performance parameters. Teaching strategies employed in this project
include: 1) discussion-style meetings with more attention toward individual
students and team-building; and 2) extensive demonstrations of using software
for analysis and conducting experiments. This project equips students with the
skills needed to independently analyze and synthesize conceptual theories and
apply them appropriately to various MEMS projects.