* 0837124
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Time-Oriented Embedded System Programming into a Computing Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Tony Givargis, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2011
* USD 69,931.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a coordinated
set of materials for integrating time-oriented embedded system programming into
a computing curriculum. The project develops materials describing a disciplined
approach to time-oriented programming that emphasizes the use of state machines
for computation and the explicit programmer management of time, described in
teaching materials including an online book and extensively animated PowerPoint
slides. Recognizing the key barriers to focusing on a disciplined approach, the
project develops a virtual microcontroller, which is freed from the complex
details of modern microcontrollers stemming from legacy or mass-production
concerns, and which instead possesses simple input and output pins and a basic
timer component with an intuitive programming interface. The virtual
microcontroller is supported by a single compilation, simulation, and debug
environment, eliminating the complexity involved with setting up and maintaining
microcontroller tools. The teaching material is based on the virtual
microcontroller, and a set of online lab exercises is also included. For
physical implementation, the virtual microcontroller can be mapped to a variety
of existing microcontrollers or even to PCs or field-programmable gate arrays,
thus decoupling lab hardware from teaching materials. Follow-on courses or labs
can then introduce students to low level details of microcontrollers as
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's developed materials define and
support the appropriate abstraction for disciplined time-oriented programming,
exposing low-level resources necessary for a solid bottom-up understanding of
time-oriented programming (timers, interrupt service routines, processor
cycles), hiding minutia that detracts attention from higher-level concepts,
describing a disciplined synchronous state machine approach. The coordinated
materials enable any instructor to introduce disciplined time-oriented embedded
programming into a computing curriculum as early as the freshmen year without
concern for complex lab setups or of overwhelming students with low-level
hardware/software details. The net result is that disciplined time-oriented
programming methods can be introduced earlier and to a larger audience.