* 0837821
* BPC-A:   Expanding Paths to Computing - Leveraging Students? Personal Interests
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Julio Garcia, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,999.00

San Jos√© State University (SJSU) proposes a planning effort leading to a larger
initiative, that will be called Expanding Paths to Computing ? Leveraging
Students? Personal Interests. Ultimately the alliance will recruit and retain
Latino/a students into computing by tapping into their personal interests, both
social and relational. It will develop study paths that link students? personal
interests to computing during their high school and college freshman years;
progressive involvement will inspire students to pursue college majors in
computing. This proposal begins the project with a pilot of the high school
outreach, Hispanic Computing Brigades (HCB). The HCB will be tested in two local
high schools, inspiring and engaging Hispanic students through IT service
learning projects. The high school students will begin the program with the
summer camp, continue to learn and engage computing throughout the year with
community service learning, and end with a local competition where they will
showcase their computing projects with high school faculty, SJSU faculty,
parents/guardians, and the community. Students will learn computer and
programming skills and processes in weekly meetings with the help of advisors
and mentors. Through assessment, the project expects to determine whether the
approach of IT service learning is a strong motivator for Hispanic students.