* 0837028
* Collaborative Research: Biodiesel and POGIL for non-STEM majors: Three Applications
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Guang Jin, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 11/30/2011
* USD 67,068.00

Chemistry(12) A collaboration between faculty at a large comprehensive state
university, a private liberal arts college and a two-year public community
college is developing, testing and disseminating three Process Oriented Guided
Inquiry Learning (POGIL) teaching modules based on a common theme related to the
manufacture and use of biodiesel. The adaptation of POGIL and biodiesel for
teaching non-STEM majors is original and unique. Moreover, this project is
innovative in its use of "en masse interactive laboratories" for large-
enrollment courses and its application of POGIL to environmental science
courses. The POGIL modules are being used to enhance the student's knowledge,
science literacy, inquiry and appreciation of science for students in non-
science majors chemistry courses and environmental science courses taught at
each institution. An additional intellectual merit is that this collaboration is
advancing knowledge and understanding in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education of non-STEM students. There are two primary broader
impacts of the new POGIL modules. First, biodiesel production and utilization is
an excellent avenue for introducing scientific principles and enhancing the
scientific literacy for students not intending to major in science because
students find the biodiesel thematic topic engaging and the POGIL pedagogy is
sustaining that engagement. Second, this project is providing valuable
information on how to implement POGIL modules at three institutions with very
divergent student profiles.