* 0837409
* Engineering Future Chemical Engineers:  Incorporation of Process Intensification Concepts into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Keisha Walters, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 02/28/2013
* USD 149,999.00

Engineering - Chemical (53)&lt;br/&gt;Process intensification encompasses a
broad spectrum of activities focused on identifying fundamental limitations in a
chemical production route and developing or combining processes to minimize
resource utilization and optimize process quality. Process intensification is
essential to industrial competitiveness as it can enhance safety, increase
operating efficiency, lower energy usage, reduce capital costs, reduce waste
emissions, and reduce process hazards. Improving processes by process
intensification requires chemical engineers to integrate many fundamental
concepts and go beyond traditional unit operations. Currently chemical engineers
are taught how to develop a process by linking together standard unit
operations, but are frequently not trained to synthesize fundamental concepts in
new ways for novel and efficient process designs. Through this project,
educational modules are being developed to provide the necessary foundation for
process intensification through the introduction of key concepts and prototype
applications. Four courses in chemical engineering are being transformed: Fluid
Flow, Heat Transfer, Mass Transfer, and Chemical Reactor Design. This sequence
of courses allows both early introduction and vertical integration of key
process intensification concepts into the undergraduate chemical engineering
curriculum. The modules are being rigorously assessed to determine their impact
on student learning and the results are being broadly disseminated through
papers, the Web, and workshops for chemical engineering faculty.&lt;br/&gt;