* 0837613
* Collaborative Proposal:  Roles for Dehydration and Photoperiodism in Preparing an Antarctic Insect for the Polar Night
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* David Denlinger, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 07/31/2013
* USD 422,820.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Polar terrestrial environments are often described as deserts, where water
availability is a critical factor limiting the distribution of terrestrial
organisms. In such environments, tolerance of low moisture conditions is likely
as important as cold resistance. Winter survival for many polar organisms
depends on a coordinated transition from feeding, growth and reproduction during
short summers, to an energy-conserving dormancy coupled with enhanced resistance
to environmental extremes during long, severe winters. The midge Belgica
antarctica provides an excellent model system for investigating mechanisms of
stress (cold and low moisture) tolerance, and the role of extreme photoperiodic
changes in coordinating seasonal adaptations. The proposed research will use
gene and protein level approaches to investigate the seasonal roles of
dehydration and photoperiodic cues in preparing a polar insect for winter
survival. The research will investigate (1) the role of aquaporins, dehydrins,
and cryoprotective dehydration in seasonal survival, and (2) the role of
photoperiodism in preparing for winter. Broader impacts involve engagement of
K-12 educators and students, including hands-on, in-the-field research
experiences for teachers, presentations at local schools, development of lesson
plans and podcasts, and publication of articles in education journals. The
principal investigators also will engage graduate students, undergraduates, and
post-docs in the project.