* 0837344
* Introduction of Mass Spectrometry to the Chemistry Curriculum of the Chicago-area Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Andy Kidwell, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,952.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry students in the ten Chicago area community
colleges (CC) are being introduced to environmental mass spectrometry analyses
using the GC/MS and LC/MS instrumentation available at Loyola University in
Chicago, IL. Students acquire and analyze mass spectrometry data through remote
internet access. The three environmental analysis experiments are designed so
that their purpose and endpoints are easy for beginning chemistry students to
grasp. The exposure of CC students to modern analytical methods and
instrumentation applied to solving problems whose importance is compelling is
expected to encourage more interest in chemistry among those students and to
encourage more of them to pursue a bachelor's degree in chemistry. Students are
analyzing chlorinated and brominated organic molecules that are by-products of
the water disinfection process. These experiments were chosen because they are
good vehicles for teaching basic mass spectrometry interpretation to students
whose background in organic chemistry is likely to be limited. Another goal of
these laboratories is to acquaint the CC students with different types of mass
spectrometry experiments, in particular those that are used to determine the
empirical formula and/or identity of a compound versus experiments that are used
to quantify targeted analytes. The six participating Chicago CC professors (3
co-PIs and 3 other participants) are attending training seminars for the use of
the GC/MS and LC/MS instruments, conducted by the instrument manufacturer at
Loyola University. The CC professors are encouraged to participate in online
demonstrations and to create educational modules that may be incorporated into
the InterLaboratory Network (ILN) as part of the dissemination of this work. The
assessment plan evaluates whether students who are exposed to environmental mass
spectrometry using internet-based technologies are more likely to go on to a
4-year institution and complete a bachelor's degree than students who do not
take part. The plan also measures student perceptions of careers in chemistry
and whether interest in environmental issues motivates students to pursue a
career in chemistry. The assessment tools are being incorporated into the online
access to facilitate gathering of information. Results of this project will be
presented at the Biennial Conference on Chemical Education and at American
Chemical Society meetings. This project aligns with the NSF initiative to
enhance the cyberinfrastructure of educational institutions to promote the
sharing of online resources.