* 0837248
* Teaching Computing to Biologists Through Data Visualization
* EHR,DUE
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2012
* David Senseman, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 11/30/2012
* USD 146,646.00

Biology (61)

This project supports the development and assessment of curricular materials for
a unique Computation for Scientists and Engineers course that uses MATLAB to
teach programming to biologists through data analysis and visualization. Three
teaching innovations form the central core of this development effort: (1) Teach
computation by working with data rather than by working with formulas. MATLAB
and other computational science courses generally target advanced students with
some mathematical training. Such courses typically begin by explaining how
MATLAB performs vector and matrix operations - an approach that is obviously
inappropriate for many students, especially those with limited math and logic
skills. A more engaging alternative is to ask these students to use MATLAB to
visualize and explore meaningful data sets that are presented as simple lists
and tables. By working with real data instead of abstract mathematical
equations, students quickly appreciate the practical benefits and central role
of computing in their discipline. (2) Use a hybrid approach to teaching
programming. The course focuses on programming tasks that can be easily mastered
in a single semester course and are useful in subsequent courses. Facilities
such as MATLAB's plottools are exploited to teach programming skills in a hybrid
fashion. MATLAB's plottools allow students to examine and plot data through an
intuitive "point and click" GUI interface, and show them the programming code
that produced the plot. Students are asked to modify this code in order to
visualize the data differently or to explore completely different data sets. (3)
Integrate real science to highlight relevance, interaction and discovery. The
materials rely on real data as much as possible, and several significant case
studies are developed in support of the curriculum. Important scientific papers
are used for examples. Side notes are created to explain how the paper is
structured, what the results are, and how the data supported the results. These
materials are generated in web format with links to the references and notes.

By emphasizing hands-on data analysis and being required early in their program
of study, this course has a significant impact on the quantitative skills of
science students. Furthermore, the curricular content and teaching materials are
made broadly available to other institutions using an open source model and
linkage to the National Science Digital Library (NSDL).