* 0837467
* Mathematics Education in the Public Interest
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Laura Jacobsen, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 12/31/2011
* USD 119,667.00

The Mathematics Education in the Public Interest (MEPI) project strives to
improve the quality and relevance of mathematics education for undergraduate
students planning to teach (preservice teachers). Its overarching goals are to
(1) support equity and social justice in mathematics education; (2) diversify
student interest and participation in mathematics; and (3) broaden and enrich
the ways mathematics is viewed as a discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Currently, the integration of
mathematics into social issues is used by only a few practicing teachers using a
scarce supply of curriculum materials and having minimal professional
development opportunities. Mathematics is treated as independent from important
social, political, and economic issues facing communities and the world. This
project builds on the premise that mathematics education requires greater
attention to the public interest and that this change in focus may expand
interest and knowledge in mathematics and its applications while creating and
strengthening partnerships between individuals and their local and global
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MEPI is working primarily with undergraduate
students in preservice elementary and middle school teacher education programs.
The objectives are to: (1) engage in curriculum and course development for
Elementary and Middle Grades Math for Social Analysis; (2) conduct and
disseminate qualitative and quantitative research on the struggles, successes,
and tensions inherent to preservice teacher learning; and (3) create an online
MEPI activities and resources center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
These materials are being pilot tested in a required course with high enrollment
at a university with roots in teacher preparation. The project is supporting
mathematics teacher educators and inservice teachers interested in infusing
courses or professional development workshops with activities or service
learning experiences of personal or social value to students. The online center
can be used by preservice and inservice mathematics teachers, mathematics
teacher educators, and mathematics education researchers as they compile and
incorporate resources into their courses.