* 0837883
* Collaborative Research: Antarctic Climate Reconstruction Utilizing the US ITASE Ice Core Array (2009- 2012)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Paul Mayewski, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2013
* USD 725,700.00

Mayewski/0837883 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to reconstruct the
past physical and chemical climate of Antarctica, with an emphasis on the region
surrounding the Ross Sea Embayment, using &gt;60 ice cores collected in this
region by US ITASE and by Australian, Brazilian, Chilean, and New Zealand ITASE
teams. The ice core records are annually resolved and exceptionally well dated,
and will provide, through the analyses of stable isotopes, major soluble ions
and for some trace elements, instrumentally calibrated proxies for past
temperature, precipitation, atmospheric circulation, chemistry of the
atmosphere, sea ice extent, and volcanic activity. These records will be used to
understand the role of solar, volcanic, and human forcing on Antarctic climate
and to investigate the character of recent abrupt climate change over Antarctica
in the context of broader Southern Hemisphere and global climate variability.
The intellectual merit of the project is that ITASE has resulted in an array of
ice core records, increasing the spatial resolution of observations of recent
Antarctic climate variability by more than an order of magnitude and provides
the basis for assessment of past and current change and establishes a framework
for monitoring of future climate change in the Southern Hemisphere. This comes
at a critical time as global record warming and other impacts are noted in the
Southern Ocean, the Antarctic Peninsula, and on the Antarctic ice sheet. The
broader impacts of the project are that Post-doctoral and graduate students
involved in the project will benefit from exposure to observational and modeling
approaches to climate change research and working meetings to be held at the two
collaborating institutions plus other prominent climate change institutions. The
results are of prime interest to the public and the media Websites hosted by the
two collaborating institutions contain climate change position papers,
scientific exchanges concerning current climate change issues, and scientific
contribution series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;