* 0837844
* Ice Patch Archeology
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2008,02/28/2015
* E. James Dixon, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/28/2015
* USD 292,907.00



Ancient ice is melting as a result of climate change in high latitude regions.
The life cycles and cultural use of poorly-known features of perennial ice,
called "ice patches," are the focus of this research. Rare and well preserved
organic artifacts, including clothing, baskets, and tools are melting from ice
patches around the world. Radiocarbon dating demonstrates that these features
have existed for thousands of years, providing a unique opportunity to
investigate their role in high latitude human adaptations. Four locales
identified by preliminary research in Alaska's Wrangell St. Elias National Park
and Preserve (WRST) are the focus of this program. Using cultural ecological and
geoarcheological approaches the research documents and interprets the role of
ice patches in early high latitude human adaptations, 2) interprets their role
in high latitude cultural development, 3) defines ice patch composition,
character, and projected longevity, and 4) develops methods to identify fossil
ice patches so that they can be recognized after the ice has melted. This
project also contributes baseline data important to understanding the prehistory
and paleoecology of a poorly known region, expands the discipline of
geoarcheology, and provides insights into the concept that polar environments
are "barometers" of climate, environmental, and cultural change. It enhances
education by exciting the public, educators, and resource managers about climate
change and the need to locate, collect and preserve rare organic remains melting
from ancient ice before they are lost forever. The program also provides
opportunities for Native Americans to participate in, and contribute to,
science. Artifacts from this project will support a regional museum/cultural
center providing cultural and educational opportunities to local residents and
tourists.

