* 0837138
* Universal Environment for Delivering Remote-Laboratories within the STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Abul Azad, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,176.00

Interdisciplinary(99) This project investigates a radical approach for
delivering laboratory courses while utilizing the benefits of emerging computer
and web technology (software and hardware) in education. The work brings
together an engineer, an educational psychologist and a pedagogical design
expert in the design and development a universal Internet-based remote
laboratory environment where students can proceed at their own pace with more
flexibility. The customizable environment brings together an embedded assessment
and monitoring facility (progress of a student and the class as a whole) to a
range of laboratory courses, so that faculty/facilitator from STEM disciplines
can integrate their laboratory courses with very little effort. Students
experience engaging laboratories and a means for developing skills of self-
monitoring and reflection, while working from pre-existing knowledge of each
student. The concept blends emerging Internet technology, software, computer
interfacing, cutting edge graphical user interface, effective pedagogical
designs, assessment and evaluation schemes. The developed environment has five
important features: a) learning through remote laboratory; b) ease of
integration with a range of STEM courses; c) real-time video and audio link with
experiments; d) frequent student feedback; and e) faculty/facilitator monitoring
of student progress and activities. The remote laboratory entails physical
(real) laboratory equipment that is controlled&lt;br/&gt;remotely. The developed
environment is validated by using two undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;level laboratory
courses (advanced digital design laboratory and control systems laboratory).
Advances in cross discipline integration and inquiry into unique challenges
posed by an unpredictable arena of human learning are combined with emerging
technologies to achieve the highest possible performance in learning. The
activities build on knowledge developed during a previous NSF grant and advance
this remote laboratory to the next level by making it flexible and more
effective for utilization in range of STEM subject areas. The project is
potentially transformative because it is converting traditional production-line
style laboratory delivery systems to a personalized and individualized approach
to learning.