* 0837489
* Bridging Learners with Practitioners: Interdisciplinary Experiential Learning in Conservation Science using Conservation Bridge
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James Lassoie, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 149,698.00

This project is developing undergraduate course materials in conservation
science, combining scientific work with efforts to conserve biodiversity.
Conservation efforts typically draw on multiple disciplines (e.g. ecology,
natural resources, sociology, communications, law, economics, and agriculture),
integrating knowledge to guide actions that are jointly more effective in
preserving diversity. Modern course materials need to be broader than
traditional disciplinary specializations. Also,ideally, course materials for
conservation science should be enlivened by activities that connect students to
real world efforts to practice conservation and provide skills to work within a
culturally-rich, international context. Hence, the course materials are being
developed as internet-based and are being made available on a collaborative
platform that connects undergraduate students from around the world to each
other and to conservation scientists working in real world contexts. The
materials are being presented through the development of ten dynamic multimedia
case studies that are designed to include high-definition video, maps, text,
web-links, Wiki, and audio files. These case studies are being designed so that
they can be integrated into existing courses to facilitate their adoption. They
are being presented on an updated version of ConservationBridge.org, a social
networking system that facilitates communication and collaboration amongst
students, educators, and practitioners.