* 0837609
* Collaborative Research:  Stimulating Wide Interest in Computer Science Using Computer Security
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jack Davidson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an innovative,
engaging, computer security course called Digital Threads. A principal
difference in the design of this course, when compared to other security
curricula such as those developed at the National Security Agency certified
Centers for Academic Excellence in Information Assurance, is the significant
reduction in prerequisites for the course. Students taking this introductory
course will gain an understanding of the foundational principles and
technologies for providing secure and dependable computing
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives include defining and
satisfying the computer security educational needs of future technology managers
and policy developers; determining what concepts need to be taught, and how
computer security can be effectively taught to novices; and exploring of the use
of service learning to attract and interest students from all corners of
colleges and universities. The project develops a high-school outreach program
to spur early interest in the computer science and information technology
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated outcomes include better security
education for computer science majors, which will improve the commercial
computer security marketplace as well as stimulating more academic research by
those graduates; increased interest, by high-school students, in the field of
computer science and information technology; and increased retention of female
and minority computer science students. The proposed approach educates future
technology policy leaders and managers; increases offering of computer security
courses at colleges that currently lack such offerings; improves awareness,
across the disciplines, of the need for computer security; and attracts interest
from students outside computer science departments.