* 0837588
* Collaborative Research: Development and use of laboratory curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Suzanne Wakim, Butte-Glenn Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,578.00

(Biological Sciences 61) Through this collaborative effort, students in student
laboratories at a state college (California State University, Chico) and a
neighboring community college (Butte College) are engaged in investigations
using state-of-the-art techniques to identify the functions of unknown genes in
a model organism, Arabidopsis thaliana. In a first tier effort, using software
developed at CSU, Chico and implemented at both institutions, students create
testable hypotheses on a gene's function as defined by its expression pattern
(predicted from examination of micro array data in the public domain) and create
fluorescent protein-gene-fusion-reporters. In a second tier effort students use
their constructs to create transgenic organisms and test their original
hypotheses using confocal imaging to observe and report on the sub-cellular
protein dynamics for these genes. Students from Butte College who transfer to
CSU, Chico continue the work on the constructs they created while at Butte,
providing continuity from their community college to their four year experience.
Students become: part of a community of young biologists with significant
research experiences, intimately linked to their major, and deeply immersed in
the discovery process.

Intellectual merit: The project tests updated curriculum design for its
potential to improve student learning and to lead to greater retention of
students in university science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
programs. In addition to research on the educational value of this approach, the
project advances basic research on protein function in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Students ask and address such questions as: Where does a specific protein reside
within a cell?; Within which organelle?; What movements does the protein
display?; and How stable is the protein?

Broader impacts: The first tier laboratories at CSU, Chico and Butte College are
engaging over 300 students per year in the initial genetic engineering exercise
described above, construction of reporter genes. Second tier laboratories at
CSU, Chico serve an additional 50 students per year and complete the genetic
engineering with creation of transgenic organisms. If successful this pilot
program will be expanded to include three additional Community Colleges in
northeastern California (Shasta College, Feather River College, and Yuba
College) whose students typically transfer to CSU, Chico. These institutions
serve over 9 counties in northeastern California.