* 0837907
* SGER: Flow-induced anisotropic thermal energy transport in elongational flows of polymer liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Jay Schieber, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2010
* USD 50,000.00

CBET-0837907&lt;br/&gt;Venerus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An experimental study of
flow-induced anisotropic thermal conduction in polymer melts subjected to
elongational deformations is proposed. In previous studies, we have developed
and applied a novel optical technique to obtain quantitative measurements of the
thermal conductivity tensor in shear flows of poly-isobutylene melts. Results
from these previous studies are consistent with the stress-thermal rule, which
says the stress and thermal conductivity tensors are linearly related. In the
present study, the same optical technique is applied to polymer melts in simple
elongational flows. Time-dependent measurements of two components of thermal
conductivity tensor (parallel and perpendicular to the stretch direction) will
be obtained as functions of strain and strain rate. In addition, mechanical
(stress) and optical (birefringence) data are obtained in the same flows. The
thermal conductivity and stress data are used to examine for the first time the
validity of the stress-thermal rule in elongational flows of polymer melts, and
the validity of the stress-thermal rule for polymers having different
chemistries. Experimental results from the present and previous studies are used
to develop a molecular-level understanding of flow-induced anisotropic thermal
conduction in polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flows of polymeric melts in
fabrication processes such as fiber spinning and injection molding are
inherently non-isothermal. Consequently, the efficient design and operation of
these processes relies on a good understanding of thermal transport in flowing
polymer melts. Despite this well-accepted importance, heat transfer in deforming
polymer liquids, and in particular, flow-induced anisotropic thermal conduction,
is poorly understood. Accurate computer-aided design of polymer processes
requires a model for estimating the thermal conductivity as a function of
deformation or stress. The experimental results obtained in this study directly
address this need. Results from this investigation will also be invaluable in
the development of predictive, or semi-predictive, theories for flow-induced
anisotropic thermal conduction in polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) Program and the Fluid
Dynamics (FD) Program, both of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems (CBET) Division within the Directorate for Engineering (ENG).