* 0837229
* Teaching Ethical, Experimental, and Quantitative (TEEQ) Biology through Problem-Based Writing with Peer Review
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Arlene Russell, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/2010
* USD 141,547.00

This project adapts the Calibrated Peer Review (CPR) process, developed at the
University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA), as a mechanism for increasing
undergraduate student understanding of experimental methods and quantitative
approaches in biology. The student is presented with a problem and background
information and then writes about it. Then, after guiding questions from faculty
help the student demonstrate competence as a reviewer, the program delivers
three peer documents for the student to review. The student answers guiding
questions and assigns scores. Finally, the student does a self-review. The
student's grade is based on both writing and reviewing. A new CPR system tracks
assignment authors and versions to give credit to contributors who share and
improve writing assignments. The Purdue project incorporates new problem-based
writing assignments with peer review into the freshman course, Biology 131, to
help students connect what they learn to both current and historical research
endeavors. Biological problems are also being incorporated with writing
assignments for peer review in the Statistics 301 course to help students
understand how new knowledge accumulates in the biosciences and what ethical
constraints such as predictions of the expected number of animals for a research
study must be considered&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
helps students learn how experimental and quantitative aspects of biology have
changed along a historical continuum and introduces statistical skills
(experimental/sampling design, one way ANOVA with multiple comparisons tests,
variability and standard deviation, confidence intervals, P-values, use of
significant figures and checking the assumptions underlying analysis of results)
in a novel way and in a manner allied to student interests in biology. The
assessment of outcomes in terms of student knowledge and attitudes and self
perception of skills and abilities is an important component of this work, as
development and refinement of the instruments used will add to knowledge about
how to determine outcomes of projects such as this.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: As capacity is built for scaling-up so
that faculty can share, critique, and improve CPR assignments, diversity issues
relating to the content and quantitative aspects of biology are also being
investigated. The project targets all students taking BIOL131 and STAT301
courses (over 1300 students annually) over the project term. The students
periodically use a Participant Perception Inventory (PPI), a questionnaire
designed to measure student perception of knowledge (cognitive dimension),
experience (behavioral dimension), and confidence (affective dimension) about
ethical, experimental, and quantitative aspects of research. What is also being
tested is the prediction that if a student leaves a biology course with
increased confidence about important aspects of bioscience research, their
interest in doing research will increase. Graduate and undergraduate teaching
assistants are also participating in this interdisciplinary project (biology and
statistics) to improve their basic communication skills in both biology and
statistics.