* 0837835
* DDRI: Sociopolitical Dynamics in the Lima Polity: A Community - Level View from Cerro Manchay
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Marc Bermann, Giancarlo Marcone will analyze data
generated from archaeological excavations at the site of Cerro Manchay on the
Peruvian central coast. Cerro Manchay (also known as "Lote B") is a settlement
pertaining to an important regional archaeological culture known as the Lima
culture. Poorly known to date, the Lima Culture offers an excellent context for
researching aspects of sociopolitical transformation in Andean prehistory.
Several prehistorians have argued for a major societal shifts in the this around
AD 550 - 650, contemporaneous with the expansion to the coast of the highland
Wari Empire, shifts that perhaps even represent the development of state-level
society for the Lima population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerro Manchay is a 1 ha
site, located on a hill overlooking the Lurín valley and straddling one of the
paths that connect this valley to the major prehistoric Lima Culture centers in
the neighboring Rimac valley, an area now covered by the modern city of Lima.
Preliminary work has shown that the site can be divided into four sectors: a
zone of domestic architecture, spread over the top of the hill; a second
residential area of agglutinated, irregular house clusters; a building composed
of rectangular rooms delineated by open spaces that may be yards or plazas; and
a rectangular compound with large walls. Each sector is spatially separated from
the others, and each displays at least one associated, major midden or disposal
area. Mapping and systematic excavation of residential, public and disposal
areas in the different sectors of the site will generate the data on
interhousehold variability in domestic architecture, household activities, and
consumption, needed to understand the nature of status and wealth variability at
the site&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focus on community integration and
household-level socioeconomic differentiation at the site is important because
allow identification of changes through time in the postures and activities
associated with Lima social leadership. The research also addresses some broad
issues in the study of complex societies, such as the roles played by staple
production, craft production, ceremonial practices and external contacts in
social inequality. In particular, investigation focuses on determining if the
increase in political centralization seen at the regional-level, was concomitant
with the development of a new sociopolitical order at the community level.
Specifically, the research explores whether changes at Cerro Manchay shows
evidence for increasing: (1) economic differentiation (ranging from craft-
specialization to staple production to wealth accumulation); (2) elite
domination of ritual practice; and/or (3) elite emulation, in activities and
stylistic preferences, of elites in other regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond
research questions of interest to social scientists, this project will have a
broader impact by enhancing the level of public understanding of science in the
communities at the Lurín valley, and fostering collaboration on study of complex
societies between scholars from Peru and the United States. The inclusion of
Peruvian students and local workers in the project, together with the experience
of the author as Peruvian state-archaeologist for the area and current teaching
responsibilities at a Peruvian University, is going to be the base for outreach
to local, national and international communities, through conferences and
preliminary informs distributed to school principals, community leaders, and
local authorities. The research findings will be presented in Peruvian and
international journals. The project aims to develop the site (and the work
there) as a model of working with the patriomonio where archaeo-tourism is of
increasing economic importance, and where the prehispanic legacy around the city
of Lima continues to be destroyed by urban expansion.