* 0837272
* The Application of a Successful Research-based Laboratory Model to Atmospheric Science
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Gabriela Weaver, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 03/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

Atmospheric Sciences (41) There is an increasing demand for professionals who
can serve as authorities on weather and climate phenomena, and interpret
associated data. However, the education of atmospheric scientists at the
undergraduate level generally does not emphasize how atmospheric science
research is performed, or the evolutionary nature of its results. Thus,
graduates of such programs do not develop an appreciation of the strengths and
limitations of current scientific information, and thereby are less able to
communicate the uncertainty of this information to each other, policymakers, the
media, and the general public. This project is developing a new atmospheric
science laboratory course to investigate if a research-based learning experience
in the early stages of an atmospheric science curriculum can enhance students':
1) scientific understanding; 2) ability to communicate science; and 3) retention
in the program. The course is based on an established, successful model of
incorporating research into introductory chemistry laboratory courses (from the
Center for Authentic Science Practice in Education, "CASPiE"). Three research
modules - forecast verification, potential influences of regional climate change
on precipitation, and thunderstorm identification and geospatial distribution -
are being designed. The modules take into account the depth of understanding
that students have at this early stage in their coursework, while still
challenging them by using state-of-the-art analysis software and numerical
modeling necessary to perform novel research in these areas. The modules require
students to analyze preliminary results, revise their experimental design to
conduct further inquiry, and synthesize and present their final results. The
results should provide valuable feedback for the atmospheric science community
in improving numerical weather prediction models, provide information to
agriculture and government agencies regarding the regions where precipitation in
the U.S. may be highly susceptible to regional climate change, and provide
initial data that can be used to improve climate model predictions of weather
extremes. This project serves to advance our understanding of how the CASPiE
model can be adapted to programs in atmospheric science, the geosciences, and
other disciplines.