* 0837210
* 100P: A Guided Discovery Curriculum for Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* John Lusth, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Suzanne C. Fitzgerald
* 04/30/2011
* USD 98,286.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal presents 100P, an
innovative guided discovery curriculum. In the 100P program, students are freed
from the classroom; students instead work on 100 concept- and research-related
problems throughout their undergraduate careers. The 100 problems guide the
students to discover the fundamental knowledge and skills required of a graduate
of the degree program. Each student is free to create an individualized mode of
learning and discovery. The curriculum fosters deep learning among students and
challenges students' intellectual growth. The 100P program encourages students
to be agile learners who can draw on a number of resources as needed, to be
resilient learners who understand that progress can come from failure, and to be
lifelong learners who are better trained for the challenges of globalization.
The structure of the classroom is replaced by a new structure: nine problems and
an oral exam. This structure repeats throughout a student's career. So not only
is 100P a rigorous curriculum, it is a caring curriculum with its emphasis on
both faculty and peer mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: 100P
provides an alternate paradigm for obtaining a baccalaureate degree. The new
curriculum integrates some of the best ideas from educational research in
building an educational environment that promotes student-centered learning,
allows for early immersion into both the discipline and undergraduate research,
and yields agile, resourceful, and resilient learners. The development of the
program not only provides an innovative education program and techniques to
enhance student success, but also insights into learning diversity and teaching
in CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This proposal offers a new paradigm
for educating students in CS and, potentially, other STEM disciplines. 100P
encourages students to reach their potential more readily than the regular
classroom format. The 100P program helps all students strive for excellence and
become more self-motivated and self-confident while in a supportive environment.
The project disseminates materials that have been vetted by experts in the
fields of CS education. These materials, the policies and procedures for the
100P program, detailed concept guides for the major courses, an
institutionalization plan, and an assessment instrument for the 100P program
facilitate the adoption of 100P by other departments. 100P also has potential
economic impact in that it addresses the aspiration of a broadly educated
engineer set forth in The Engineer of 2020.