* 0837538
* collaborative research: CSI module to enhance students learning in materials, design and manufacturing engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Firas Akasheh, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 05/31/2012
* USD 46,911.00

Engineering Mechanical - (56)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Create your Scenario
Interactively (CSI) is a novel concept that utilizes interactive storylines,
2D/3D visualization, simulation, and state-of-the-art interaction technologies.
In this exploratory grant project personnel develop a CSI module, implement the
module in a series of undergraduate materials, design, and manufacturing
engineering courses at The University of Oklahoma (OU) and Tuskegee University
(TU), assess the impact of these modules on students' learning and retention
through external evaluation, and disseminate the results globally. This project
provides students with a tool that enhances their understanding of engineering
concepts. In the CSI module, instructors first present the scenario to attract
the students' attention, and then teach the theoretical content needed to
accomplish the goals of the scenario. Afterwards, students solve relevant
problems associated with the scenario in the CSI environment and provide
justifications for their design decisions. Simulations and visualizations for
each step in the design scenario are provided for students to demonstrate the
effects of their decisions. This CSI module:(i) stimulates active learning; (ii)
ties theory with real-world design experience, (ii) provides more insight into
engineering careers, and (iii) serves as a natural link to subsequent courses in
the STEM disciplines. Use of this CSI module in courses will positively impact
student learning and retention in engineering and provide a mechanism for
increasing student interest in engineering careers.