* 0837031
* Learning Mathematics from Practice: Developing Professional Teaching Cases for Preservice Content Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Philip Wagreich, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 04/30/2011
* USD 149,868.00

Mathematical Sciences - 21&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CCLI Phase 1 project is
developing and researching the effectiveness of innovative learning materials
and teaching strategies based on professional teaching cases for use in
mathematics content courses for preservice elementary teachers. These
professional teaching cases are video and text documents that demonstrate
teaching situations to promote discussion of issues related to mathematics,
mathematics teaching, and mathematics learning. The cases are used to create
contexts that facilitate preservice teachers' recognition and understanding of
their implicit assumptions about the mathematics and the teaching and learning
of mathematics while at the same time broadening their knowledge of students'
mathematical thinking. This project is also producing facilitator guides to
enable mathematics faculty, who teach content courses for teachers, to develop
expertise in the area of professional teaching cases, a medium with which they
are most likely unfamiliar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts from this
project are not limited to the dissemination of the professional cases and the
facilitators guide on the project website. The research results from this
project are contributing to the growing understanding of how to support
preservice teachers' learning of the mathematical knowledge needed for teaching.
The project's evaluation includes a comprehensive mixed methods approach to
assessing the context, input, process, and product of the project.