* 0837121
* Innovation in Digital Libraries:  An Experimental Examination of the Production, Diffusion, and Use of STEM Teaching Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2012
* Roberta Spalter-Roth, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2012
* USD 155,760.00

Sociology (86)&lt;br/&gt;While digital science libraries are increasingly
common, systematic assessment of their impact is nearly absent. This study is a
beginning in addressing that gap. It is investigating whether access to cyber-
infrastructure-based materials for teaching and learning in STEM results in more
widespread and effective diffusion of resources than a traditional paper-based
production and distribution. Using both a quasi-experimental design and network
analysis, the project is testing a series of hypotheses that were generated from
diffusion and network theory that are applicable across STEM disciplines.
Examples are whether user networks are homophilious, whether digitizing
materials increases the scope density and rate of usage, and whether digitizing
results in greater participation in the production of materials. This research
has the potential to advance theoretical and practical insights into the means
by which scientific resources for classroom use are diffused throughout networks
of teachers and scholars in STEM fields. Research shows that introducing
technological innovation does not ensure the diffusion of new ideas and that the
diffusion of innovation occurs through social networks mediated by their density
and the relative status of their members. &lt;br/&gt;The American Sociological
Association (ASA) is creating the digital materials for this study. ASA is
launching a digital teaching resource center by moving more than 16,500 pages of
teaching modules from a print-based delivery system into a web-based interactive
digital science library. &lt;br/&gt;A key step of this project is the creation
of a database of all 14,000 members of the ASA and their demographic,
departmental, and institutional characteristics, their use of the paper-based
science teaching materials, and the networks in which they participate (measured
by the links such as graduate school cohorts, dissertation committees, and co-
authors) among users, and the links among non-users. An updated database will be
created in the second year in order to compare the characteristics of users and
non-users, and their networks, of the paper resource materials and the digital
library. In addition, the rate of adoption of individuals in denser or less
dense networks will be assessed. &lt;br/&gt;As a membership organization ASA is
able to establish a yearly database of both users and non-users of STEM teaching
materials. This membership database is a bounded network of association members
that makes network analysis easier to conduct. The availability of these data
provides a set of unobtrusive measures that will avoid many of the costs and
problems of other data collection methods. It is possible that the findings from
this project will provide key insights about how to facilitate the movement of
cutting-edge scientific findings into the classroom.