* 0837551
* Collaborative Project:  Integration of Shared Presentation Virtual Space in STEM courses
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Charles McFadden, Beaufort County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 03/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
implements an innovative, online and real-time course delivery system, Shared
Presentation Virtual Space (SPVS). The SPVS technology is evaluated through
expected measurable outcomes of improved student performance and increased
student satisfaction. The team implements this technology into several different
STEM courses in mathematics, biology, and computing. &lt;br/&gt;The project
results in the creation of a virtual classroom world to enhance and enrich the
learning experience of online education (OE) students, by creating real-time
lectures and class discussions. This system contributes to the educational
process for students and educators because it can be delivered via low-bandwidth
to rural areas of the country. The SPVS classroom worlds used in this project
comprise an emerging medium demonstrated in many areas already familiar to
today's student (e.g., computer games, entertainment systems, and
visualizations). The specific instructional goals for this project include the
development of non-traditional online lectures. The project enhances and
enriches the learning experience of both OE students (by creating real-time
lecture and class discussion) and also students in Face-To-Face (FTF) classes
(by creating archived lessons as a study aid and that allow students to make up
lessons they might have missed). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
SPVS system is designed to create a suitable infrastructure supporting OE and
FTF classes, while providing students with an environment resulting in an
overall increase in student performance and satisfaction. Student performance
improves when the learning environment allows students to see, hear, and
interact with the instructor and other students, and to directly view
educational information, such as notes written on a whiteboard. This environment
also increases student participation in class, which helps increase motivation
and satisfaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The SPVS system is
accessible to instructors and to all students, especially economically
disadvantaged students, because the SPVS system uses low bandwidth, requires no
costly system enhancements, and does not involve steep learning curves for
students or instructors.