* 0837656
* Multi-Disciplinary Applied Cryptography
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Stanislaw Radziszowski, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 02/28/2013
* USD 149,598.00

Computer Engineering (32)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a multi-
disciplinary course sequence that integrates the algorithmic, engineering, and
practical aspects of security as exemplified by applied cryptography. To study
cryptography across the disciplines - computer engineering, software
engineering, and computer science, this project creates a laboratory with state-
of-the-art FPGA-based reconfigurable hardware boards and development stations
tailored to the study of efficient software, hardware, and hardware-software
implementations. Coursework also covers concepts of secure design and
implementation of the algorithms. Pairs of students (a software-oriented student
and a hardware student) work on projects bringing to bear knowledge in their
individual disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The course
sequence is based on modifications to an existing cryptography course in
Computer Science, and two new courses in Software Engineering and Computer
Engineering. Building on a theoretical foundation from computer science, the two
new courses use a "studio" format classroom to provide immediate reinforcement
of the concepts. Students actively engage in the study of cryptographic
algorithms and their efficient software, hardware, and software-hardware
implementations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The curriculum
introduces students across multiple computing disciplines to the broad range of
topics associated with cryptographic algorithms and their realization in
hardware and software. Students engage in multi-disciplinary activities on real
cryptographic problems, extending their knowledge and skills well beyond that of
their home discipline. Students who possess this broad range of knowledge and
skills are more effective developers of secure systems.&lt;br/&gt;