* 0837536
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Building on the Past: The Emergence of Maya Elites and Monumental Architecture at Anonal, Peten, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 14,990.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Takeshi Inomata, Jessica Munson will direct
archaeological excavations at the ancient Maya site of Anonal located in the
Department of Pet√©n, Guatemala. This research examines the ways in which
monumental buildings mediated the emergence and negotiation of political
authority at Anonal from the Middle Preclassic through the end of the Classic
period (ca. 900 B.C. - A.D. 900).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Archaeological
excavations at Anonal will investigate the architectural history of this site to
understand the emerging role of Maya elites and commemoration practices within
this community. Maya temples, such as the temple complex at Anonal, commonly
represent the result of multiple construction episodes and incorporate
architectural elements that date back to much earlier times. Such long
construction histories imply some connection with a known past. Long-term use
and renovation of Anonal's temple building provides an excellent context to
examine the origins of monumental construction in Maya society, as well as
related changes in political organization beginning in the Preclassic period.
Through intensive excavation this research will document detailed architectural
histories, and analyze patterns of use, reconstruction, and abandonment at
Anonal's temple complex. Excavations will focus on monumental buildings in order
to examine the duration, intensity, and methods of construction associated with
these structures over long periods of time. Micromorphological and radiocarbon
data from intensive stratigraphic excavations will make unique contributions
towards understanding the frequency of construction, the use of different
construction materials and techniques, as well as the chronological sequence of
these building episodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Built environments reflect
particular forms of social organization and actively shape people's perception
of their surroundings by contributing a sense of place to the people that use
them. Alterations to these social landscapes concomitantly affect the creation
and transformation of social memories, as well as signify changes in social and
political order. Archaeological research on the cultural construction of
monumental architecture suggests that these buildings mediated the organization
and negotiation of political power and commemoration in ancient Maya society.
Legitimization strategies by elite leaders often invoke the past as a means to
establish ancestral connections and assert political authority. By examining the
construction history and use of Anonal's temple complex, this research will
contribute understanding to the origins of Maya monumental architecture and
associated changes in political organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project also has immediate impacts for cultural patrimony regarding the
conservation of endangered sites and heritage education. Excavation of Anonal's
temple complex will promote stabilization and conservation of threatened
structures for future generations. This project will also establish
collaborative partnerships with Guatemalan archaeology students and local Qeqchi
Maya communities engaged in sustainable cultural tourism projects. Students will
be trained in archaeological field methods and participate in laboratory
analyses. Local Qeqchi Maya people will also participate in the excavation
program and learn about their cultural landscape. This knowledge will promote
stewardship of archaeological resources directed by indigenous communities.