* 0837119
* Transforming AI Education Through Real-World Programming Projects and Structured Journaling and Reflection
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Christopher Brooks, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 05/31/2012
* USD 149,955.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an integrated
set of student projects, tutorials and code which provide undergraduate students
taking an AI course with practical experience in solving real-world problems.
The second goal is the development of an open-source assessment tool that allows
students to journal about their design decisions, record their challenges and
solutions, and reflects on their design experience. The project includes both
the development of instructional material to help teachers use the accompanying
software to conduct and evaluate student projects and also the deployment and
maintenance of a website which allows other instructors to use, modify and
extend the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is meant to have an
explicitly collaborative approach, using open-source tools and materials
wherever possible. The assessment share of the project helps teachers with the
usually difficult task of evaluating the effectiveness of a student project. It
provides undergraduate students with a better understanding of AI algorithms,
gives them exposure to the application of AI techniques in real-world settings,
and provides experience in solving practical problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has a potential to develop resources that can be used and shared by
instructors worldwide in teaching AI to undergraduate students. This work
assists with both teaching and assessment of AI courses at a variety of
educational institutions. The labs described in this project can all serve as
starting points for student undergraduate research.