* 0837301
* Collaborative Research: Paradigms in Physics: Creating and Testing Materials to Facilitate Dissemination of the Energy and Entropy Module
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Michael Rogers, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Richard W. Peterson
* 01/31/2011
* USD 33,299.00

Physics(13)

Topics in statistical and thermal physics have long been problematic in the
undergraduate curriculum. To many students, the subject matter is abstract and
theoretical and often requires mathematical tools they lack. This project
addresses the challenge of teaching upper-division thermal and statistical
mechanics by building on the Energy and Entropy (E&E) paradigm developed through
the Paradigms in Physics Project at Oregon State University and a physics
education research project at the University of Maine. E&E takes a radically
different approach to statistical mechanics, incorporating the issues of quantum
mechanics and measurement at its core and focusing on entropy as the Principle
of Least Bias. In the approach, thermodynamic systems are treated as large, i.e.
macroscopic, quantum systems that are not perfectly isolated from the remainder
of the universe. This external interaction has enormous consequences that when
taken into account clarifies thermodynamics' substance, with thermal variables
now understood as macroscopic quantum averages and thermal probabilities as
macroscopic quantum probabilities. An entropy postulate then plays the ultimate
and crucial role of match maker in this marriage. As part of the current
project, E&E curricular materials are being further refined and the materials
are being field tested at Oregon State University and at collaborator sites at
Ithaca College and Pacific University, a detailed instructor's manual is being
prepared, and an education research project is being conducted to examine the
efficacy of the approach and materials in supporting student learning of these
concepts in advanced courses.