* 0837220
* Enhancing Active Learning: an Inquiry-Based Laboratory in Biomolecular Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Pushpalatha Murthy, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,410.00

Chemistry (12)

The major goal of the project is developing a semester-long laboratory course in
biomolecular chemistry that emphasizes the research process by actively
involving students in question formulation, data gathering, critical analysis,
team work, and communication in a guided-inquiry format. Science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education has been revolutionized by
significant advances in molecular biology, genetic engineering, computer
science, and information technology. With the knowledge base increasing
explosively and techniques and equipment becoming out-dated rapidly, problem
solving, constant questioning, critical thinking, analysis, and team-work
abilities are critical for continued scientific and economic progress and for
the next generation of students to successfully compete globally.

This lab course familiarizes students with biochemistry/molecular biology
techniques through a series of open-ended experiments designed to guide students
to become progressively more independent and culminate in a student-developed
original research project. Appropriate learning and teaching assessments are
incorporated throughout the project and necessary iterative changes are being
made. More active involvement in research can increase the interest of students
in scientific careers and alleviate the shortage of students entering careers in
STEM fields. A majority of students (55-65%) in BS programs in Chemistry,
Biochemistry, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry at Michigan Technological University
are women, 7-8% are African-American and Hispanic; thus this project has a
significant positive impact on groups underrepresented in these fields. This
project improves the teaching of undergraduates, especially underrepresented
groups, increases the interest of students to pursue careers in science, and
advances the field of education research.