* 0837038
* LInear algebra in New Environments (LINE)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sergio Loch, Grand View College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2014
* USD 43,980.00

Mathematical Sciences (21) This collaborative project integrates: (a) the study
of important mathematical content, (b) the use of applications, and (c)
reflection on mathematical learning theories by faculty and students in the
context of an advanced undergraduate linear algebra course. The development and
implementation of this new course involves co-teaching and collaboration among
faculty with expertise in a variety of areas including mathematics, computer
science and mathematics education. The project includes professional development
of college faculty who will form professional learning communities to support
implementation of innovative teaching modes. The project is designed to:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Motivate students by connecting math to their experiences;
&lt;br/&gt;2. Match the analysis of content to theories of learning and
instructional models; and &lt;br/&gt;3. Provide collaborative support so that
expertise in content and pedagogy are used to design effective instructional
practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel characteristic of this project is the
integration, within a single course of study, of content and applications, in a
manner guided by current theories of teaching and learning mathematics at the
undergraduate level. The project work involves a significant and long-term
collaboration among mathematics and mathematics education faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit This project is transforming STEM
education at the participating institutions by demonstrating the impact of
curriculum design based firmly in a rich collaboration among disciplines that
contribute content, application, and educational theory. There is a strong
interest in mathematics in these schools, and particularly in linear algebra,
because of its importance for secondary mathematics, computer science, abstract
mathematics and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
is impacting a large number of students even in its initial phase, given the
number of colleges and potential linear algebra students involved. In addition,
the number of faculty who will be involved (at least 10) in the initial phase
promises a strong impact in STEM pedagogy and content at the five participating
institutions. All of the mathematics educators in this project are either placed
in mathematics departments or have strong working relationships with their
colleagues in math, and therefore there is an opportunity to begin a genuine
dialogue about how STEM education could evolve, and the way that these
mathematics professors, and others who could use the disseminated instructional
materials, think about how their students learn mathematics.