* 0837456
* The Software Enterprise: A Reinforcing Pedagogical Model for Software Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Kevin Gary, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 12/31/2012
* USD 148,345.00

Software Engineering (34)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the
development and testing of the Software Enterprise model, a model that uses
student project experiences as the contextual teaching and learning vehicle,
instead of as a summative experience. In this model, students engage in
traditional classroom learning, group-oriented lab exercises, implementation on
scalable projects, and reflective assessment co-located in time for each module.
The result is a student who not only acquires a new skill, but understands how
to put that skill in practice. &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the two
activities: 1) Performing a longitudinal assessment of student performance in
industry after graduation; and 2) Creating new curricular modules in subject
matter areas currently lacking, including design, architecture, quality
assurance, and maintenance. Dissemination activities include packaging
Enterprise modules for online delivery and conducting tutorials on the method
and benefit of structuring Software Engineering Education (SEE) according to the
Software Enterprise pedagogical model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The Enterprise contributes a new pedagogical model to SEE. While the model is
new, it builds off previous contributions to SEE. The objective of this model is
to accelerate the industry preparedness and skill level of software engineering
graduates, and this project performs a longitudinal assessment to validate this
claim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project produces SEE modules
supporting a reinforcing teaching and learning model. These modules are made
available to the SEE community through a project website as well as through
SWENET (http://www.swenet.org). The results of the assessment activity are
reported to the community with an analysis of the viability of this pedagogical
approach.