* 0837030
* 11th International Congress on Combustion By-Products, -Origin, Control and Health Effects - Student Travel Stipends
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Barry Dellinger, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 12/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

CBET-0837030&lt;br/&gt;Dellinger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds
to partially support a biennial international conference on research into the
formation, mitigation, and adverse health effects of products of combustion. The
conference will be held in Research Triangle Park, NC and hosted by the US-EPA.
The tentative date for the conference is June 14-17, 2009. This is the eleventh
conference, and approximately 120 researchers are expected to participate. Six
plenary lectures are in the planning stage. The organizers expect that 60-90
papers will be submitted and that graduate students will present some of these.
The NSF Combustion, Fire, and Plasma Systems program has provided support for
four previous gatherings of this conference (Arizona in 2005, Sweden in 2003,
North Carolina in 2005, Fand Italy in 2007). Travel expenses were provided for
ten students in 2005, four students in 2003, eight students in 2005, and eight
students in 2007. The website for the meeting will list the availability of NSF
support for student travel
(http://www.lsu.edu/piccongress/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion research is a
multi-disciplinary field encompassing diverse disciplines in engineering and
science. Society relies on combustion for power generation, transportation, and
manufacturing. While great strides have been made and continue to be made in
mitigating pollutant formation from combustion, some emissions persist, and the
health effects of these emissions are just beginning to be examined in detail.
This conference allows health-focused and combustion-focused researchers to
exchange ideas in a stimulating technical forum. Policymakers will also be in
attendance to participate in the exchange of information. The intellectual merit
of this activity arises from the participation of combustion and health experts
from the various countries, their discourse, their communications with students,
and their ultimate recommendations for future research directions. The outcomes
of this meeting can serve as a useful guide for setting priorities of the NSF
Combustion and Plasma Systems program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For broader
impacts, graduate students involved in the meeting will be encouraged to
participate further in research into toxic byproduct formation, mitigation, and
lifecycle/health effects. The meeting offers a unique opportunity for health and
combustion experts to interact. The informal discussions at this meeting would
provide a valuable learning experience for the students who participate. The
conference would also promote international, multi-disciplinary collaboration
and communication. Ultimately, local air quality and public health could be
improved by the outcomes of the conference.