* 0837056
* Integrating Service-Oriented Paradigm Into Introductory Information Technology Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Billy Lim, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 151,500.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Web services can be integrated into
the introductory programming sequence to make it more interesting and more
importantly, make the students better prepared for upper division classes and
for the IT industry upon graduation. This not only fascinates the students with
its interesting collection of activities, thus addressing the issue of
retention, but also inspires and prepares them for real-world software
development solutions using the service-oriented paradigm. This project
overhauls the approach currently used in the introductory programming sequence
by incorporating a modern and novel approach that integrates service-oriented
paradigm via Web services technology. The objectives of this project are: (1)
Increase interest in introductory programming courses through the use of
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)/Web services as a method of exposing
students to real world programming scenarios. (2) Increase performance in
introductory programming courses through the use of SOA/Web services as a
framework for engaging students in the study of basic core programming concepts.
(3) Create a series of SOA/Web service-centered introductory programming courses
considered beneficial and relevant to employers in information technology
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research findings of the
treatment group experiment provide valuable information on the effectiveness of
using service-oriented paradigm for introductory program sequence. Research
findings from the instructors participating in the project provide insight on
how service-oriented paradigm may be incorporated into the introductory
programming sequence of computing curricula. The series of courses developed
expose students to a new pedagogical model that allows them to experience what
the IT industry is practicing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
deliverables of this project are situated in a repository for ease of
exploration by instructors and students. Live Web services are hosted in the
repository for educators to incorporate into their classrooms. The service-
oriented paradigm is highly adaptable for various groups. A faculty workshop is
conducted to transfer, further disseminate, and provide feedback for the course
materials.