* 0837398
* Luminescence Spectroscopy in Molecular Assemblies and New Energy Conversion Materials:  Integration Across the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Jeanne Pemberton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 01/31/2012
* USD 149,945.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. A collaborative group of educators
from the Chemistry Department or from the Biochemistry &amp; Molecular
Biophysics Department are implementing the use of two fluorescence
spectrophotometers as a means for catalyzing an integrated modification of the
undergraduate chemistry and biochemistry laboratory curriculum. The modified
curriculum is providing undergraduate students with a broad introduction to
luminescence and associated topics, including a multiyear exposure to the
scientific processes underlying solar energy conversion and energy transport in
both synthetic and living systems. A thorough and integrated introduction to
luminescence&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopies and luminescent materials in the
undergraduate curriculum has become important for a number of reasons.
Fluorescent assays are widely used in the characterization and analysis of
biological and biomimetic materials, and in parallel with the sequencing of the
human genome there has been an explosion in the use of single molecule
fluorescence studies in all areas of bioscience. Luminescence spectroscopy is at
the heart of the development of many forms of nanoscience, especially the
development of new nanomaterials for solar energy conversion. By offering
practical and in-depth laboratory experiences that explore these important
topics, students are enhancing their understanding of fluorescence as a probe of
the dynamics of molecular systems and are becoming familiar with recent advances
in contemporary research fields such as solar energy conversion, nanoscience,
and biochemical fluorescence spectroscopy. The fluorescence spectrophotometers
are being used by both Chemistry and Biochemistry undergraduates, in years three
and four of their curriculum, including in Analytical, Physical and Inorganic
Prep classes, along with a Biochemical Techniques laboratory. Experiments are
being developed that investigate a) light absorption and excited state creation,
energy transfer, and luminescence decay; b) fluorescence emission, resonance
energy transfer (FRET), and anisotropy in molecular assemblies, emphasizing the
effect of microenvironment on these processes; c) biochemical applications of
anisotropy and FRET in measurements of biomacromolecular binding affinity and
reaction kinetics; and d) the competition between luminescence and electron
transfer in solar energy conversion systems created from linked semiconductor
and oxide nanoparticles. The last of these involves a cross-course collaborative
capstone experience for students in Inorganic and Physical Chemistry
laboratories. Experiments are being designed using a "bottom-up" approach so
that appropriate overlap of the most significant issues occurs throughout the
students' training.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Approximately 250 students are
enrolled in the affected courses each year. As a result of this curricular
modification, these students are developing an enhanced understanding of
fluorescence and a number of related topics while being exposed to important
areas of contemporary research. They are gaining appreciation for the
collaborative and cross-disciplinary nature of science. Under the guidance of
the faculty, graduate teaching assistants carry out much of the experimental
development, and are benefiting both educationally and professionally. An
additional solar energy education outreach component is being implemented in
collaboration with the undergraduate chemistry club. Materials developed over
the course of the project will be made accessible to the wider scientific
community.