* 0837734
* Assessment Rich Instructional Modules for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Candace Thille, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2009
* USD 149,583.00

(Biological Sciences 61) This project focuses on fostering active student
engagement and instructor feedback via on-line technologies in biochemistry,
with simulations and interactive animations and embedded assessments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on research in active student engagement and
effective feedback, the project is developing, refining and assessing an
integrated set of instructional modules for courses in molecular and cellular
biology. The project goes beyond typical course development in that it is
creating new computer-based instructional activities for students (simulations,
interactive animations, etc.) and also collecting feedback from the activities
via the "Open Leaning Initiative" (OLI) environment. This provides reports that
allow the instructor to monitor the progress of the students in learning the
content and to identify misconceptions and/or concepts that are difficult for
students to learn. Instructional products emanating from this project include: A
new set of research-informed, computer-based instructional activities;
instructor feedback reports; a publicly available hybrid biochemistry course;
and a version of these instructional activities packaged for use in any online
learning environment and contributed to the
NSDL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this
proposal resides in the use of computer-based and on-line technologies and tools
to create new instructional materials with embedded assessments that address the
variability of student backgrounds and learning styles in the midst of course
delivery. In addition, the project is assessing the impact of these tools on
teaching and learning in biochemistry and molecular biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project is not only of benefit to the
biology students of Carnegie-Mellon University, one-hundred per year during this
project, but is also being made available well beyond this institution. The
materials developed are being made freely accessible through the "Open Learning
Initiative" and therefore instructors at other institutions can adapt and
integrate the modules as they deem appropriate. Given the importance of
quantitative biology, these materials and the evidence generated through the
research study relative to impact are making significant contributions to the
teaching and learning of biology and perhaps other quantitative sciences as
well.