* 0837987
* SGER: Thermogenic Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Robert Roemer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2010
* USD 49,999.00

CBET-0837987&lt;br/&gt;Roemer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Australian endemic cycad
plant Macrozamia lucida is derived from an ancient lineage of gymnosperms (non-
flowering plants like pine trees) present on earth long before flowering plants.
Its pollination system may be unique in terms of the interactions between the
host plant and its specific insect pollinator. The heart of this system is a
daily thermogenic event during which the cycad cones "spontaneously" heat up
(maximum measured of 25F above ambient), an action that coincides with the
midday flight activity of the pollinators between cones. Little is known about
the mechanisms of this "unstable" heating process (it starts and stops in each
cone on a daily basis for up to two weeks) including its functional significance
in pollination. Through experiments inspired by prior observations and bio-
thermal engineering modelling we have shown that these cyclic thermal events are
likely driven by thermo-chemical instabilities that involve the Arrhenius
equation based temperature dependence of the cone metabolism. Although sequences
of such instabilities are well known in abiotic systems, this is the first
reported biological instance of such an instability sequence. We will perform
experiments on these cones and develop mathematical models that predict the
cones' varying thermal behaviour (metabolism and temperature distribution in
space and time) over the multiple weeklong series of events in order to analyze
the bio-physical basis of these unique instabilities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this interdisciplinary, combined experimental and
modelling research is that it will yield a basic biophysical understanding about
the first known biological example of a thermo-chemically unstable system, and
it will contribute to understanding the functional significance of thermogenesis
in gymnosperms and angiosperms, topics of current biological interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the interdisciplinary work that we and
several students will perform will contribute to the understanding of the nature
and evolution of obligate pollination mutualisms, of which only a few flowering
plant systems have been studied in depth including the yucca/yucca moth and
fig/fig wasp systems. Our research on this pollination system will further
complement that with angiosperm systems in being dioecious (separate male and
female plants) and of an ancient non-flowering seed plant lineage, and in having
a pollination system that is extremely temperature sensitive. Second, the strong
role of ambient temperature in these plants' pollination process suggests that
global warming may significantly impact this system, and those of other
temperature dependent cycads, and cycads could be sensitive indicators of global
warming. Because this lineage of plants precedes the flowering plants, studies
of this cycad system may give insights into early pollination systems. Finally,
our study has fundamental implications for the conservation of cycad/insect
pollination systems worldwide, an important consideration since about half of
all cycad species are endangered that are undergoing conservation
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the unique combination of
biological and thermal engineering perspectives could provide a model for other
interdisciplinary efforts. Integrating the engineering and biological research
tools to develop an understanding of this unstable thermal-chemical biological
system could provide unique insights into the nature of plant thermogenesis.
Although much is understood about the biochemical pathways in basic thermogenic
processes in plants, the work proposed here should lead to testable hypotheses
on the mechanistic aspects of the correlated volatile production that is
coincident with increased metabolism and thermogenesis.