* 0837505
* A Cognitive-Apprenticeship Learning Curriculum Augmented by Cognitive Tutors (CAL-CT) for Fundamental Programming Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Wei Jin, Shaw University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Erlinger
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,708.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses student
learning obstacles and low motivation in introductory programming courses. This
project utilizes two effective instruction methodologies, the cognitive
apprenticeship learning (CAL) model and cognitive tutors (CT), to improve
student problem solving skills with fundamental programming concepts, such as
basic statements, if/switch statements, loops, and functions. There are two
steps involved. First, task analysis of expert problem solving process is
conducted and scaffolding techniques are developed. Second, computer tutor
programs are constructed and delivered online. These tutoring programs interact
with students as their personal coaches. They utilize explicit expert problem-
solving processes and scaffolding techniques to guide students through their
problem-solving practice. The tutors can accommodate multiple solution paths
that students might choose for solving a problem. As students work through
program-writing problems, the tutors provide step-by-step feedback and upon the
student's request will provide advice on what to do next. Therefore, the student
can always reach a successful conclusion to problem
solving.&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation is conducted based on collected test scores for
students in the first introductory programming course over a four-semester
period. Pretest-posttest two-group control group design methodology is used for
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;