* 0837820
* Improving Student Understanding of Geological Rates via Chronotopographic Analysis of Active Landscapes
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Scott Linneman, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 08/31/2011
* USD 204,469.00

Geology (42) This project investigates the value of incorporating
chronotopographic analysis across a range of undergraduate geology courses using
terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) to improve student understanding of the rates
and styles of geomorphic processes. Repeat high-resolution TLS surveys have
begun to track, in detail, the evolution of active landscapes, including
investigations of active faulting, glaciation, landslides, fluvial systems and
coastal dynamics. This project is investigating the hypothesis that
undergraduate geology students who collect and analyze positional data for
locally-important, active landscapes develop a better sense of the critical (and
non-steady) geomorphic processes affecting landscape change. A collaborative
faculty team from three institutions (regional university, community college,
and tribal college) are acquiring and being trained on a TLS system and are
collecting baseline scans of actively evolving landscapes identified in
cooperation with local land-use agencies. The team is developing inquiry
activities for each site and for classes at each institution, and assessing
their impact using rigorous evaluation procedures. The 2-year college faculty
and students are especially interested in monitoring rapid retreat of coastal
bluffs near their campus. The tribal college faculty and students are
integrating the TLS monitoring into their BA degree program and into a high
school mentoring program with the support of the Lummi Nation School physics
teacher. The university faculty are incorporating the TLS scanning into upper
division geomorphology courses. In small research teams, students are:
partnering with a local land-use agency to identify and evaluate an actively
evolving landform; defining target zones for TLS surveying; designing and
conducting a TLS survey; conducting basic TLS data processing, including
deformation analysis with past surveys; quantifying variability in rates and
modes of landscape change at several time and length scales; and identifying
uncertainties and limits of TLS data, and their value relative to qualitative
assessments (e.g., geomorphic mapping, repeat photography, etc.). Pre- and post-
instruction data on student understanding of geological rates are being
collected. Questionnaires and interviews are designed to measure preconceptions
and then evaluate change after students complete the chronotopographic
activities. The results of this project are being disseminated through the "On
the Cutting Edge Teaching Geomorphology" web site (cross-referenced with NSDL),
and the processed chronotopographic sequences are being posted on the WWU
Landscape Observatory web site. The results of this project benefit research
universities that may already have a TLS system, and regional and liberal arts
institutions, which may be evaluating the value of incorporating this
'revolutionary' technology into their undergraduate curricula.