* 0837375
* Scaffolding Conceptually Driven Genomics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Susan Singer, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/2011
* USD 149,976.00

Engaging undergraduate students in authentic research in the classroom can
enhance development of scientific thinking. However, in a teaching laboratory
with 20 or more students, a limiting factor in student success with open-ended
research problems is instructor availability for real time, individualized
scaffolding (guiding students to higher-level thinking and complex problem
solving related to the student's research problem). This project is testing the
hypothesis that by moderately scaffolding the student research process a
carefully designed web interface tool, the "Exploring Genomics in Context
Interface" (EGCI), can support classroom instruction and facilitate authentic
research in genomics with only a modicum of faculty input. The EGCI provides an
iterative way for students to choose strategies for asking and addressing
biologically interesting questions using a range of genomics tools. It is
designed to help students develop the ability to: 1) define biologically
interesting questions that can be addressed with data, 2) relate a gene to
biological function, 3) analyze data including the aspect of quality, 4) develop
a literature-based understanding of important quantitative approaches, and 5)
test thoroughly a viable hypothesis by bringing together the literature,
classroom knowledge, and analysis of data. The project's specific research
objectives are to: 1. determine how undergraduate students' scientific thinking
skills are enhanced by an authentic research experience in the context of a
course; 2. analyze the role of scaffolding in supporting student research
success; and 3. identify generalizable components for computer-based scaffolding
of open-ended research. These are being explored using a mixed-methods research
approach to collect data that characterizes: 1) the skill level of individual
students prior to the course, developed through the course prior to the specific
assignment, and following the assignment, 2) student behavior during the
assignment (including structured observations; student reflections; and analysis
of EGCI webmetrics), and 3) the scaffolding accomplished by the faculty member
(including structured observations and reflection by the faculty members).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Genomics education is an ideal
platform on which to initiate this work because genomics, an important frontier
in modern science, provides the opportunity for students to work with large
datasets; and allows scaffolding of biological questions at multiple levels of
organization. Chamaecrista (partridge pea) and Aiptasia (model for symbiotic
corals), the organisms selected for this initial work, are ideal test subjects
because they are threatened by global climate change and evolution, are
scientifically important, and, most important for an undergraduate project, have
readily available gene sequences and appropriate supporting analysis tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Identifying general elements of
scaffolding software that support authentic student research at scale increases
opportunities for undergraduates at many institutions to develop higher order,
scientific thinking skills, meeting a national need. All curricular material,
assessment tools, and editable forms of the EGCI are being made freely available
for adoption on the Teaching Genomics website. The work is being conducted at
two different institutions - one that integrates genomics throughout the
curriculum (Carleton) and one with distinct genomics and bioinformatics courses
(Vassar), thus broadening the applicability of the efforts to other
institutions.