* 0837860
* Collaborative Research: The Diurnal Evolution of Stable Boundary Layers in an Enclosed Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Shiyuan Zhong, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2012
* USD 201,883.00

A three-year meteorological research program will be conducted to investigate
the diurnal development of the nocturnal stable boundary layer (SBL) in the
closed basin of Arizona's Meteor Crater. An extensive data set was collected
there by the Principal Investigators (PIs) under NSF funding during October
2006. The experimental design in this small, circular, and comprehensively
instrumented experimental basin has parallels to laboratory experiments. The
field campaign provided a data set uniquely suited to support innovative
analyses to answer extant scientific questions about SBL evolution within
topography. The goal of the research is to determine the physical processes
leading to SBL evolution in a closed basin, with the objectives of identifying
the roles of drainage flows, turbulence, radiative transfer, and larger-scale
ambient flows in SBL evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel and innovative
concepts are featured with analyses and modeling informed by field experience
and the PIs' initial analyses. The PIs will perform the first comprehensive
investigation of SBL asymmetries during the transition periods when differential
insolation occurs on the basin sidewalls. Hypotheses will be tested to determine
the cause of unusual SBL thermal structure evolution in the crater. The
topographic amplification factor concept will be tested for the first time with
observational data. The relative roles of slope flows, radiative transfer and
sensible heat flux in SBL development will be diagnosed. An analytical model of
self-induced katabatic flow shutdown in basins will be developed. Exploratory
investigations of turbulence characteristics will be made for the floor,
sidewalls, and rim of a basin, as well as over the surrounding plain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research will advance knowledge
and understanding of the physical processes that affect SBLs in complex terrain,
and this knowledge is expected to lead to improvements in models and,
ultimately, in weather forecasts for the western U.S. and throughout the world.
The work explores innovative approaches and concepts and uses a combination of
analyses and numerical modeling to gain understanding. Separately funded
collaborators from other institutions and countries will contribute to the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Potential benefits to society
will accrue through improved understanding of SBL evolution with potential
applications for air pollution dispersion, general and fire weather forecasting,
and climate. Broader societal impacts are promoted through the infusion of the
research into university teaching, the support of undergraduate and graduate
students, the promotion of investigator/student diversity, and the development
of training courses, workshops and seminars. Project results will be widely
disseminated through peer-reviewed scientific publications, teaching modules,
scientific presentations and web sites.&lt;br/&gt;