* 0837757
* Application and Confidence Inventories for Assessing Curricular Change in Introductory Engineering Mathematics Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Maria Terrell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 179,832.00

This project is a continuation of efforts to enhance engineering students'
abilities to transfer and apply the calculus they learn in their first year of
college to the introductory engineering courses they take in their second year.
In the course of a 2006 curriculum review, engineering faculty observed that
many students who succeed in the first year mathematics courses nonetheless have
difficulty using elementary mathematical concepts to represent physical
quantities and their relationships in their second year engineering courses.
Spurred by Engineering Curriculum Task Force recommendations, in the spring of
2007 a group of engineering and mathematics faculty began to infuse core
engineering mathematics courses with engaging and diverse problem solving
experiences, incorporating example applications from the physical sciences and
engineering. In a pilot effort in Fall 2007 these types of applications were
integrated into the first required math course in the engineering math sequence.
This was accomplished by transforming one of two weekly recitation sections into
a collaborative problem-solving session. This project is evaluating the effect
of adding these activities to the curriculum, by developing instruments to
assess students' understanding of mathematics as representative of physical
phenomena and their skill in applying mathematics to solve problems involving
physical quantities and relationships, both before and after their participation
in the problem-solving workshops; and also to assess students' confidence about
their understanding of mathematics and their ability to use mathematics to
succeed in engineering, both before and after their participation in the
problem-solving workshops. The project is also assessing whether the inclusion
of collaborative applied problem-solving in the first-year calculus courses
leads to improvement in students' abilities to apply mathematics in the core
second-year engineering courses - mechanics, dynamics, electrical circuits, and
thermodynamics. The project's central questions are exploring how curricular
changes in both content and method of instruction might enhance student ability
to apply mathematics to classical engineering applications and improve student
confidence in solving problems. Tools are being developed for assessing the
degree of integration of core math, science, and engineering content. The
project is being evaluated by an independent evaluator.