* 0837185
* Investigation of alternative conceptions about Plate Tectonics across the expert-novice continuum: When a well-known theory isn't so well known
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Jessica Smay, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 12/31/2012
* USD 214,683.00

Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating students' and experts'
conceptual understanding of plate tectonics. Because plate tectonics is the
conceptual model through which most dynamic processes on Earth are understood, a
solid understanding of the basic tenets of the model is crucial in developing
future geoscientists and a scientifically literate public. The overarching goals
for this project are to 1) highlight specific concepts that pose barriers to
students' comprehension; 2) make faculty aware of the extent of the problem by
disseminating results in presentations and journal publications; 3) investigate
whether or not the complexity, interdisciplinarity, and the continual evolution
of the plate tectonic model leads to alternative conceptions being embedded
within instructional tools, with the potential for passing these alternative
conceptions on to current undergraduate and graduate students; and, 4) improve
educational practices by making instructors aware of common alternative
conceptions held by students as well as problems with equivocal representations
in figures, and by suggesting alternative approaches to teaching about plate
tectonics using images. Lecture Tutorials are being developed that specifically
target alternative conceptions and problem areas revealed in the research. The
Lecture Tutorials will be disseminated via publication and through a faculty
workshop at a national conference. This project impacts several communities,
including geocognition researchers, faculty and students. This project is
contributing to the STEM education knowledge base by generating a unique,
comprehensive data set of plate tectonics conceptions across the expert-novice
continuum. Additionally, this work is having significant implications for future
geoscience education practice and research, by providing insight into the
importance and impact of commonly used illustrations for development of
conceptual models.