* 0837493
* BPC-DP Project ACE:    Accessible Computing Education for Visually Impaired Students
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Thomas Reichlmayr, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 11/30/2012
* USD 530,164.00

The Rochester Institute of Technology proposes to increase the participation of
students with visual impairments in computing by providing better preparation
and support for them, as well as increased professional development
opportunities for their teachers. There are four objectives: (1) increase the
number of students with visually impairments who enter computing programs at the
post-secondary level, (2) increase instructional opportunities for students are
visually impaired in grades seven through twelve, (3) increase the preparation
of computing teachers at the secondary level, and (4) provide ongoing support
for computing educators and students while the students are in secondary school
or making the transition to post-secondary education. Summer workshops and year-
round follow-up activities will be developed to provide middle and high school-
aged students with the opportunity to explore computing in a multi-modal, hands-
on environment with their parents. An annual workshop will be held to train
special education and computing educators from secondary schools. The Project
ACE website will be expanded to include a multimedia career zone to learn about
being a student and practitioner pursuing computing. In addition, a 2-day
conference for industry, STEM professionals who are visually impaired, students
and their families will be held in collaboration with the National Federation of
the Blind to explore the issues, opportunities and successes regarding
participation in computing by the visually impaired community.