* 0837315
* Activities to Support Deep and Research Oriented Learning of Host Pathogen Interactions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Daniel Stein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,956.00

(Biological Sciences 61) The University of Maryland College Park and Montgomery
County Community College, Rockville are working together in order to engage
students in deep and research oriented learning of microbiology with an emphasis
in host pathogen interactions (HPI). The project is expanding the HPI teaching
community to include faculty from community colleges; developing new activities
to engage students in research-oriented learning of HPI; creating comprehensive
teaching materials in support of these new activities; and evaluating the
effectiveness of the new HPI teaching activities. At the University of Maryland
College Park (UMCP), faculty with research and teaching expertise in the area of
HPI have formed a teaching community that is actively working on undergraduate
science education reform and has generated teaching and assessment tools (13 HPI
Concepts and a HPI Concept Inventory). The project brings the research process
and questions to the undergraduate classroom and engages students in authentic
experiences involving analysis of primary data or the generation of data from
model organisms or mock samples. The activities are being designed for use in
introductory microbiology courses offered at the UMCP and at Maryland community
colleges, but can serve as a model for other institutions. A three day planning
workshop kicks-off the year of activities designed to address the process of
science, engage a diversity of learning styles and encourage critical thinking.
Assessment of student learning utilizes an existing HPI concept inventory,
questions from a published "Views on Science and Technology in Society" survey,
and student performance in poster presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposal resides in the project's intent to engage
research faculty in taking the most interesting data and problems from their
research programs to form authentic learning activities for undergraduates. The
topics of research conducted by faculty involved in this project represent
current and pressing issues of microbiology including emerging infectious
disease, genomics, and vaccine development and offer the potential to engage
students in discussion of the societal benefits of conducting basic research.
Learning via these activities engages undergraduate students in the process of
research science by involving them in data analysis or data generation, followed
by data interpretation, and critical thinking. Senior graduate students are
collaborating with faculty in the development, implementation and assessment of
activities and developing teaching and communication skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project lie in its potential
to act as a model for development, assessment and dissemination of an effective
approach to teaching of science using student engagement in research as the
vehicle. Although the project activities concentrate on HPI, the model has the
potential to be used widely for different research topics. The project expands
the HPI UMCP community to involve community college faculty in order to widen
the reach of the activities to a broad and diverse audience. The activities
generated are being disseminated through an online digital library.