* 0837307
* Collaborative Research: Strengthening the Foundation of STEM Education for Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Tony Malaret, Seminole State College of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This project is developing a university/community college partnership between
the University of Central Florida (UCF) and Seminole Community College (SCC)
that is designed to strengthen the mathematical foundations of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) community college students. To
achieve this goal, a number of important objectives are identified: &lt;br/&gt;
1. Creating Teaching Strategies incorporates an innovative partnership between a
two-year institution and a research university through adaptation of the
infrastructure of a successful NSF funded STEP program (EXCEL) at the partnering
research university to better fit a two-year institution's setting. This is
being achieved by developing a team-taught, STEM-interdisciplinary course
sequence. The courses in this sequence are Applications of College Algebra,
Applications of Trigonometry, and Applications of Pre-Calculus.&lt;br/&gt; 2.
Developing Faculty Expertise at the community college by working jointly with
EXCEL faculty and the Faculty Center for Teaching and Learning (FCTL) at UCF.
&lt;br/&gt; 3. Creating a Learning Community of Learners and Scholars from SCC
and UCF with the common goal of enhancing the mathematics abilities of college
underclassmen through emphasizing applications of mathematics. This is further
reinforced by the creation of a center on campus for these students. At the
center students have a "home base" on campus where they may engage in group
study and receive tutoring in their mathematics and applications of mathematics
coursework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The collaborative effort
is designed to implement and test educational practices at the community
college, modeled after the EXCEL program. The effect of this educational model
applied to diverse environments of learners and scholars (SCC and UCF)
contributes to the knowledge base of undergraduate STEM education and advances
identification of best practices in teaching mathematical applications to
diverse student populations (community college and university students).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The university/community college
partnership established in this project is intended to be a pilot program for
future implementation at other universities in partnership with neighboring
community colleges to improve mathematical foundations of STEM undergraduates.
Because a significant number of the nation's community college students are from
groups underrepresented in STEM fields, similar programs at community colleges
all over the nation would broaden STEM participation among underrepresented
groups.