* 0837192
* Enhancing Student Engagement in the Analytical Process and Scientific Inquiry in the Chemistry Curriculum at Concordia College
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Graeme Wyllie, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,700.00

Chemistry(12) This project is integrating inquiry-based experiences into two
high-profile chemistry courses to promote student learning, engagement, and
excitement toward science. The Analytical Chemistry laboratory is focusing on
three primary goals: development of laboratory skills, enhancement of
proficiency with analytical instrumentation, and engagement in the process of
critical analysis. In the first half of the course, students are developing
laboratory skills and instrumental proficiency by rotating through six different
instruments performing quantitative analyses of unknowns. In the second half of
the course, pairs of students are using these skills to design and perform a
quantitative chemical analysis of a real-world sample. The students are
responsible for directing each step in the analytical process: sample
collection, sample preparation, data acquisition, data interpretation,
conclusion formation, and information dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small
groups of students in the General Chemistry II laboratory are engaging in mini-
research projects focused on an issue of relevance - the fate of pharmaceuticals
in natural waters. In the first half of the course students are carrying out
experiments that prepare them for their research projects. Then in the second
half of the course, each group is developing a hypothesis, creating and carrying
out an experimental plan for hypothesis testing, evaluating their results, and
presenting their conclusions. This project is adapting established models of
inquiry-based laboratory instruction and implementing them into two popular
courses to excite and educate the next generation of scientists. Assessment
outcomes will be of interest to educators across the sciences, because
stimulating student learning, interest, and excitement are objectives shared by
all.