* 0837925
* History of, and Mechanisms Leading to, Post-LGM Retreat of the West Antarctic
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* John Anderson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 09/30/2013
* USD 426,939.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;PI: John B. Anderson&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0837925&lt;br/&gt;Title: History of, and Mechanisms Leading to, Post-LGM Retreat
of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The West
Antarctic Ice Sheet is believed to be vulnerable to climate change as it is
grounded below sea level, is drained by rapidly flowing ice streams and is
fringed by floating ice shelves subject to melting by incursions of relatively
warm Antarctic circumpolar water. Currently, the most rapidly thinning glaciers
in Antarctica occur in the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Sea sectors. This study
seeks to place the present day observations into a longer-term geological
context. Mechanisms that led to the retreat of the ice sheet from the West
Antarctic continental shelf since the last glacial maximum will be investigated.
This study will build on a number of previous investigations and fill in key
data gaps in the region. Bathymetric mapping and direct sampling of relict
glacial features on the continental shelves of the Bellingshausen (Marguerite
Bay), Amundsen (Pine Island Bay) and eastern Ross Seas will be conducted via
dedicated science time on the Swedish Icebreaker Oden. Sites for Kasten coring
will be selected on the basis of detailed swath mapping. Radiocarbon dating of
glaciomarine deposits in the new and existing cores will refine the timing of
retreat events. Geomorphic features of paleo ice streams such as grounding line
wedges and ice scours will be examined to assess whether the retreat occurred
continuously and/or episodically. Sediments will be examined for paleontological
evidence of warm ocean water intrusions during retreat as well as for mineral
evidence of possible melt water origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project is collaborative with colleagues from the US,
Sweden, the UK, France, Japan and Poland. It will entail the training of three
PhD students at Rice University and so afford them international field work
experience. One of these will be transitioning to post-doc status in the course
of this project. An undergraduate student will also be involved in the fieldwork
phase of the research. The PI expects to continue to be active in Rice
University's Houston area high school teacher outreach program as well as a
separate program to convey science to elderly people confined in assisted living
and retirement facilities.