* 0837990
* Record of the 17O-excess of H2O in the WAIS Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2013
* USD 376,672.00

Steig/0837990&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to obtain a
~100,000-year record of 17O-excess from the WAIS Divide ice core, currently
being drilled in West Antarctica. To date, a 17O-excess record has been obtained
only on one ice core ? from Vostok. WAIS Divide is appealing for comparison with
Vostok because it is located in a very different moisture transport regime, and
will be influenced by potentially quite different changes in sea ice and
atmospheric circulation. The intellectual merit of the work is that 17O-excess,
obtained from the high-precision measurement of both 18O/16O and 17O/16O in ice
core H2O, provides information highly complementary to deuterium excess which is
used to provide useful insight into past climate conditions because of its
dependence on evaporative conditions at the ocean surface source regions where
polar precipitation is ultimately derived. Unlike deuterium excess, 17O-excess
is independent of source temperature, and is only weakly influenced by
fractionation during transport from source to ice sheet. 17O-excess therefore
offers great potential, in combination with traditional measurements, as a
powerful new tool for evaluating climate conditions in the past. In particular,
it provides the opportunity to disentangle the effects of source humidity, wind
speed, and temperature, local site temperature and fractionation during
transport, on ice core water isotope records. The broader impacts of the work
are that it contributes to the development of infrastructure and expertise
needed both for glaciology and paleoclimatology, as well as for other research
areas. A graduate student will work on both the method development and the
analysis and interpretation of the ice core profile, providing plenty of
material for a well-rounded and novel Ph.D. thesis.