* 0837640
* Introduction of a Guided-inquiry Curriculum in Organic Chemistry by Means of Microwave-assisted Synthesis
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2012
* Shaun Murphree, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 11/30/2012
* USD 135,302.00

Chemistry(12) A sophomore organic laboratory curriculum based on microwave-
mediated synthesis is being developed, in which the conceptual link between
laboratory and classroom is strengthened. Guided-inquiry laboratory activities
are also being created to increase conceptual learning and foster the
development of practitioner knowledge. In addition to the acquisition of the
necessary microwave reactors, the project is providing for faculty-student
collaborative development of curriculum materials. A thoroughgoing evaluation of
the project learning outcomes is being conducted by an external
evaluator.&lt;br/&gt; The project is addressing the great need for robust, safe,
and user-friendly procedures to use in a typical sophomore organic laboratory.
Furthermore, while other investigators have reported on the successful
introduction of guided-inquiry components into the organic laboratory
curriculum, the current proposal is embarking on the first major undertaking to
capitalize on the advantages of microwave-assisted synthesis in creating a more
student-centered laboratory experience. In addition, this program is generating
new knowledge in the realm of teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt; The acquisition
of the microwave equipment is establishing a regional center of expertise and
infrastructure in microwave chemistry, available to the many colleges and small
universities within a 50-mile radius of Allegheny, and an existing junior high
science enrichment program is benefiting from the equipment. Student and
instructor materials are being collected into a virtual lab manual. The
curriculum materials, as well as the new knowledge on teaching and learning
acquired from assessment, is being shared with the broader community at cross-
cutting conferences on chemistry and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;