* 0837910
* Collaborative Research:  Testing a New Concept for the Long-term Build-up to Coronal Mass Ejections
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Paul Bellan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 11/30/2012
* USD 120,000.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) has assembled an international collaboration to
test whether coronal mass ejection (CME) build-up can be ascribed to a four-
stage process of magnetic field evolution that ultimately leads to the
triggering of a CME. This four stage process consists of (1) canceling of
magnetic fields along a polarity reversal boundary; (2) formation of a filament
channel concurrent with the ascent of horizontal magnetic field into the
chromosphere from cancellation sites; (3) thread-by-thread formation of a
filament magnetic field and visible filament when the filament channel attains
maximum development; and finally, (4) thread-by-thread building of the filament
cavity magnetic field as mass drains from the visible threads, thereby
incrementally releasing filament magnetic field into the cavity magnetic field
until one of many possible triggering mechanisms initiates the CME.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's team will examine these distinct stages and the
mechanisms linking them, taking advantage of the synergy offered by new
observations, data analysis, numerical modeling, analytic theory, and laboratory
plasma experiments. The PI's team expects this project to provide a greatly
improved understanding of how CMEs originate and evolve. This improved knowledge
of the CME environment is needed to develop predictive tools so that critical
space weather events can be accurately forecast.