* 0837526
* Achieving Student Mastery of Chromatographic and Spectroscopic Methods in Organic Chemistry through a University/Community College Partnership
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* William Whaley, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 05/31/2013
* USD 181,192.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use the
Professional Development Experiences at the university setting to improve the
participation of 2-year undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds in their
pursuit of both undergraduate and graduate degrees in chemistry. Many community
college students who transfer to four-year institutions are not adequately
prepared to fully integrate into the learning environment and benefit from a
first research experience. The program represents a partnership amongst Texas
A&amp;M University-Commerce and two community colleges, Collin College and
Northeast Texas Community College, representing urban/suburban and rural areas,
respectively. The partnership will promote comparable training of students in
organic chemistry with respect to using instrument-based chromatographic and
spectroscopic methods. Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce students will be peer
mentors to the community college students throughout the project, including the
Professional Development Experiences and follow-up activities, both via email
and on-site visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance knowledge and
understanding by exposing undergraduate students to hands-on research
experiences in organic chemistry. Community college students will master
techniques of chromatography and spectroscopy. Using peer-mentoring strategies
and professional scientist presentations, this project represents a potentially
transformative model of innovative educational strategies. Additionally, it will
not only encourage undergraduate and underrepresented students from community
colleges to promote discovery and learning in organic chemistry, but it will
also benefit society by serving as a model for similar community college and
university partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;