* 0837340
* Case-Based E-Learning for Solving Real-World Engineering Design Problems: Nurturing Epistemic Growth for Second Year College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Nadia Kellam, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 02/29/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is applying web-based
technologies and learning theories in a case-based learning context to help
future engineers experience real-world engineering design problems in a
sophomore design course. This is helping students to understand the complex and
context-bounded nature of engineering problem-solving, to apply their scientific
knowledge to design practices, to build justification and argumentation skills
in the context of engineering design, and to evaluate and reflect upon their
design process and products. The approach is based on the construct of personal
epistemology, and it focuses on open-mindedness, justification, and
argumentation skills and on reflective thinking since these factors are strongly
related to students' innovative ability in solving engineering problems. The
evaluation effort is using an analysis of student writings and questionnaires to
monitor improvements in students' ill-defined problem solving skills and their
epistemic growth. The investigators are disseminating their material and results
through conference presentations, journal publications, postings on their
institution's website and on the Case-Based e-Learning website. Broader impacts
include the dissemination of their material and results and the increased
student awareness of societal issues in an engineering context.