* 0837717
* Collaborative Proposal:   BPC-DP:   Incorporating Cultural Tools for Math and Computing Concepts into the Boys and Girls Clubs of America
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2013
* Valerie Taylor, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 11/30/2013
* USD 210,000.00

Texas A&amp;M University, in collaboration with Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
and Auburn University, proposes to use culturally responsive approaches to
attract and retain high school students to computer science. They will expand
two frameworks that have been developed for math education into computing
education. The AADMLSS City Stroll (African American Distributed Multiple
Learning Styles System) and CSDT (Culturally Situated Design Tools) are
interactive environments that use culturally relevant cues to teach math.
AADMLSS City Stroll system is a game-like environment that includes instruction,
practice, and assessment. CSDTs are web-based applets, based on
ethnomathematics, that is, the mathematical knowledge embedded in cultural
designs such as cornrow hairstyles, Native American beadwork, Latino percussion
rhythms, etc. The essential idea of CSDTs is one of translating knowledge from
informal to formal systems. The goals of the proposed project are: (1) to assist
the efforts to extend the work on these math educational tools to include
computing; (2) to develop a institutional "pipeline" such that K-12 students
successfully participating in these activities can maximize their odds of
entering undergraduate programs in computing; and (3) extend the current work
with CSDTs and AADMLSS, from the local or regional scale to the national scale,
by incorporating it into the Boys and Girls Clubs of America (BGCA).