* 0837496
* Inquiry Based Learning Modules for Atmospheric Science Using Student-Accessible Modeling Tools
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Timothy VanReken, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,774.00

Atmospheric Sciences (41)

This project is improving students' understanding of what it means to do science
by introducing inquiry-based learning modules into several courses offered
within Washington State University's (WSU) atmospheric chemistry program and is
part of a comprehensive strategic effort to improve WSU's atmospheric research
and air quality engineering program. The specific objectives of the project
include: 1) developing student-accessible modeling tools for atmospheric
chemistry; 2) creating and implementing inquiry-based learning modules for using
the new modeling tools throughout the atmospheric science program at WSU; 3)
assessing the impact of this approach on student conceptual understanding of
non-linear system dynamics in science and engineering; and 4) dissemination of
these new learning tools to the broader community. Objectives 1 and 2 include
producing new course materials to enhance student learning. High quality
research models for atmospheric chemistry and aerosol processes already are
available, but their interfaces often require more expertise than can be
expected of undergraduates. New web-based interfaces for these models are being
built to make the interfaces more accessible to students in introductory
courses. Inquiry-based learning modules using these tools are being developed
for seven other courses that span the atmospheric chemistry program, including
courses taken by advance undergraduates and graduate students. The assessment of
the effectiveness of the project activities on student learning uses a
combination of approaches, including clinical demonstration interviews, in-class
observations of students, analyses of student work, and pre- and post-testing.
The combination of evaluation approaches should allow the learning modules to be
iteratively improved to make them more effective classroom tools and yield
useful data for increasing the STEM education knowledge base. It is anticipated
that the framework for introducing inquiry-based learning modules will be
adapted by other programs within and outside of WSU. The modeling tools and
learning modules developed as part of this project are being distributed freely
over the Internet. The proposed work also is supporting the student training
goals of NSF by involving a graduate student in the educational research and
learning outcomes assessment and the participation of two undergraduate summer
researchers in the development and testing of the student-accessible modeling
tools.