* 0837075
* Computing in Life Sciences Through Hands-on Experience and Case Studies at Tuskegee University
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Danielle Gray-Singh, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/2010
* USD 110,024.00

Biology has changed from an insular entity into a science dependant upon
interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary approaches. At the Tuskegee University
(TU) and many institutions of higher education integration of bioinformatics and
computational skills into the biology undergraduate curricula is an enterprise
still in its infancy. This project advances that enterprise through development
of a two-course sequence and five modules on bioinformatics and computing. These
emphasize computational thinking and skills, provide students with hands-on
experiences and a collaborative learning environment based on case studies and
team projects, and rely on new learning enhancement software tools,
instructional materials and lab manuals developed specifically for this project.
Case study examples include identifying the alleles and paralogs of disease
resistance genes in the sweet potato genome and mutation probablility and
frequency during aging in the yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The intellectual merit of this project lies in its initiative to develop
materials and methods for teaching computational thinking to students in life
sciences, its effort to develop comprehensive computer laboratory exercises that
offer hands-on learning experience for the targeted student pool, and a case-
study course design that challenges students to solve interesting problems in a
collaborative learning environment. The project is designed to: promote
excitement about computing in the minds of students in the life sciences; lead
to student growth through interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary experiences;
encourage students to apply computation in their individual research projects;
and cultivate student interest in pursuing research careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The newly developed modules,
instructional materials and educational software tools are impacting more than
100 students per year at TU, a historically black college. The courses developed
are being offered as science electives to students in the Department of Computer
Science and to bioinformatics concentrators in the Department of Chemistry. The
broader impacts of this project include student experiences, curricula
improvement, faculty development, and the potential for adoption and adaptation
by other institutions of the material and the way it is being integrated into
courses. The activities are also increasing faculty collaboration among the
departments of Biology, Computer Science, Chemistry, and Agricultural and
Environmental Sciences. In addition, the modular nature of the developed
teaching materials is facilitating their dissemination outside of TU, thus
enhancing the curricula at other institutions. The reliance on R, an open-source
cross-platform computing environment, and other open-source software is
contributing to the broader impacts of this project. Dissemination of the
generated teaching materials is being facilitated by a dedicated website
http://bioinformatics.org/ctls/ (Computational Thinking in Life Sciences),
developed and maintained by the PI.