* 0837259
* Creating and Implementing a Concept Inventory-Based Diagnostic Tool to Improve Undergraduate GIS Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Joseph Szakas, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Geology (42) This project is improving GIS education by uncovering student
misconceptions. Drawing on the notions of concept inventories first developed in
the Force Concept Inventory, and using techniques developed by education
researchers in other STEM disciplines, a concept-based diagnostic tool is being
developed to measure student learning across the wide array of disciplines in
which GIS is taught. The instrument is being used to identify the misconceptions
preventing students from attaining geospatial literacy as defined in the
Geospatial Information Science and Technology Body of Knowledge (BOK). Project
activities include: 1) mapping the BOK concept inventory to the existing
statewide GIS curriculum; 2) developing an assessment instrument to identify
misconceptions impairing students' understanding of these concepts; 3)
identifying successful strategies for overcoming the misconception; and 4)
integrating the successful strategies in classrooms and laboratories to improve
and update existing GIS curriculum materials. This project is responsive to a
call to action by the National Research Council and numerous professional bodies
including the University Consortium for GIS and the Association of American
Geographers. The project findings are enabling GIS educators to address the
problem of student underperformance and positively impact teaching in the ever
widening array of fields in which GIS is now regarded as indispensable.