* 0837151
* Sustainability Engineering and Ecological Design Learning Partnership (SEED-LP)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Melanie Dupuis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 06/30/2012
* USD 147,303.00

Interdisciplinary - (99)

This project is an effort between faculty in the social sciences, environmental
sciences and engineering to create interdisciplinary undergraduate courses and
labs in the area of sustainable engineering and ecological design at the
University of California Santa Cruz. The project is part of a larger
institutional effort to develop a curriculum in sustainable engineering and
ecological design that educates students from a broad range of disciplines in
the principles and practices of the planning, development and deployment of
technological and social systems and institutions that can meet the immediate
resource needs of society while protecting ecological systems. The investigators
are creating two specialized courses, one in Technological Literacy and one in
Social-Institutional Literacy. The course in Technological Literacy provides
instruction in the quantitative aspects of sustainable science and engineering
with an emphasis on problem solving to students in the social sciences and
humanities. The course in Social-Institutional Literacy provides instruction in
social science concepts relevant to sustainability issues to students in the
physical sciences and engineering. The project also includes three hands-on
laboratories focusing on renewable energy sources, green building and
agroecology and permaculture. The educational materials and evaluation and
assessment results are being disseminated through a website and through both
disciplinary and educational conferences and journals. The courses developed in
this project are expected to have a significant female enrollment.