* 0837225
* The VIP Program -  Integrating Undergraduate Design Projects and Graduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Edward Coyle, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2012
* USD 67,268.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, a collaboration
between Georgia Institute of Technology and Purdue University, is developing and
evaluating vertically-integrated projects (VIP) that support multidisciplinary
teams of undergraduates working on design projects embedded in the research
efforts pursued by faculty members and their graduate students. The project is
expanding the existing Purdue effort and initiating a new program at Georgia
Institute of Technology. The design of the VIP program utilizes large,
vertically-integrated teams and long-term, for-credit, design experiences
similar to those developed in the EPICS program. The investigators are creating
multi-site collaborative VIP efforts and developing and sharing course modules
to enable students joining VIP teams to come up to speed quickly on the
technologies fundamental to their design projects. The evaluation effort, led by
an independent expert, is using student and faculty surveys and interviews along
with social network analysis to monitor the project's progress. Instructional
materials and evaluation results are being disseminated through a discipline
specific website (i. e., the ConneXions site), through conference presentation,
and through journal publications. Broader impacts include the dissemination of
the project's materials and results, particularly the social network data on
student and faculty experiences and collaboration patterns, along with a special
focus on the project's impact on women and underrepresented minorities in the
evaluation study.