* 0837779
* Multimodal Modules for Inquiry-Based Statics and Dynamics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Javier Kypuros, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 199,974.00

Engineering Mechanical - (56)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students struggle
to conceptualize Statics and Dynamics fundamentals because it is difficult to
visualize the effects of external loads on physical systems and intuitively
comprehend the static or dynamic response of such systems. Traditionally,
Engineering Mechanics courses have been primarily lecture-based with little
experimentation or discovery. This project will develop and assess scalable
inquiry-based, multimodal (i.e. incorporating multiple modes of physical or
virtual interaction) Statics and Dynamics modules designed to reinforce and
demystify concepts through using enhanced discovery and experimentation
strategies. The course modules are designed to target students who enter college
with limited proficiency in Calculus and Physics. This project devises
relatively simple, 30-45 minute exercises that incorporate semi-open-ended
problems within lecture courses or as part of a homework assignment. The
problems are designed to address common misconceptions which can, more often
than not, be dispelled without the need for seemingly complex mathematical
proofs. Though the primary focus will be Statics and Dynamics, the modules are
scalable to enable use in introductory courses such as Introduction to
Mechanical Engineering and Physics I and high school courses such as Physics and
Calculus. Successful development, implementation, and evaluation will enable
widespread use of inquiry-based, multimodal modules at other institutions and in
other disciplines.