* 0837388
* An Atmospheric Science Laboratory for Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Katja Friedrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 01/31/2012
* USD 144,359.00

Atmospheric Sciences (41)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two modules are being developed
for "Weather and the Atmosphere" and "Analysis of Climate and Weather
Observations". These two courses are part of the undergraduate curricula in the
Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences at the University of Colorado.
The primary motivation behind this effort is to provide students with
opportunities for 'hands-on' experiences using environmental sensors and data.
This project is using rooftop laboratory instruments and measurements of
fundamental parameters to help students understand radiative processes in the
Earth's atmosphere and to investigate key elements of the hydrological cycle. At
the introductory undergraduate level students are becoming familiar with
environmental sensors and their operation and are being introduced to
applications of data on a phenomenological level. Upper-division undergraduate
students are using these data to develop a quantitative understanding of the
radiative energy budget at the surface, to compare with model simulations, and
to gain a practical understanding of instrument and measurement theory, sensor
calibration, and measurement uncertainties. The progress and effectiveness of
this project is being determined by external evaluators at the University of
Colorado. The evaluation approach involves a series of formative and summative
tools (both qualitative and quantitative) and is intended to help determine the
impact of the proposed curriculum on participating students.