* 0837131
* AMS Survey of Web-based Assessment and Testing in Mathematics Departments
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Alan Tucker, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 90,223.00

Mathematical Sciences (21) This project is studying the growing use of Web-based
Assessment and Testing Software (WATS) in mathematics departments at leading
universities. In recent years, several mathematics departments and programs have
taken these computer-based homework systems out of the experimental category,
and they are using them with thousands of students. There is solid education
research backing up the instinctive belief of mathematicians that one learns
mathematics by doing it, i.e., by solving a large number of different sorts of
problems, usually as homework. Computer-based homework systems have the
potential to make a major impact on student learning for a comparatively modest
investment. One of the strongest cases for computer-based homework is at the
many universities that lack the resources to grade homework in large freshman
courses and resort to short weekly quizzes based on suggested homework
assignments. In cases where hand-grading of homework is not possible, the
instant feedback and individualized assignments (e.g., different numbers in each
student's version of a problem) of a WATS have obvious value in terms of
improved learning and reduced copying, respectively. Increasingly, other
university and college mathematics departments are going to be expected to
consider the use of WATS. The American Mathematical Society is collecting,
analyzing and disseminating information about WATS for undergraduate mathematics
courses, with special attention to freshman-level courses. This 18-month effort
will result in an AMS on-line publication that will be designed to help
mathematics departments make more informed choices about whether to use
computer-based homework systems. If a department's decision is positive, the
study will help that department decide which system to use. If a department's
decision is negative, the study will give that department a well-articulated
reason for the rejection of computer-based homework. To these ends, the survey
will collect information about how computer-based homework affects student
learning. This survey will lead to a report that distills the experiences of
mathematics departments using computer-based homework systems and gives their
intellectual and practical merits, as well as drawbacks, for student learning.