* 0837049
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing the Geosciences Curriculum Using GeoBrowsers-based Learning Objects
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Steven Whitmeyer, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 05/31/2011
* USD 50,704.00

The project is creating computer resources and associated lesson plans to aid
undergraduate students in visualizing geology using Google Earth (TM) and will
assess learning with real research data versus textbook simplifications.
Students nationwide will be able to investigate concepts of vast geologic scale
and deep geologic time via the familiar interface of Google Earth, and thereby
gain a sense of technological empowerment. Interactive models are being
developed to show a variety of geologic features, such as mountains, tectonic
faults, volcanoes, mineral deposits, and hydrocarbon traps, that emerge from the
sub-surface when students drag the mouse across their computer monitors. By
studying paleogeographic restorations draped over the Google Earth surface in
association with representative rock and mineral specimens, students have a
unique affordance to understand the geological timescale. Logging of mouse and
keyboard actions in test classes are being used to evaluate the systematicity of
student learning.&lt;br/&gt;Focus groups of college professors in teaching-
intensive 2- and 4-year colleges will attend workshops on lesson plan design
suited to state and local needs. They will test the learning objects and serve
as an advisory board. Two larger-scale studies are assessing matched cohorts
(students in different classes who have the same professor and whose GPAs, etc.,
are roughly equivalent). Tests will identify student misconceptions and will
include transfer-type questions in which students have to generalize
wisely.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Learning objects from this project are
promoting undergraduate comprehension of geology and geophysics and a more
complete understanding of Planet Earth with the aid of 4-D interactive globes
that hyperlink to research data. Mindful of research findings on how students
learn via technology, it is predicted that the project will significantly
improve the knowledge and skills of the next generation of geoscientists.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The development and use of innovative visualization
materials in both introductory and upper-level geoscience courses are advancing
discovery and understanding of the nature of science and scientific
investigations among a wide and diverse population of students. The availability
of these materials for free download will promote broad
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;