* 0837133
* Integration  of  Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy into the Chemistry  Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Joseph Rugutt, Columbus State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is incorporating
modern instrumentation into the educational program of students at Columbus
State University (CSU) and Chattahoochee Valley Community College (CVCC).
Laboratory sections of chemistry courses are being redesigned to include
discovery-based instructional modules that use spectroscopic and computational
techniques. Successful laboratory experiments and methods are being adapted and
implemented; these experiments have been endorsed by the NSF New Traditions
Chemistry Initiative, centered at the University of Wisconsin, and others have
been published in the educational chemical literature, primarily the Journal of
Chemical Education. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the
centerpiece of this discovery-based approach, with students given exposure to
NMR theory and applications in their first course. At CVCC new experiments also
are being incorporated into a biology laboratory course. At CSU faculty build
increasingly more detailed uses of NMR to explain basic chemical principles in
advanced courses, including organic, inorganic, analytical, biochemistry,
physical chemistry, and research courses. Students synthesize these experiences
in a research course, using a molecular modeling program. The 90 MHz NMR serves
as a workhorse instrument for general, organic, analytical, inorganic, and
physical chemistry laboratory courses. A community of STEM scholars form a peer
advisory panel that is developing and evaluating the impact of discovery-based
instruction on students' understanding of the chemical principles. The project
has been designed to promote at both CSU and CVCC the development of skills in
the areas of critical thinking, problem-solving, knowledge management, and
assessment of performance. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Columbus State University
is located about 100 miles southwest of Atlanta. The student body is
predominantly female (60%). The integration of modern techniques into STEM
education is giving the students the preparation necessary to be successful in
scientific careers in academia, industry, and government. At least 589 CSU
undergraduates (science majors) are expected to participate in the proposed
project per year, while faculty and students from CVCC benefit from their
revised curriculum. CSU's outreach mission continues to strengthen ongoing
collaborations with Auburn University (AL), Cott Beverages Inc. (GA), National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory (FL), and two Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (i.e., Clark Atlanta University and Southern University A&amp;M
College, LA). Other broader impacts of the proposed project include: 1)
improvement of the educational and technical quality of laboratory and research
experiences for STEM students and educators in the community served by CSU and
CVCC; 2) exposing STEM students to spectroscopic and computational technologies;
and 3) enhancing research opportunities for CSU's faculty and students. The
results from the project will be disseminated locally and to the broader
chemical education community through presentations at ACS meetings, publication
in peer-reviewed journals, and posting at CSU's website.&lt;br/&gt;