* 0837555
* Curriculum for Accelerated Services Engineering (CASE)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jayashree Ramanathan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,981.00

Software Engineering (34)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
developing the new skills needed of IT workers - skills in systems integration
and evolution rather than system development, "services engineering" rather than
the traditional "software engineering."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves: 1) Organizing this material into a curriculum that communicates both
the problem context and the problem solving to undergraduates; 2) Creating a
four-course track in services engineering that can be incorporated in any
undergraduate Computer Science program; and 3) Establishing a process of
continuous improvement though community-building activities. As part of this
track development, a set of benchmark or reference enterprise applications is
built that are representative of the complexity found in extant enterprise
systems, and serve as an exemplar enterprise system for the curricular material,
as well as the core on which laboratory assignments for the above courses are
based. This curriculum is rigorously assessed and validated internally, and
validated externally by offering this material through an equivalent set of
three short courses to industry professionals, and getting their
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The process of direct
engagement with industry has resulted in knowledge creation relevant to the
management of complex enterprise systems and services. This experiential
knowledge combined with project assets is organized and integrated into a
curriculum teachable to undergraduates that move into the workforce. In addition
to the curriculum creation itself, also unique is the two-fold assessment
process. Because this curriculum is intended to make better practitioners, it is
offered (in addition to the classroom setting) directly to industry
professionals, for their assessment and evaluation of the impact to their
capabilities and their on-the-job performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: The immediate dissemination plan is to help incorporate this curriculum
within partner institutions. The materials created also enable other
institutions to create their own services engineering courses.