* 0837637
* Introducing Undergraduates to Complex Systems through Rapid-prototyping of Low-cost, Networked Mobile Robots
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Chandrasekhar Nataraj, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 01/31/2013
* USD 149,995.00

Computer Engineering (32)&lt;br/&gt;The use of mobile robotics in teaching has
the potential to be revolutionized by advances in four areas: (a)
computationally powerful target hardware; (b) modern Automatic Code Generation
tools which allow these devices to be programmed directly from high-level Matlab
/ Simulink-based designs; (c) the built-in networking capabilities of these
devices, which enables groups of robots to interact with one another in complex
ways; (d) increasingly interdisciplinary approaches to dealing with this
complexity. This project realizes this potential by bringing all these
components together in a series of exemplary Laboratory Modules, programmed
directly from the Matlab / Simulink environment, and autoCoded for
implementation on either i) the Lego MindStorms NXT for simple algorithms, or
ii) the Nokia N800 Internet Tablet for more demanding applications. To project
involves first developing and deploying the necessary software and hardware
tools to enable rapid prototyping for these specific target devices, and then
exploiting the capabilities it provides to develop new Laboratory Modules which
enhance the curriculum. The versatility of the resultant toolset, and its
ability to address the educational needs of students in different disciplines
and at different stages of their educational growth is demonstrated in the
variety of Laboratory Modules which include a search and rescue project, mobile
self-balancing robots, robotic evolution, and dynamic multi-robot
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project produces the following student
learning outcomes:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Students learn more efficiently and can more
fully realize the benefits of using robots in the curriculum because they are
free to focus on higher level pedagogical aims rather than low level
implementation detail.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Students are able to understand and harness
the complex engineering and social system formed by groups of robots which
interact with one another through their in-built sound, vision, WiFi and
Bluetooth networking capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Students from different
disciplines and non-computer engineering or computer science backgrounds are
able to participate effectively in solving complex mobile robotics-based
problems using methods from Cognitive Science, Biology, Mechanical, Electrical
and Computer Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;(d) Students are able to use autoCoding
methods to implement algorithms in embedded computers and are better prepared
for the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;These assertions are rigorously evaluated by an
advisory group of robotics and educational experts from the Academic, Industrial
and K-12 STEM community.