* 0837878
* Nonlinear Theory of Anomalous Resistivity for Buneman Instability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Peter Yoon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 06/30/2012
* USD 210,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines a theoretical and
numerical study of one of the mechanisms that may initiate magnetic reconnection
in a geomagnetic substorm. The general mechanism is an enhancement in the
electrical resistivity of the plasma brought on by a plasma instability. The
effective electrical resistivity is referred to as "anomalous resistivity."
Magnetic reconnection is one of the most important research topics in
contemporary space plasma physics. Although it is at the core of many
astrophysical, space, and magnetospheric processes, there are still many issues
associated with this fundamental process that have yet to be understood. The
onset process and the mechanism which breaks the frozen-in-flux condition are
among them. It is widely recognized that the anomalous resistivity that arises
from small-scale kinetic plasma instabilities is one of the crucial factors that
can lead to the onset of reconnection by breaking the magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
frozen-in-flux condition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of the many possible plasma
instabilities relevant for collisionless reconnection, this project will focus
on the Farley-Buneman (FB) instability (also known as the two-stream
instability). Theoretical computation of anomalous resistivity in the literature
has been limited to quasilinear formalism. However, recent numerical simulations
show that numerically tabulated anomalous resistivity from FB instability can be
orders of magnitude higher than the theoretical prediction. This shows that
nonlinear theory is called for. This project develops a self-consistent
nonlinear theory of anomalous resistivity for the FB instability. The customary
text book theory is inapplicable for the FB instability since it is a reactive
instability. The project will perform a quantitative analysis based upon the
nonlinear theory, and compare the theoretical results with results from
numerical simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In view of the importance of
anomalous resistivity phenomena for a variety of problems in magnetospheric and
solar-terrestrial physics, astrophysics, and even laboratory plasma physics, the
research will have far-reaching consequences. From the perspective of
fundamental plasma physics, the research will lead to a new way of analyzing
nonlinear stages of plasma instabilities. The plasma kinetic theory developed by
the early pioneers of modern plasma physics is valid only for weakly unstable
kinetic instabilities. In plasmas, kinetic instabilities form only a small
subset of problems. More general reactive instabilities are important for many
situations, and are far more prevalent. For this important class of
instabilities, there is currently no theory to analyze their fully nonlinear
behavior. Even though the immediate goal of this research is to investigate only
the nonlinear phase of the Farley-Buneman instability, the underlying nonlinear
theory will be valid for any reactive instability.