* 0837531
* BE/CNH: Biodiversity Dynamics and Land-Use Changes in the Amazon: Multi-Scale Interactions Between Ecological Systems and Resource-Use Decisions by Indigenous Peoples
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2007,09/30/2011
* Jose Manuel Fragoso, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2011
* USD 1,192,518.00

Debate surrounding resource use and conservation by indigenous peoples has
shifted away from tests of the "noble savage" hypothesis of the 1970s and 1980s
towards analysis of the multiple social, economic, and biological factors that
affect the sustainability of resource use. Hunting practices in particular among
many indigenous groups are probably strongly regulated by internal controls,
based on a combination of spiritual beliefs (cosmology), social rituals, and
natural history knowledge. Despite the evidence for the key role of cosmology in
regulating resource use, most work on game overexploitation and the abandonment
of traditional hunting practices by indigenous peoples, particularly in the
Neotropics of Central America and northern South America, has focused on the
effects of market integration and ignored spiritual and other cultural
practices. This research project will test the fundamental hypothesis that
retention of traditional practices and cosmology by indigenous societies buffers
them against the process of integration into the national society, thereby
preventing biodiversity and ecosystem degradation by the indigenous societies
themselves. This hypothesis will be evaluated by quantifying resource-use
practices and biodiversity status among communities of one ethnic group that
differ in their degree of retention of traditional cosmology and practices. The
project will be based in the 1.7 million-hectare Raposa Indigenous Area in the
northern Brazilian Amazon. The dynamics of hunting by the Macuxi people of this
region offer an excellent system for bridging theory and practice in the study
of complexity. Hunting practices and degree of integration to Brazilian society
vary among 206 villages distributed across the heterogeneous landscape in
Raposa. A mechanistic model of animal population dynamics and human hunting
practices will be developed and tested using quantitative and qualitative
approaches. Socioeconomic data, wildlife data, and remotely sensed data will be
collected, integrated, and analyzed within a geographic information system. In
addition to a better understanding of human-biodiversity linkages in indigenous
areas, outcomes of this project will include (1) educational materials for the
Macuxi and the institutions that work with them, (2) a distance-linked graduate
seminar in which students collaborate across departments, campuses and
disciplines, (3) broadening of the participation of women and minority students
in science, and (4) enhancement of the infrastructure for science by linking
institutions with different areas of specialty into a teaching and research
network that will benefit students who would normally have access only to their
own institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the
development of effective development policies and biodiversity conservation and
will help provide theoretical background for coupled human-natural systems in
the subsistence or semi-subsistence societies that characterize much of tropics.
Research results will be relevant to discussions on the role of overkill by low
technology hunters in Pleistocene extinctions and the synergistic effects of
environmental conditions and forms of social organization and decision making on
the intensity of natural resource depletion. The results will be particularly
germane for the ongoing debate on the role of "people in parks" and on the
contribution that indigenous peoples will make to biodiversity conservation
worldwide. The geographical location of this study is significant unto itself.
Roraima covers a large portion of the unstudied and largely unmanaged high
diversity Guiana Shield forest-savanna transition. The area, which grades from
dry savannas through mesic and wet forests to montane cloud forest and tepui
habitats, represents one of the last wilderness areas on Earth. For this key
ecological area, the future of biodiversity lies in the hands of indigenous
peoples. This study will provide key insights regarding how the internal
cultural dynamics of indigenous societies influence and are influenced by
biodiversity patterns and ecosystem function, with implications for human-
environment interactions in Raposa and elsewhere where indigenous peoples retain
an important presence. This project is supported by an award resulting from the
FY 2005 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;