* 0837946
* Physiochemical characterization, transport, biological response and occupational exposure of engineered nanometal oxides
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Justin Hanes, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,914.00

CBET-0837946 Biswal

Occupational exposure to nanomaterials in manufacturing plants may pose serious
health risks, and the industrial production rate of small size particles is
growing exponentially. An estimated 745,000 workers are potentially exposed to
engineered nanoparticulate matter in the manufacturing sector alone; within 10
years, that number is expected to increase to more than 1 million workers. Both
human and animal studies have associated exposure to metals with a range
inflammatory diseases, especially within the lungs (asthma, fibrosis and COPD).
Toxicity of metals has been studied for a long time, however, the toxic
potential of nanometal oxides, that are being produced in large scale due to
their use in a wide variety of industrial applications, is not clear. Exposure
pathways, resultant bioavailability, and potential adverse health outcomes of
these metal nanoparticles in humans are poorly understood. This proposal will
focus on physicochemical characterization, transport, biological response and
occupational exposure of engineered nanometal oxides. Our specific aims are 1)
Characterization of biological response, transport and physicochemical
properties of metal oxides and 2) Pilot assessment of exposure and
characterization of physicochemical properties of metal oxides in exhaled breath
of exposed workers. The proposal involves a strong interdisciplinary
collaboration between experts on exposure assessment, aerosol science,
nanotechnology, the protective mucus barrier, pulmonary molecular toxicology,
and a company focused on the large scale production of nanometal oxides
(NanoProducts Corporation). Overall these studies will help in understanding the
potential risk of nanometal oxides to human health and also develop the
knowledge base required for future studies on a larger populations exposed to
nanometal particles. Supplemental key words: Nanometal oxides, exposure
assessment, physico-chemical properties, mucus transport, biological affects,
human lung cells