* 0837334
* Collaborative Research: Educational Assessment Tools For Genomics And Bioinformatics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Brian Morton, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* gregory goins
* 12/31/2013
* USD 63,732.00

Advances in genomics and bioinformatics have led to the rapid proliferation of
dedicated research laboratories, summer institutes, and academic degree
programs. Individual biologists, working groups, and national research networks
are focusing their attention on the integration of genomics and bioinformatics
lessons into undergraduate curricula. The first goal of this project is to: (1)
assemble genomics and bioinformatics assessment items and tools into a single,
freely-accessible, and user-friendly format; (2) summarize validity and
reliability data for existing measures; (3) construct, evaluate, and revise a
suite of supplemental genomics assessment tools in four areas: knowledge,
affect, performance, and faculty assessment; (4) disseminate this genomics
education concept inventory through SERC, the DANSER project, and the FIRST
project, and (5) field test the inventory items for utility, validity, and
generalizability by using a newly developed, HHMI-funded interdisciplinary
genomics curriculum at Barnard College as a test case. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
mixed-methods (i.e., quantitative and qualitative) quasi-experimental design is
being used to assess the impact of the curriculum intervention at Barnard. The
following five methodologies are being employed, using a longitudinal study
design, to assess the impact of the genomics curriculum relative to the
traditional biology curriculum: (1) a Likert-scale questionnaire, (2) the
Student Assessed Learning Gains (SALG) anonymous online instrument, (3) concept
mapping of content knowledge, (4) the CTT (Critical Thinking Test), and (5)
semi-structured, transcribed oral interviews by an independent researcher. These
data permit methodological triangulation of results. The overarching research
question for goal two of this project is: Does a 4-year undergraduate genomics
curriculum pathway produce significantly different performance skills,
attitudes, knowledge, and dispositions toward biological research compared to a
traditional 4-year biology pathway in women science students?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;