* 0837995
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research:   Creating a Future Internet Network Architecture with a Programmable Optical Layer
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Keren Bergman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 02/28/2010
* USD 100,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The project explores a transformative networking
architecture for the future Internet that truly exploits the physical optical
layer in a cohesively integrated fashion. We specifically seek to explore an
architectural design that encompasses the capabilities of a fully programmable
optical layer. Within this unified architectural platform the optical layer
becomes a directly accessible component of the network capable of dynamically
morphing to meet the increasingly diverse demands of emerging applications. To
realize these capabilities will require breaking the barriers currently
separating the underlying optical transport technologies from the networking
layers by introducing programmable cross-layer access deeply into the physical
layer. The effort will include a design exploration and simulation validation
for the uniquely integrated architectural platform evaluated across varied
networking applications and traffic scenarios envisioned for the future
Internet.

Broader Impact: If successful, our exploratory effort could provide a new
framework for concretely bridging the gap between the future Internet networking
research efforts and the underlying heterogeneous substrate by creating an
integrative cross-layer environment that enables deeper access to the physical
layer in a context consistent with the diverse capabilities and limitations of
the emerging technologies. The architectural approach will enable users and
applications at the upper layers of the network to directly drive and exploit
emerging heterogeneous technologies, thereby broadening the use to the
networking community. In our broader outreach we will coordinate and work
closely with the FIND research community to develop this platform in a manner
that facilitates the realization of the broader architectural research goals.