* 0837587
* NMR in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Kathy Lewis, Wilkes University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Chemistry (12) The goal of this project is to modernize and improve the
chemistry/biochemistry curriculum by developing and introducing new, innovative
NMR spectroscopy experiments into laboratory courses. Wilkes University in
conjunction with Luzerne County Community College (LCCC) is revising ten
undergraduate laboratory courses and enhancing undergraduate research. The
centerpiece of the recently overhauled chemistry/biochemistry curriculum at
Wilkes University is the three semester Integrated Laboratory sequence. NMR
spectroscopy experiments are being incorporated into all chemistry courses with
a laboratory component, including organic, inorganic, physical, analytical, and
biochemistry courses, and the use of NMR is being extended to include freshmen
as well as 13C NMR in the sophomore organic laboratory. In undergraduate
research projects students now have ready access to an instrument that can
produce data of publishable quality. Remote access capability allows enhancement
of the lecture courses as well as the laboratory, thus allowing experiments to
be run during class and projected in real time. This technology is greatly
enhancing the learning during the lecture portion of several courses (including
organic and instrumental analysis) and is having a strong impact on the lecture
portion of the organic chemistry courses at LCCC. LCCC also utilizes the
instrument, hands on, for its laboratory courses. The intellectual merit of
improving the chemistry/biochemistry curriculum by the acquisition of a new
high-field NMR spectrometer lies in the ability to add more complex, innovative
experiments to the curriculum. This change is impacting not only chemistry and
biochemistry students but those in almost all of the sciences at Wilkes
University. Addition of a high-field instrument is strengthening the research
capabilities of the faculty and students, particularly in the areas of
biochemistry and physical chemistry. The broader impact of improving the
chemistry/biochemistry curriculum is apparent in several areas. Students in ten
chemistry courses are benefitting from using the high field NMR spectrometer and
one new course is being added to the curriculum. Students are able to use
expertise gained in these courses for their senior capstone research projects.
Typically, one-third of Wilkes University student body consists of first
generation college students, and this year 70% of chemistry graduates are women.
These underserved students are benefitting from access to this advanced
technology. Community college students use this instrument for their organic
chemistry laboratories, and high school teachers and students are being trained
on the instrument during two already-established outreach programs offered in
the summer.