* 0837443
* The Design of a Research Based Curriculum for Real Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jack Spielberg, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jacobson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,985.00

Mathematical Sciences (21): This project is studying student learning patterns
in undergraduate advanced analysis, a critical course for students who intend to
do advanced work in mathematics. The ultimate goal of the project is to design a
research based curriculum with learning materials for the undergraduate
mathematics course in Real Analysis at Arizona State University (ASU), as well
as for other institutions throughout the U.S. This project will positively
affect STEM undergraduate programs by:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Creating learning
materials and teaching strategies, including lesson modules and an instrument to
gauge students' readiness,&lt;br/&gt;2. Implementing educational innovations
through a whole-class teaching experiment and task-based interviews with
individual students, and &lt;br/&gt;3. Conducting research to explore students'
understanding, obstacles and their learning patterns; and effective teaching
strategies to enhance learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There
is little research about students' obstacles and their learning patterns in
upper level abstract mathematics courses, such as advanced undergraduate
analysis. While much research on the application of educational theories has
been done and materials have been developed for K-12 and some lower division
undergraduate mathematics, there is no evidence that this work applies to
advanced abstract courses. This project is a step toward filling this gap in the
research literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Analysis courses, such
as the one being studied at Arizona State are also present at most 4-year
colleges and universities in the U. S. and are often required for undergraduate
degrees in mathematics and secondary mathematics education. The proposed project
will help a significant pool of mathematics students and future high school
teachers across the nation to have a successful transition to upper division
mathematics courses. This project is also developing faculty expertise by
illuminating challenges to and opportunities for adapting innovations in diverse
educational settings.