* 0837665
* Contemporary Canonical Software Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Yuanfang Cai, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,753.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new learning
materials along with a teaching package that systematically introduce the key
technology and software design concepts behind the two important canonical
software systems, Firefox and Apache. These two systems represent modern
canonical distributed, multi-platform, and multi-language systems. Their
internal structures exemplify highly expansible and flexible architecture that
contribute to their survival as open source projects. Both systems have received
significant attention and their inner workings have been studied by researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is going to organize the key knowledge,
including Firefox and Apache architectures, into slides and to develop a
teaching tool, a structural navigator, to illustrate the relationships among the
key features, architectural structures, and source code modules of these
canonical systems. Lab assignments require students to build lightweight web
browsers and web servers for mobile devices. The slides, the structural
navigator and the labs constitute the teaching package. Classes making the use
of the teaching package are offered in the Drexel University undergraduate
Computer Science and Software Engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has a potential to advance the education of modern software concepts and
technologies by formally introducing matured key technologies into undergraduate
curricula, and organizing the knowledge about the design, architecture, and
technology of these canonical systems systematically into a presentable form.
Anticipated outcomes include adaptation of the teaching package developed in
this project by the computer science or software engineering curricula at other
universities and colleges. The teaching package is extended and integrated into
computer science textbooks, tools, and exemplary software that can be
disseminated broadly.