* 0837646
* ATI: Backscattering and chirping laser guide star experiments at Palomar Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Edward Kibblewhite, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 11/30/2009
* USD 90,559.00

Telescopes on the ground must observe objects in deep space through the
interference of the earth's atmosphere. As light passes through the atmosphere
it gets spread out by turbulence due to wind shear and changes in temperature
and pressure within the atmospheric layers which effectively diminishes the
resolving power of earth-based telescopes. This difficulty can be overcome to a
large extent by relatively new techniques employing "Laser Guide Stars" and
"Adaptive Optics." A bright laser illuminates a patch of sky near the target
object. The laser's light is absorbed and then re-emitted by atoms in the upper
atmosphere, above much of the interfering lower atmosphere. The return signal
can then be used to track the time-dependent scattering of the light. Adaptive
Optics uses this information to adjust optics in the telescope's instrumentation
to restore the image to what would be seen from above the atmosphere.
Unfortunately, Laser Guide Star technology is complex and expensive. Dr.
Kibblewhite is pursuing a theoretical idea, confirmed by his computer
simulations, that would significantly increase the amount of light returned from
the atmosphere. This enhanced signal could then lead to better signal-to-noise
and/or more rapid response to the atmosphere's changes, all at a lower cost. Dr.
Kibblewhite will modify a laser and then use it on the Palomar Observatory's
5-meter Hale telescope to test his idea.