* 0837803
* ChemCompanion: A Digital Text for the First-Year College Chemistry Course
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Steven Wood, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Brown
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,999.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;ChemCompanion is a new and novel web-based teaching
resource for first-year college chemistry courses that couples innovative
delivery of the course content outside of the classroom with increased
opportunity for active learning inside of the classroom. The goal is to deliver
the core course content as a series of filmed presentations with simultaneous
presentation of supporting visual elements in an engaging virtual classroom
environment. The resource also features inline self-assessment activities and
video problem-solving tutorials inserted at regular intervals throughout the
presentation materials. The fully-developed product will be capable of replacing
the course textbook. This full function "next-generation textbook" creates new
opportunities for innovative use of student-instructor classroom time and is the
first step toward the goal of building a broad-based online community of
educators and learners. Since ChemCompanion delivers the course content and
introduces the skills of the first-year chemistry course outside of the
classroom, instructor-student interactions in the classroom are able to
emphasize activities that promote better understanding, deeper learning, and
application of concepts to real-world examples. The additional time and effort
to implement active learning can be a barrier to adoption for instructors. Thus,
resources supporting these activities are being developed for instructors to
facilitate the adoption of active learning strategies in the classroom that
integrate well with ChemCompanion. These materials are being made available
through a website that will lay the foundation for future Web 2.0 capability.
Informed evaluation of the piloted use of ChemCompanion is guiding the continued
development and improvement of materials. Evaluation is both quantitative and
qualitative as well as both formative and summative.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: ChemCompanion simultaneously delivers a conceptually-oriented concise
text and high-quality visual elements that illustrate, demonstrate, and animate
the content. It is designed for self-paced student learning outside of the
classroom, providing a student with immediate feedback via inline assessment
tools. Its use frees up classroom time for increased active learning and for
more "real world" applications. To support this new hybrid approach to teaching,
the instructor resource website is hosting materials designed for in-class use
with ChemCompanion as well as application-based teaching modules.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The first-year college chemistry course is central to
the chemistry STEM curriculum as well as to that of biological sciences; hence,
large numbers of students are affected by any improvements or enhancements to
this course. The availability of quality machine or web-based resources that
effectively deliver course content outside of the classroom has the potential to
transform STEM teaching away from the traditional lecture model. Such materials
also offer students the possibility of more control over their learning and help
them come to class more equally prepared regardless of their prior preparation
and backgrounds. In addition, if the course content is presented in audiovisual
format, students are less likely to use it in support of working the assigned
problems, as they do a traditional textbook, and more likely to view the
complete story as intended by the author. ChemCompanion is designed with these
opportunities in mind.&lt;br/&gt;