* 0837950
* U.S.-India Joint Workshop:   Coupled Natural-Human Systems and the Challenge of Rapid Urbanization to the Resiliency of Water Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Linda George, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2012
* USD 49,313.00

Shandas &lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a U.S.-India workshop focused
on developing research and education collaborations between U.S. researchers at
Portland State University (PSU) and at several other U.S. universities and the
Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE) in Bangaluru,
India. US PI Vivek Shandas and Indian collaborator Harini Nagendra will convene
a five-day workshop on Coupled Human-Natural Systems and the Challenge of Rapid
Urbanization to the Resiliency of Water Systems. India, which is home to some of
the most rapidly urbanizing cities in the world, offers an exceptional
opportunity to study the coupling of human and natural systems. The multi-
disciplinary group of researchers expects that the workshop will contribute to
theoretical and methodological understanding of urban ecosystems by engaging
Indian scientists and educators in discussing topics of high mutual interest.
Three working groups will focus on key questions having to do with Urban
Morphology and Spatial Analysis, Urbanization and Water Quality, and Curriculum
Development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concrete outcomes include: 1)development of
research proposals on the resiliency of water systems in rapidly urbanizing
cities for parallel submission to US and Indian funding agencies, 2)development
of pilot curricular modules to internationalize urban ecology courses in higher
education, and 3)establishment of a global community of committed researchers
and educators in the field of urban ecology. Additionally, the workshop will
promote cross-cultural and educational experiences for all participants. The US-
side includes women, early-career faculty, and graduate students. This activity
is supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
Geography and Regional Sciences Program.