* 0837891
* Penetration and Translocation of Nanoparticles through Skin
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Lisa DeLouise, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2012
* USD 394,345.00

CBET-0837891&lt;br/&gt;DeLouise&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: Advances in the
synthesis and control of engineered nanoparticles (NP) properties has escalated
their use in numerous diverse applications ranging from medicine to energy.
Currently NPs are formulated in over 400 consumer products (eg. sunblocks, food
containers). A consequence of this nanotechnology boom is an increased risk of
unintended NP exposure with human skin, the largest organ in the body. The
proposed research is motivated by the increasing use of metal oxide (ZnO and
TiO2) NPs in daily-use cosmetic products to protect against ultraviolet
radiation (UVR) exposure. Our main objective of this research is to quantify NP
skin penetration and to generate molecular level insight into the mechanisms of
translocation by contrasting permeation through normal and barrier compromised
skin induced by UVR. &lt;br/&gt;Experimental Approach: We will utilize in vivo,
ex vivo and in vitro models to quantify the effects of UVR on NP permeation and
translocation. Mechanistic insight will be gleaned by investigating penetration
as a function of NP surface chemistry and vehicle including incorporation of
chemical penetration enhancers (CPE) to modify the skin barrier by extraction or
fluidization of skin lipids. The central hypothesis of the proposed research is
that the NP surface chemistry (charge/hydrophobicity) and hydrodynamic size are
the most important material properties that effect skin penetration. Tissue
clearance and toxicity also depend on composition but these are not a focus of
this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 1: Develop an in vivo mouse
model to investigate NP skin penetration and generate mechanistic insight on NP
translocation as a function of NP size, surface chemistry, vehicle and skin
status (normal vs. UV exposed). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 2: Translate
knowledge gained in Aim 1 to a human system using an ex vivo skin model to
quantify the affect of skin physiology and UVR on NP penetration.
&lt;br/&gt;S&lt;br/&gt;pecific Aim 3: Develop an in vitro differentiated
keratinocyte model to investigate NP up-take and cytotoxicty as a function of NP
surface chemistry and UVR and to elucidate knowledge on localization aspects
discovered in Aim 2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected Results: These studies will
be among the first to generate in vivo data on a wide range of NP types (quantum
dots, fluorescent polymer, metal oxides) as a function of skin barrier status.
Our study will increase understanding of the mechanisms and driving forces of
skin barrier function against NP penetration. Results from this research will
generate knowledge on how to design NPs to limit bioavailability and prevent
potential side effects from skin exposure. We will develop understanding that
will enable future work to be done in more specific targeting of nanoparticles
to prevent or enhance bio availability. This knowledge could be used to develop
powerful drug delivery agents or to decrease penetration of cosmetic
nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A primary outcome of this work will be
to provide education and mentoring to graduate, undergraduate and high school
students in a highly interdisciplinary research environment spanning aspects of
material science, surface chemistry, skin biology, and biomedical engineering.
The concepts of quantum dots and nanotoxicity will be integrated into lectures
presented in Cell and Tissue Engineering (BME462) and Nanobiophotoics (ECE580)
courses given by the PI. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
research will be trained to pursue a variety of challenging career paths in the
high-tech and biotech sectors of industry, government, and academia.
&lt;br/&gt;Supplemental Keywords: nanotechnology, nanomaterials, nanoparticles,
polymer, quantum dots, metals, metal oxides, semiconductor nanocrystals, human
skin, skin permeation, UV radiation, bioavailability, cell culture, human health
effects, dermal contact, human exposure.