* 0837385
* Promoting Peer Collaboration Through PeerSpace -- A Novel Online Social Network Based Learning Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Cen Li, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 02/28/2013
* USD 149,745.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes collaborative
learning among students taking introductory&lt;br/&gt;Computer Science (CS)
courses through an online social learning environment,
called&lt;br/&gt;PeerSpace. PeerSpace is based on the fundamental idea of the
successful Emerging Scholars Program, a peer-learning program that enhances
student learning by promoting strong peer support, both academically and
socially. PeerSpace consists of two main components: the social network
component and the peer-learning component. The social network component provides
students with online collaborative tools for convenient synchronous and
asynchronous online interactions on course related topics as well as social
topics. The student-centered pod membership and the pod-to-pod friendly
competitions are used to give students a sense of belonging to the learning
community, and to encourage the building of peer support networks. The peer-
learning component is a set of carefully designed peer collaborative exercises
organized in a novel way to emphasize peer collaboration by integrating popular
peer learning techniques in computer science education such as group discussion,
peer code review, and student self-reflection. These peer collaborative
exercises encourage students to help and support each other academically within
the established social environment, deepening students' understanding of course
material and enhancing students' motivation, persistence, and passion towards
their study. The goal of PeerSpace is to promote peer collaborative learning in
introductory CS courses by providing carefully designed peer collaborative
exercises within a friendly, peer-supportive online social network environment,
and to facilitate the building of peer support networks that lasts throughout
and beyond the introductory CS courses.