* 0837567
* Integrating Functional Program Verification Techniques to Computer Science Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Steven Roach, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2013
* USD 149,959.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of this project
is to raise the competence of software developers to create and verify reliable
software by improving the ability of undergraduate computer science students in
reasoning about the correctness of computer programs. To reach this goal, this
project has one technical objective and two educational objectives. The
technical research objective is to develop practical verification techniques
suitable for teaching in undergraduate computer science courses. The educational
research objectives are to develop and disseminate learning modules and
materials on program verification and to integrate formal program verification -
reasoning based on mathematics - into the undergraduate computer science and
engineering curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematics to achieve this
project's educational goals of integrating program verification into the
undergraduate curriculum is through the use of sets and functions. An annotation
notation incorporating recent advances in specification languages is developed
to document programs as functions from input values to output values. The
annotation notation supports a spectrum of formality, from informal to fully
mathematical, to assist an incremental integration into the curriculum. A
functional verification approach, which supports a natural, intuitive, forward
reasoning, is extended for modular verification of object-oriented programs, and
lightweight tools are developed for teaching and learning functional
specification and verification. An incremental integration to the curriculum is
achieved by first delivering an experimental course on program verification and
then, using this experience as a guide, introducing problem-based learning
modules throughout undergraduate courses. The approach is demonstrated by
integrating modules into the undergraduate computer science curriculum from the
introductory courses to the senior capstone course.