* 0837341
* QoSec: A Novel Middleware-Based Approach to Teaching Computer Security Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kai Chang, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,999.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops QoSec, an
extensible middleware framework for computer security course projects. The QoSec
framework provides learning materials for undergraduate students related to the
design of large-scale trustworthy computer systems. Course projects in QoSec are
implemented as plug-in modules of a middleware-based framework. The QoSec
framework is the first educational material of its kind designed specifically to
teach undergraduate students how to make real-world computing systems more
accountable and less vulnerable to attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
creates a novel middleware-based approach to teaching undergraduate students how
to develop large-scale secure software. QoSec addresses several challenges of
contemporary computer security education including the lack of novel approaches
to study real-world secure computer systems; the need of a holistic platform for
constructing computer security projects; and the challenge of using commercial
middleware-based frameworks to teach introductory computer security classes.
QoSec has an easy interface which allows teaching students the rapid development
of security-critical software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a potential
to advance the education of modern university computer security course
curricula. Anticipated outcomes include addressing the problem of information
assurance skill shortage and preparation of future computer security engineers.
Through collaboration with Tuskegee University and Alabama State University,
QoSec is used to prepare future minority engineers and scientists with expertise
in computer security. The extensible nature of QoSec allows instructors to
easily share, expand, and modify their computer security course projects.