* 0837677
* Enhancing Integrated Technology and Interdisciplinary Based Engineering Education Through the High Altitude Balloon (HAB) Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Zhiqiang Wu, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 147,567.00

Interdisciplinary (99) Computer, electrical, industrial, materials, and
mechanical engineering students enrolled in an interdisciplinary, collaborative
senior capstone design project are employing an integrated technology High
Altitude Balloon (HAB) system launched into the near-space region (85,000 -
100,000 ft above sea level) of the earth's atmosphere. The HAB system is a
systematic integrated project that involves team investigation of a system with
multiple elements such as wireless communication; working with alternative
energy devices; control system design; data analysis for computing; payload
material design; flight path prediction and aerodynamics; wind data studies,
shape memory composites, heat transfer analysis; and developing a balloon
tracking system. Through working on this project, students delve into a complex
engineering system that (1) exposes them to applied and cutting-edge design
projects; (2) encourages them to participate in an integrated, inter-
disciplinary curriculum that facilitates engagement by working across all
engineering disciplines; (3) involves them in methods of applied technology and
skills necessary to transition from academic to professional
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides students with meaningful
experiences and insight into industry standards by introducing them to the
state-of-the-art technologies and design clinics in inter-disciplinary projects;
and encouraging them to work on technology transferable designs and determine
success by creating new projects for engineering curriculum. A longitudinal
study on the value of the proposed approach is being conducted by systematically
evaluating the preparedness and ability of engineering students engaged in the
interdisciplinary senior design approach compared to students in the traditional
design program.