* 0837823
* Integrating Statistics and Methodology Instruction Through a Problem-Based Learning Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Stephen Lakatos, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2011
* USD 145,032.00

Psychology (73) Even when departments have implemented student-faculty research
collaborations as standard practice, undergraduate psychology majors completing
a statistics-research methodology sequence often exhibit weak scientific skills
in the laboratory. One cause of this weakness may be overemphasis of lecture-
laboratory formats. This project is seeking to improve students' scientific
skills by applying innovative problem-based learning (PBL) techniques within an
undergraduate training laboratory. Transforming undergraduate psychology
curricula and education experiences through novel, inquiry-based instruction and
training in scientific instrumentation is the long-range goal of this project.
To achieve this goal, traditional teaching techniques are being combined with
four PBL projects that were developed by faculty members with expertise in each
of four research domains. Student groups guided by faculty and graduate student
tutors are working through complex problems in experimental psychology in these
four domains. Students' prior knowledge is insufficient to understand these
problems in depth. Therefore student groups must use resources within and
outside of the laboratory to understand each problem and to develop valid
solutions. PBL projects encourage students to integrate the principal
statistical and methodological components of psychological research in a hands-
on environment. A series of written tests are being used to examine student
performance in research tasks requiring semantic and procedural knowledge. In
addition, several established PBL evaluation techniques are being used to assess
the changing learning experiences for students and tutors. Of particular
interest is whether PBL works effectively for both traditional and returning
students. The expected outcome of this project is a series of lesson plans,
complete with interactive tutorials for each piece of scientific equipment,
which will be used to disseminate PBL to other campuses. Preliminary findings
from the proposed PBL implementation will be used to encourage the continuing
evolution of PBL as a flexible, multidisciplinary learning approach in other
social science disciplines.