* 0837364
* Development of Modular Interactive Learning and Assessing Tools for Electrical Circuit Core Course for Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Kalpathy Sundaram, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 06/30/2012
* USD 199,994.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a
set of computer based learning modules for use in introductory circuits courses
in electrical and computer engineering curricula. Each module leads the student
through four learning phases for a particular concept. The first phase is a
tutoring phase in which the student is given basic ideas and information. The
second phase is a quizzing phase in which the student is quizzed on the ideas
and information presented in the first phase and given immediate feedback on
their performance. The third phase presents the student with a design problem in
which they need to use the ideas and information provided. The final phase
provides the students with concrete practical examples of the use of the concept
in real world applications. The learning modules are being developed and
deployed at a four-year institution and a community college. The project
includes rigorous formative and summative evaluation plans with both qualitative
and quantitative components coordinated by an independent evaluator. The
projects results are being disseminated through conference and journal
publications and through a training workshop.