* 0838996
* Ammonia Oxidation Versus Heterotrophy in Crenarchaeota Populations from Marine Environments West of the Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2013
* James Hollibaugh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 12/31/2013
* USD 640,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;Ammonia oxidation is the first step in the conversion of regenerated
nitrogen to dinitrogen gas, a 3-step pathway mediated by 3 distinct guilds of
bacteria and archaea. Ammonia oxidation and the overall process of
nitrification-denitrification have received relatively little attention in polar
oceans where the effects of climate change on biogeochemical rates are likely to
be pronounced. Previous work on Ammonia Oxidizing Archaea (AOA) in the Palmer
LTER study area West of the Antarctic Peninsula (WAP), has suggested strong
vertical segregation of crenarchaeote metabolism, with the "winter water" (WW,
~50-100 m depth range) dominated by non-AOA crenarchaeotes, while Crenarchaeota
populations in the "circumpolar deep water" (CDW), which lies immediately below
the winter water (150-3500 m), are dominated by AOA. Analysis of a limited
number of samples from the Arctic Ocean did not reveal a comparable vertical
segregation of AOA, and suggested that AOA and Crenarchaeota abundance is much
lower there than in the Antarctic. These findings led to 3 hypotheses that will
be tested in this project: 1) the apparent low abundance of Crenarchaeota and
AOA in Arctic Ocean samples may be due to spatial or temporal variability in
populations; 2) the WW population of Crenarchaeota in the WAP is dominated by a
heterotroph; 3) the WW population of Crenarchaeota in the WAP "grows in" during
spring and summer after this water mass forms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will contribute substantially to understanding an important aspect of the
nitrogen cycle in the Palmer LTER (Long Term Ecological Research) study area by
providing insights into the ecology and physiology of AOA. The natural
segregation of crenarchaeote phenotypes in waters of the WAP, coupled with
metagenomic studies in progress in the same area by others (A. Murray, H.
Ducklow), offers the possibility of major breakthroughs in understanding of the
metabolic capabilities of these organisms. This knowledge is needed to model how
water column nitrification will respond to changes in polar ecosystems
accompanying global climate change. The Principal Investigator will participate
fully in the education and outreach efforts of the Palmer LTER, including making
highlights of our findings available for posting to their project web site and
participating in outreach (for example, Schoolyard LTER). The research also will
involve undergraduates (including the field work if possible) and will support
high school interns in the P.I.'s laboratory over the summer.