* 0838089
* Collaborative Research: Application of Fe and Zn isotopes to fingerprint, track, and quantify metal fluxes in streams and groundwater in alpine watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Richard Wanty, Geological Survey-Denver
* Interagency Agreement
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2012
* USD 27,661.00

Collaborative Research: Application of Fe and Zn Isotopes to Fingerprint, Track,
and Quantify Metal Fluxes in Streams and Groundwater in Alpine
Watersheds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alpine watersheds
ultimately support the drinking, agricultural, and industrial water needs for
most of the western United States, and are critical sources of water worldwide.
A key concern in many alpine watersheds is metal contamination, either from
abandoned mining operations or from natural sources. In order to design and
prioritize useful water management and remediation strategies, we need to
identify important metal sources and understand how metal loads change over
different spatial and temporal scales. We will attack this problem in a new way
- by using the emerging tools of Fe and Zn isotopes to fingerprint metal sources
and to identify metal transport processes in mountain catchments impacted by
acidic, metal-rich waters. &lt;br/&gt;We have framed this investigation to
advance scientific understanding in three main areas: 1) Distinguishing between
Fe and Zn loads that are attributable to groundwater discharge to surface-water
as opposed to surface runoff, 2) Distinguishing between anthropogenic and
natural sources of Fe and Zn, and 3) Correlating seasonal changes in Fe and Zn
isotopes with hydrogeochemical changes. We will complete our project by
integrating our findings into a conceptual model for evaluating metal
contamination in alpine waters. Our research plan includes targeted field
sampling of waters (both dissolved and suspended loads) and rocks in Prospect
and Handcart Gulches in Colorado, and complementary lab experiments with
sulfide-rich mineral separates. Both field sites are contaminated with metals
and include remarkable access to groundwater through existing networks of
monitoring wells. We will also take advantage of differences in metal sources
(anthropogenic vs. natural) and in dissimilar groundwater-surface water
relationships in these watersheds to test our hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;Our
proposal is collaborative, combining the expertise and resources within the U.
S. Geological Survey with PI Borrok and students in the Department of Geological
Sciences at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP). Our work will
specifically broaden participation from underrepresented students already at
UTEP. UTEP is the only research-intensive doctoral university in the U.S. with a
Mexican-American majority student population. To further enhance educational
opportunities, we have partnered with the Mountain Studies Institute, an
independent research/education institution and alpine field station in
Silverton, Colorado. We will utilize the MSI?s boarding, field laboratory, and
educational facilities for our field work in Prospect Gulch. Partnerships with
the USGS and MSI will allow students at UTEP access to cutting-edge
equipment/facilities and to participate in a broad range of research
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;