* 0838338
* A Metabolically Active Transient Storage Model for Predicting Nutrient Retention  in Streams
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Myrold, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 417,064.00

A Metabolically Active Transient Storage Model for Predicting Nutrient Retention
in Streams Roy Haggerty, Alba Argerich, David D. Myrold, Eugènia Martí & Nancy
B. Grimm Transient storage has become one of the most important concepts in
hydrology in the past 25 years, helping to predict solute and heat transport in
streams, and it is one of the most frequently quantified processes in stream
ecology. However, recent research shows that transient storage has minimal
explanatory power for nutrient retention in streams. This is a paradox because
nutrient retention is closely tied to aerobic metabolism, which in turn is very
strongly tied to hyporheic exchange, a major component of transient storage.
Further, other processes that retain nutrients (sorption of phosphorus, and
anaerobic microbial processes) also should happen preferentially in transient
storage zones. Consequently, it is surprising that transient storage has not
been a better predictor for nutrient retention. We hypothesize that nutrient
retention is mostly associated with transient storage that is metabolically
active. Metabolically active transient storage (MATS) is defined as water with
velocity much slower than the mean in which there is significant primary
production or respiration. We predict that MATS will include much of the
hyporheic zone and some benthic areas of pools. Given known mechanistic
relationships between nutrient transformations and metabolism, we predict that
MATS zones will also be hotspots for nutrient retention. We have done
preliminary work to develop a MATS-sensitive tracer, resazurin. Resazurin
quickly reduces to resorufin in the presence of aerobic respiration. Our tests
indicate that it is feasible to use resazurin in streams to measure MATS, and
that a standardized methodology to measure MATS can be adopted similar to what
is commonly done with a conservative tracer (e.g., NaCl) to measure transient
storage. We will conduct a series of column and mesocosm experiments to relate
nutrient retention to metabolism (focusing on respiration). We will also test
the relationship between resazurin reduction and respiration in different
substrates and multiple sediment samples, and further characterize resazurin
sorption, photodegradation, and degradation. We will then conduct field
experiments, adding nutrients and resazurin in streams. These will primarily be
conducted in heterotrophic, lownutrient streams of Oregon, but a few experiments
will also be conducted in Arizona and Spain to add a gradient in metabolism and
dissolved inorganic nitrogen to phosphorus (DIN:P) ratio. Injections will also
be carried out at different times of the year encompassing a metabolism gradient
within the Oregon streams, so that our interpretations are not limited to inter-
stream variability. Streams will be surveyed and geomorphically characterized to
help control for physical differences. A preliminary model of MATS is presented,
and will be further developed during the study. A computer code will be updated
and released that can model and do parameter estimation for reactive transport
in streams in the presence of MATS, where the timescales of exchange may be the
conventional exponential distribution or another distribution. Broader impact:
Correlation of nutrient retention with MATS would improve our understanding of
the hydrologic component of nutrient retention and help us to predict transport
of nutrients in streams. Resazurin reduction could prove a valuable tool for
measuring MATS, and open the way for a tracerbased quantification of
respiration. Lastly, we will work with an elementary school to gauge a stream
and collect stream nutrient data as part of their science curriculum. The data
are important to the City of Corvallis because of a proposal to use a large
quantity of treated wastewater for irrigation in the watershed that the stream
drains, and there is no gauge.