* 0838161
* Collaborative Research:  Copulas, Tail Copulas, Garch and Extreme Values in Dependence Modelling and Risk Management
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2007,09/30/2011
* Xiaohong Chen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2011
* USD 198,694.00

Multivariate data series in economics, survival analysis, medical science,
biostatistics, insurance, finance, and other fields in social sciences are
typically nonlinear, non-normally distributed, and have nonlinear co-movements
and interactions. However, the existing econometrics and statistics methods in
multivariate time series data analysis are largely confined to multivariate
normal or conditional normal framework. This interdisciplinary collaborative
research project will examine the estimation, testing, and empirical
applications of broad classes of copula-based semiparametric models for
analyzing multivariate data series that exhibit nonlinear co-movements,
asymmetric, heavy-tailed, possibly censored and/or other non-normal patterns.
These classes of models will partially solve the "curse-of-dimensionality"
problem by specifying the marginal distributions nonparametrically (or
semiparametrically) and specifying the copula functions that capture the
dependence among the multivariate variables parametrically (or
semiparametrically). The research will involve novel modifications and
applications of several modern statistical methods such as empirical likelihood
method, sieve maximum likelihood method, bootstrap method, extreme value theory,
residual-based weighted empirical process theory, etc. Research outputs will
include several original papers on estimation and testing of copula-based
semiparametric multivariate models for independent data and for censored data,
as well as estimation and testing of semiparametric dynamic models for nonlinear
and possibly heavy-tailed time series data. The project will produce new
estimation and testing software that can be freely downloaded from the authors'
web pages. The results from this project will make significant contributions to
econometrics and statistics literature on estimation and testing of
semiparametric multivariate models based on copulas, tail copulas, and Garch
with heavy tails, and will be very useful in economics (such as industrial
organization, income inequality, health economics), insurance, biostatistics,
medical science, and other fields where nonlinear dependence is important.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new methodologies and apply
modern statistical methods to explore nonlinear dependence among multivariate
series and to understand complicated dynamics of human and social interactions
with empirical applications to economics, insurance, finance, statistics, and
other sciences. Since practitioners in finance and insurance have been combining
nonlinear time series models with copulas and/or tail copulas to heuristically
model multivariate option pricing, portfolio Value-at-Risk, correlated default
and credit risk, and the time-varying asymmetric nonlinear co-movements among
different series, the results from this project will guide applied researchers
to perform statistically reliable economic policy evaluations, financial
forecasts, and risk managements. The main educational plans are to train PhD
students in economics, statistics, and finance to become capable researchers in
related topics, and to develop new courses for students in economics,
management, statistics, and quantitative finance. This award was supported as
part of the fiscal year 2006 Mathematical Sciences priority area special
competition on Mathematical Social and Behavioral Sciences (MSBS).