* 0838846
* Collaborative Research: Climate Change and Predatory Invasion of the Antarctic Marine Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Richard Aronson, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Diana Nemergut
* 02/28/2013
* USD 453,531.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global climate change is altering polar marine
ecosystems through rising temperatures and ocean acidification. Marine
communities in Antarctica face an additional threat: climatically driven
biological invasions from temperate and subpolar latitudes. Durophagous
(skeleton-breaking) crabs from warmer environments are on the verge of invading
shallow-benthic habitats, and could significantly impact the endemic shelf fauna
and its unique trophic structure. This study will assess the status of crab
populations in western Antarctica and their potential to disrupt benthic
communities. The Swedish Icebreaker RVIB Oden provides the ideal opportunity to
sample areas of the Bellingshausen and Amundsen Seas, as her ice-capability
exceeds that of U.S. research icebreakers. The extent and consequences of the
ongoing invasion will be assessed by: (1) sampling the water column for larvae;
and (2) surveying the benthos for juveniles and adults, and for localized
changes in community structure. An autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) will be
used to image the bottom fauna, providing density estimates of crabs on the
slope and, perhaps, on the shelf, and will provide a rare glimpse of the fauna
underneath the ice shelves of the Bellingshausen and Amundsen seas. Use of AUVs
under ice shelves is highly exploratory and high risk, but the results are
potentially transformative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will promote
collaboration between scientific teams from the U.S., Sweden, and the United
Kingdom. The project also will provide undergraduate and graduate training,
include a research component for minority students, promote the advancement of
women in scientific careers, and generate curricular materials for K-12
education. Finally the project will generate data on marine invasions, which are
urgently needed for long-term tracking of ecological change in
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;