* 0838546
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Tempo, Size, and Chemical Connectivity of Magma Batches in a Tilted Plutonic Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Kevin Chamberlain, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2013
* USD 138,891.00

Intellectual Merit. In the realm of magmatic arc studies, fundamental gaps exist
in our understanding of how individual pulses of magma may physically and
chemically interact with extant magma/rock in a growing pluton, how emplacement
depth affects the crystallization history and longevity of distinct
compositional zones within a vertically-extensive pluton; and (c) whether large,
vertically-extensive plutons may form as single, well-mixed open-system
reservoirs. The tilted, 15-km thick Wooley Creek batholith-Slinkard pluton
system will be examined to test two central hypotheses: (1) pluton construction
was via multiple increments of magma with little to no physical and chemical
communication at the site of emplacement (i.e., isolated batches); and (2) the
upper portions of the system represent a large volume of well-mixed magma at the
site of emplacement (i.e., ?big tank?). Field study, high-precision U/Pb
analyses, petrography, in situ oxygen isotopic analysis, and LA-ICPMS trace
element microanalysis will be utilized to test these hypotheses. The objectives
of this research are to (i) delineate the timescale of intrusion,
crystallization and solidification; (ii) evaluate the possibility that recharge
of mafic magmas remobilized existing crystal mushes; (iii) test the hypothesis
that open system processes (e.g., including magma mixing and assimilation)
occurred in a large volume, vertically-extensive magmatic system; and (iv) test
the hypothesis that magmatic fabrics in plutons form diachronously and reflect
the regional tectonic strain field during crystallization. The focus site is a
near-ideal system to attain these objectives because (a) the intrusion displays
vertical compositional zonation from structurally lower gabbro/diorite upward
through quartz diorite, tonalite, granodiorite and granite; (b) co-magmatic
compositional links between various phases have been previously established; (c)
distinctive lithology, isotopic composition, and ages for the country rocks make
it possible to investigate spatial variations in physical &amp; chemical
contamination within the magmatic system; (d) magmatic fabrics cross-cut
compositional zones; (e) fine-grained dikes in the ?roof zone? represent magmas
tapped during construction of the underlying batholith; and (f) the pluton
contains minerals (augite, zircon, quartz) whose oxygen isotope and trace
element compositions will track upward and lateral variations in magma
composition, hence, open-system behavior. This project will test the possible
coexistence of discrete large, vertically-extensive magmatic systems having
identical crystallization ages and have open-system chemical links from one
intrusive phase to another Ie.g., the ?big tank? model). In contrast, an
emerging paradigm favors large batholith formation by incremental emplacement of
small magma batches, over millions of years, and with distinct pulses with
distinct chemical histories. Either outcome will have long-ranging, process-
oriented implications for interpreting how large batholiths are constructed in
arc settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will support
undergraduate &amp; graduate student involvement in state-of-the-art analytical
and field projects. Results from this work will also be integrated into teaching
activities, and because the study area lies in a heavily traveled wilderness
area, geologic summaries will be produced for distribution by the U.S. Forest
Service to the general public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;