* 0838937
* Collaborative Research: Weddell seals as autonomous sensors of the winter oceanography of the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 555,788.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine mammals
of the Southern Ocean have evolved diverse life history patterns and foraging
strategies to accommodate extreme fluctuations in the physical and biological
environment. In light of ongoing climate change and the dramatic shifts in the
extent and persistence of sea ice in the Ross Sea, it is critical to understand
how Weddell seals, Leptonychotes weddellii, a key apex predator, select and
utilize foraging habitats. Recent advances in satellite-linked animal-borne
conductivity, temperature and depth (CTD) tags make it possible to
simultaneously collect data on seal locations, their diving patterns, and the
temperature and salinity profiles of the water columns they utilize. In other
ecosystems, such data have revealed that marine predators selectively forage in
areas where currents and fronts serve to locally concentrate prey resources, and
that these conditions are required to sustain populations. Weddell seals will be
studied in McMurdo Sound and at Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea and will provide the
first new data on Weddell seal winter diving behavior and habitat use in almost
two decades. The relationship between an animal's diving behavior and physical
habitat has enormous potential to enhance monitoring studies and to provide
insight into how changes in ice conditions (due either to warming or the impact
of large icebergs, such as B15) might impact individual time budgets and
foraging success. The second thrust of this project is to use the profiles
obtained from CTD seal tags to model the physical oceanography of this region.
Current mathematical models of physical oceanographic processes in the Southern
Ocean are directed at better understanding the role that it plays in global
climate processes, and the linkages between physical and biological
oceanographic processes. However, these efforts are limited by the scarcity of
oceanographic data at high latitudes in the winter months; CTD tags deployed on
animals will collect data at sufficient spatial and temporal resolution to
improve data density. The project will contribute to two IPY endorsed
initiatives: MEOP (Marine Mammals as Explorers of the Ocean Pole to Pole) and
CAML (Census of Antarctic Marine Life). In addition, the highly visual nature of
the data and analysis lends itself to public and educational display and
outreach, particularly as they relate to global climate change, and we have
collaborations with undergraduate and graduate training programs, the Seymour
Marine Discovery Center, and the ARMADA program to foster these broader impacts.