* 0838933
* Collaborative Research: GeomicroBiology of Antarctic Subglacial Environments (GBASE) Beneath the Mercer and Whillans Ice Streams
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* John Priscu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,640,575.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The GBASE project (GeomicroBiology of Antarctic Subglacial
Environments) is one of three research components of the WISSARD (Whillans Ice
Stream Subglacial Access Research Drilling) integrative initiative that is being
funded by the Antarctic Integrated System Science Program of NSF's Office of
Polar Programs, Antarctic Division. The overarching scientific objective of
WISSARD is to assess the role of water beneath a West Antarctic ice stream in
interlinked glaciological, geological, microbiological, geochemical, and
oceanographic systems. GBASE will examine distinct, but hydrologically related,
subglacial environments using a combination of biogeochemical/ genomic
measurements to answer key questions directly relevant to metabolic and
phylogenetic biodiversity, and the biogeochemical transformation of major
nutrients beneath the Whillans Ice Stream. We expect the microbial communities
associated with the ice stream to be a metabolically dynamic ecosystem, and
specifically ask (1) what is the microbial community structure and (2) what is
the metabolic function of the community in situ? Understanding biogeochemical
processes involved with elemental transformations on our planet is a central
theme in NSF's decadal plan and the use of multidisciplinary tools to study
these transformations in polar regions has been recommended by a 2007 NRC report
that states "It is time for scientific research on subglacial lakes to begin".
GBASE results will be used by investigators of LISSARD and RAGES (the other two
components of the WISSARD project) to cast their results in a holistic ecosystem
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The latest report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change recognized that the greatest
uncertainties in assessing future global sea-level change stem from a poor
understanding of ice sheet dynamics and ice sheet vulnerability to oceanic and
atmospheric warming. Disintegration of the WAIS (West Antarctic Ice Sheet) alone
would contribute 3-5 m to global sea-level rise, making WAIS a focus of
scientific concern due to its potential susceptibility to internal or ocean-
driven instability. The overall WISSARD project will test the overarching
hypothesis that active water drainage connects various subglacial environments
and exerts major control on ice sheet flow, geochemistry, metabolic and
phylogenetic diversity, and biogeochemical transformations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Societal Relevance: Global warming,
melting of ice sheets and consequential sea-level rise are of high societal
relevance. Science Resource Development: After a 9-year hiatus WISSARD will
provide the US-science community with a renewed capability to access and study
sub-ice sheet environments. Developing this technological infrastructure will
benefit the broader science community and assets will be accessible for future
use through the NSF-OPP drilling contractor. Furthermore, these projects will
pioneer an approach implementing recommendations from the National Research
Council committee on Principles of Environmental Stewardship for the Exploration
and Study of Subglacial Environments (2007). Education and Outreach (E/O): These
activities are grouped into four categories: i) increasing student participation
in polar research by fully integrating them in our research programs; ii)
introducing new investigators to the polar sciences by incorporating promising
young investigators in our programs, iii) promotion of K-12 teaching and
learning programs by incorporating various teachers and NSTA programs, and iv)
reaching a larger public audience through such venues as popular science
magazines, museum based activities and videography and documentary films. In
summary, WISSARD will promote scientific exploration of Antarctica by conveying
to the public the excitement of accessing and studying what may be some of the
last unexplored aquatic environments on Earth, and which represent a potential
analogue for extraterrestrial life habitats on Europa and Mars.