* 0838746
* Student and Minority Faculty Travel Support for ACM SIGCOMM 2008 Conference; Seattle, Washington;  August 17-22, 2008
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2009
* USD 28,630.00

0838746 Karen Sollins

The 2008 ACM Conference on Communications Architectures, Protocols and
Applications will be held in Seattle, WA, August 17-22, 2008. This conference is
the premier technical meeting that examines the state-of-the-art in computer
networks and communications. This award provides funding to assist approximately
16 United States-based (including Puerto Rico) graduate students as well as
approximately 2 U.S.-based under-represented minority (including women) faculty
members or faculty members of U.S. institutions that are primarily serving
under-represented minorities in attending this meeting. Participation in
conferences such as SIGCOMM is an extremely important part of the graduate
school experience, as well as an important part of the teaching and research in
data networking. It provides the opportunity to interact with more senior
researchers and to be exposed to leading edge research in the field. The support
requested in this proposal will enable the participation of students and
minority or minority serving faculty members who would otherwise be unable to
attend AMC SIGCOMM 2008. The Travel Grant committee and SIGCOMM are committed to
encouraging the participation of women and under-represented minorities.

Intellectual Merit: This project proposes to provide travel support for graduate
students and minority and minority-serving faculty members to attend SIGCOMM
2008. This will expose them to new ideas and allow for interaction with other
researchers.

Broader Impact This project integrates research and education of students
through exposure to the premier technical meeting in computer networks and
communications. Students and minority faculty will have the opportunity to
observe high-quality presentation and interact with senior researchers in the
field. The proposed student participation will have positive impact on students?
interest and the quality of their research. The faculty participation will have
an impact on teaching, the quality of the research and on their own students?
research in their home institutions.