* 0838525
* Collaborative Research:  High-resolution receiver function imaging of crustal structure in the Southern Great Basin, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Glenn Biasi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2011
* USD 13,405.00

The western United States is continuously being deformed by plate tectonic
forces. In this study area centered on the southern half of Nevada, the
characteristic alternating ranges and valleys of Nevada were formed in the past
by stretching of the Earth's crust, and more recently, the northwestward motion
of the western US coastal regions relative to the core of the continent.
Northwestward plate motion responsible for the San Andreas Fault is partly also
accommodated by a fault system in the California/Nevada border area. At 15 to 30
km depth, lower crustal rocks are under high enough temperature and pressure to
deform without brittle failure. How faulting and surface motions relate to lower
crustal deformation is largely unknown. Our study will use seismic recordings
from the University of Nevada, Reno Southern Great Basin Digital Seismic Network
to study this process. This network detects signals from worldwide earthquakes
after they are modified by the structure of the crust under the study area. By
looking at the differences between earthquake signals arriving from different
directions, the researchers can find signs of the deformation processes occuring
in the lower crust. There are several ways in which the lower crust could behave
during stretching and shearing of the crust. mong methods to estimate Moho depth
and to detect and measure crustal anisotropy, receiver functions offer one of
the best options.

Using a data set collected by the University of Nevada, Reno's short-period,
dense, long-running Southern Great Basin Digital Seismic Network, they performed
a pilot study showing that high-quality receiver functions can be obtained from
the data. The receiver functions show arrivals from the Moho as well as from
crustal structure, and indicate the presence of anisotropy, scattering, and
3-dimensional structure. The project plan is to apply multichannel stacking
techniques, including ones specific to anisotropy detection, a new bootstrap
windowing technique for receiver function calculation, and numerical forward
modeling in order to distinguish scattering from anisotropic conversions and to
detect crustal structures associated with tectonic processes. Receiver functions
will be calibrated against permanent and temporary broadband stations in the
area, including a handful of broadband stations colocated with the short-period
sensors in the same network. Crustal structure and anisotropy findings will be
interpreted in the context of the tectonic history and development of southwest
Nevada and eastern California in particular, and lower crustal deformation in
general.

Distinguishing which processes are operating in this study area may help other
geoscientists who look at deforming continental crust understand similar
activity in their field areas. Understanding crustal deformation, including what
happens in the lower crust, is foundational for studies of faulting and
earthquakes in the US and elsewhere.