* 0838434
* EMSW21-MCTP: Research Experience for Graduate Students
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Steven Bradlow, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2014
* USD 2,024,104.00

Abstract Bradlow

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Mathematics Department at UIUC aims to train stewards of the mathemat-ical
enterprise. Our programs facilitate all stages of development from prospective
undergraduate math major to senior mathematician. We propose here to enhance our
REGS program and thereby impact several critical transitions at the graduate
level. REGS stands for \Research Experiences for Graduate Students"; for many
students REGS provides the initial contact with research. Our current program
provides summer support for early graduate students to work (individually or in
a group) on a research project with one or several faculty mentors. We propose
here an enhanced program with four components: one for incoming Ph.D. students
(REGS 0), one for 1st- and 2nd-year Ph.D. students (REGS 1), one for students
who have already begun thesis research (REGS 2), and one for students about to
complete their dissertations (REGS 3). The first three components are summer
programs while the fourth provides a year-long fellowship. We will extend the
reach of our programs by including external participants in the REGS 0 and REGS
1 components. The external participants will include students from
underrepresented minority groups and also from schools which do not have
mathematics Ph.D. programs. The Mathematics Department at UIUC has a
distinguished record of research, scholarship, and training. Our current REGS
program has provided graduate students with early research experiences. Our
enhancements will stimulate their intellectual development at all stages of the
program. In addition we will provide similar opportunities to some students from
other programs. All students will work in research areas of current interest and
many will make original contributions to them. Furthermore the mini-courses from
the REGS 0 program will make the graduate curriculum more dynamic and better in
tune with current mathematical research. Our programs significantly impact the
quality and vitality of the national scientific workforce. Because we are a
large department with broad mathematical interests, our students go on to a wide
variety of careers. Those who become research mathematicians impact many
different fields, and those who work in industry or as teachers replicate our
commitment to mathematics in their settings as well. We have disseminated and
shared information about our programs via websites and publications; our
participation in the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate (CID) allowed us to
share the details of our REGS program. Our ideas are easily adapted to the needs
of other departments. Our enhancements include participants from other programs,
and hence will encourage an early transition to research for people outside of
our department. The REGS 0 component provides a way to recruit members of
disadvantaged minority groups to mathematical research.