* 0838171
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:   Boiling-Over Pyroclastic Flows
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Karen Harpp, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2012
* USD 88,145.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions often produce pyroclastic density currents, ground-
hugging mixtures of particles and hot gas that are denser than the ambient
atmosphere. Pyroclastic density currents rapidly propagate in the lowest levels
of the atmosphere where they can directly impact human population centers and
structures, and are some of the most hazardous volcanic phenomena. Pyroclastic
density currents erupted at Cotopaxi in 1877 and at Tungurahua in 2006 and 2008
were produced by a little understood process described as "boiling-over". During
a boiling-over eruption, a dense froth of pyroclasts and gas pours over the
crater rim or through a notch in the crater, creating a pyroclastic density
current. The mechanism for the formation of boiling-over pyroclastic density
currents differs in important ways from those that result from the collapse of
lava-domes or high convective columns, and the deposits are distinctive.
Boiling-over eruptions are likely common but under-recognized in the geologic
record, as most are associated with relatively small volume eruptions of
volatile-rich mafic to intermediate magmas. This project, which is supported by
the Petrology&amp;Geochemistry program and the Americas Program (OISE) is a
multidisciplinary, international collaborative effort in which numerical
modeling and field studies will be integrated to characterize boiling-over
deposits, determine why this style of eruption occurs, and understand the
transport of the resulting density currents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, this proposal focuses on two fundamental questions designed to
advance our understanding of pyroclastic density currents: 1. What conduit
conditions result in boiling-over dynamics? 2. What are the relative
contributions of eroded substrate and entrained air in boiling-over eruptions,
and how does this influence pyroclastic density current dynamics? It is proposed
to use 2D multiphase numerical models to test whether the presence of an
enclosed summit crater enhances the decompression rate, allowing for a rapid
sequence of exsolution and microlite crystallization over a limited spatial
domain. The results of this study will have general applicability to volcanoes
worldwide. The research team will also use petrographic and volatile content
observations from the field studies at Cotopaxi and Tungurahua as a crucial test
of the fidelity of the modeling program. They will test the hypothesis that
after exiting the summit crater, a particle-dense, bed load region in the
pyroclastic flows develops rapidly. This bed load region, which is constituted
of particles that make multiple and enduring contacts with the substrate, may
enhance erosion and gas pore pressure, and suppress ambient air-entrainment
resulting in longer runout distances of these flows. Detailed analysis of
deposit architecture, paleomagnetic measurements, and granulometry along with a
3D granular multiphase computational approach will be used to examine the role
of entrainment in the propagation of these flows. One of the many novel aspects
of the proposed investigation is the use of thermal proxies, including
thermoremanent magnetization, in conjunction with the numerical models to
constrain the thermal consequences of entrainment.