* 0838269
* How Does the Lower Crust Thicken and Grow During Continent Collisions? A Case Study of the Pamir
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bradley Hacker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2013
* USD 341,828.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Continent collisions can form large plateaus, like Tibet, producing thick crust
and high topography that affects climate change. How plateaus grow to become so
large is unresolved: either the lower parts of Earths crust flow at depths where
the temperatures are high (>30 km), or the crust thickens in a more brittle
fashion along faults that transect the entire crust. This research focuses on
this question using exposures of the lower crust in the Pamir Mountains of
Tajikistan. The impact of this research should be considerable and broad because
of the archetypal nature of the Tibetan and Pamir plateaus.

The PIs test models for crustal thickening within the framework of three
hypotheses: the Pamir lower crust was thickened and exhumed by local
intracontinental shortening during the Cenozoic, thickened by Cenozoic long-
distance flow and exhumed by local intracontinental shortening during the
Cenozoic, or thickened and exhumed mostly before the collision between India and
Asia. These hypotheses will be evaluated by U/Pb dating of zircon to determine
crystallization ages of plutons, Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd dating to measure crustal
thickening ages, thermobarometry to determine exhumation depths, 40Ar/39Ar,
fission-track, and (U+Th)/He dating to constrain thermal histories, and
structural analysis to determine deformation histories.