* 0838808
* Strengthening Qualitative Research:   Determining Identity in International Adoptions
* SBE,SES
* 02/21/2008,01/31/2010
* Vilna Bashi Treitler, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/2010
* USD 27,070.00

SES 0601801&lt;br/&gt;Vilna Bashi&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last 10 years, the number of adoptions
of foreign-born children completed by American parents has increased tenfold
over a wide number of countries, to the point where such adoptions number over
20,000 foreign-born children each year. Prospective parents tend to be racially
white, professional class, and wealthier than average. This project is designed
to answer two research questions regarding this surging phenomenon. The first
is: How do agents adopting American parents and international adoption agencies
make decisions about how they racially identify foreign born adopted children
and racially represent the nations from which the children come? The answer is
not predictable from the large and growing literature on what has been variously
called racial formation, racialization, and ethnoracial assignment. These
writings reinforce the idea that race is a system constructed on a premise that
some people are more deserving of privilege and preference than others, but they
also suggest that racial advantage and disadvantage is not doled out in a manner
fixed for all time. Racial privilege, instead, evolves with changing political
and economic circumstances. Much of this work is historically based, using legal
and historical analysis to re-tell the story of this historical change over
time. The project differs in that it attempts to capture a contemporary and
ongoing racialization process. A second question asks: What is the relationship
between gender and race in the international adoption process? This search for
the foreign-born can be said to be racially motivated, as scholars have
suggested that American race and class dynamics have created a "shortage" of
desirable &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies a more contemporary
manifestation of the racial assignment process by looking at the ways agents
involved in placing foreign-born children in American homes construct those
children's races, and help to set their racial identities, and to examine the
relationship between gender and race in these processes. The principal
investigator will use qualitative research methods to study the racial assigning
processes in three sites in which they occur. The first site focuses on adoption
agencies' representations, via a content analysis of the print materials they
provide to prospective parents, and through their websites. A second site of
research examines the growing cultural dialog on international adoption as
expressed in advice books on "how to" undertake an intercountry adoption, raise
a child different from oneself, and ensure your child learns his/her "culture."
There is also a nascent but expanding children's literature on international
adoption meant to comfort children who are foreign-born and/or explain the
adoption to them as they grow. The PI will use content analysis in order to
examine how print and visual media and other sites for advice in international
adoptive childrearing (e.g. cultural camps) contribute to or hope to influence
the racialization of these children. Finally, the PI will interview parents who
have adopted foreign-born children to understand parents' thoughts and processes
about the (inter-) racial aspects of international adoption, and learn about
their practices in raising their foreign-born child. The broader impacts of this
work include training undergraduate and graduate students. Results will be
disseminated widely and the data will be made available to other researchers
interested in replication and reanalysis. This data availability contributes to
strengthening qualitative research methods.&lt;br/&gt;