* 0838849
* Collaborative Research: Exploring A 2 Million + Year Ice Climate Archive-Allan Hills Blue Ice Area (2MBIA)
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Michael Bender, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2014
* USD 446,763.00

This award supports a project to generate an absolute timescale for the Allan
Hills Blue Ice Area (BIA), and then to reconstruct details of past climate
changes and greenhouse gas concentrations for certain time periods back to 2.5
Ma. Ice ages will be determined by applying emerging methods for absolute and
relative dating of trapped air bubbles (based on Argon-40/Argon-38, delta-18O of
O2, and the O2/N2 ratio). To demonstrate the potential of the Allan Hills BIAs
as a paleoclimate archive trenches and ice cores will be collected for age
intervals corresponding to 110-140 ka, 1 Ma, and 2.5 Ma. During the proposed two
field seasons a total of 6x100 m and additional 15 m cores will be combined with
trenching. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is that the results
of this work will extend the landmark work of EPICA and other deep ice coring
efforts, which give records dating back to 0.8 Ma, and will complement work
planned by IPICS to drill a continuous Antarctic ice core extending to 1.5 Ma.
The results will help to advance understanding of major climate regimes and
transitions that took place between 0-2.5 Ma, including the 40 kyr world and the
mid-Pleistocene climate transition. A major long-term scientific goal is to
provide a transformative approach to the collection of paleoclimate records by
establishing an "International Climate Park" in the Allan Hills BIA that would
enable sampling of large quantities of known age ice as old as 2.5 Ma, by any
interested American or foreign investigator. The broader impacts resulting from
the proposed activity include training students who are well versed in advanced
field, laboratory and numerical modeling methods combining geochemistry,
glaciology, and paleoclimatology. We will include material relevant to our
proposed research in our ongoing efforts in local education and in our outreach
efforts for media. The University of Maine already has cyberinfrastructure,
using state of the art web-based technology, which can provide a wide community
of scientists with fast access to the results of our research. The work will
contribute to the broad array of climate change studies that is informing
worldwide understanding of natural and anthropogenic forced climate change, and
the options for responding. This award has field work in Antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;