* 0838061
* Theoretical Studies in Aeronomy
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Steven Guberman, Institute for Scientific Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2013
* USD 584,000.00

Electron-ion collisions play an important role in determining the plasma and
chemical properties of the Earth's ionosphere. Using parameters calculated under
prior National Science Foundation support, theoretical quantal calculations will
be made to determine the atomic state quantum yields resulting from the
dissociative recombination of N2+ with an electron, i.e. N2+ + e- leading to N +
N. Dissociative recombination generates the N(2D) and N(2P) excited states,
upper states of well known ionosphere emission lines. Vibrationally excited ions
are present at high abundance in the ionosphere but atomic quantum yields for
excited ions have never been determined by theory or experiment. By using a new
technique, the project will yield accurate quantum yields for the lowest five
ion vibrational levels over the wide range of ionospheric electron temperatures.
Calculations will also be performed for the vibrational deexcitation of N2+ by
electrons, and for the rotational deexcitation and excitation of N2+ by
electrons in the Earth's ionosphere. These processes may have high rate
constants. Currently, there is no theoretical or experimental information on
this fundamental process. Calculations will also be performed for another
molecular species in the ionosphere, NO+, since recent observations found that
highly rotationally excited NO+ is present in the upper atmosphere. None of the
prior laboratory experiments or theoretical calculations have determined
dissociative recombination rate constants and quantum yields for very high
rotationally excited NO+. Using techniques similar to those developed for the
study of N2+, the dissociative recombination rate constants and quantum yields
will be determined for NO+ with high rotational excitation. For relaxed ions,
prior experimental studies have disagreed on the electron temperature dependence
of the dissociative recombination rate constant. The electron temperature
dependence and the quantum yields will be calculated for the full range of
ionospheric temperatures. The broader impacts of the project include the
convening of an international conference devoted to the latest developments in
dissociative recombination research. The 8th Meeting will be held in 2010 at
Lake Tahoe, California, with the project providing support for student travel. A
website on dissociative recombination is maintained, which provides the rate
coefficient data for N2+ for dissociative recombination, vibrational
excitation/relaxation and rotational excitation/relaxation and the full set of
data that enters the calculations. A section of the website is allotted to
explanatory material and an animation for nonexperts.