* 0838893
* SBIR Phase I:  High-efficiency Multi-carrier Ribbon-beam Amplifier for Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Thomas Bemis, Beam Power Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This SBIR Phase I research proposal will demonstrate an innovative Ribbon-Beam
Amplifier (RBA) which significantly advances the state-of-the-art in solid-state
and vacuum electronic Radio Frequency (RF) amplification. The goal is to
determine the feasibility of a ribbon-beam amplifier that is highly efficient
(56%), broadband (1930-1990 MHz), and high power (100 W in continuous-wave
operation). As a next-generation RF amplifier, the RBA is expected to be
applicable to third-generation (3G) wireless communications and future wireless
communication platforms such as emerging fourth generation (4G) and ultra-wide-
band (UWB) wireless communications. If successful, this project will lead to
commercially deployable RBA products overcoming the limitations of existing
solid-state multi-carrier power amplifiers (MPCAs) which have low efficiency,
complex and expensive linearization circuits, and narrow instantaneous bandwidth
(30 MHz).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology will significantly lower
both the capital cost and operating cost of commercial wireless base station
amplifiers. Using increases in efficiency of a factor of 2 to 3 over current
solid state products provides for cost reduction in primary power usage by the
amplifiers themselves; operating cost and capital cost reduction from lower
power output requirements of backup power sources such as batteries and
auxiliary power generators needed for power outage conditions; smaller power
supplies; and smaller less expensive cooling systems. &lt;br/&gt;