* 0838265
* Controls on Growth of the Puna Plateau, Northwestern Argentina
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Douglas Burbank, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2013
* USD 282,370.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Both the mechanisms of growth of orogenic plateaus and the processes that
control or limit their growth remain controversial. Within currently active
orogens, only two large-scale orogenic plateaus (in Tibet and the Andes) have
developed during Cenozoic times. At the broadest scale, their growth has been
driven by sustained plate convergence. If such convergence continues into the
future, will these plateaus continue to expand? What controls whether they reach
a stable size, continuously expand, or begin to shrink or collapse? This
research project explores the factors that limit plateau growth and the
interplay between tectonic forcing and erosion that modulates changes in
topography along plateau margins with particular focus on one mode of plateau
growth: synchronous growth of thrust-related ranges with filling of high, ponded
intermontane basins during times of relative aridity. The enhanced crustal loads
represented by the basin-range couplet are proposed to drive outward propagation
of deformation. This project will be focused along the northeastern margin of
the Puna Plateau and the adjacent Eastern Cordillera of northwestern Argentina,
a region that lies astride an abrupt climatic boundary and boasts multiple
generations of late Cenozoic thrusting and episodes of basin filling and
emptying. Successive faults overthrust conglomerates and fluvial-lacustrine
strata and are then buried by younger gravels. Radiometric dating of the
numerous volcanic ashes that are preserved within the basin fills, as well as
within conglomerates will permit tight time control on the growth and decay of
the plateau margin and will underpin a detailed reconstruction of the interplay
of range growth, an evolving fluvial network, and multiple cycles of basin
filling and emptying.

Orogenic plateaus represent extensive topographic regions characterized by high
elevation, but low topographic relief. The two largest plateaus on earth today
have resulted from tectonic plate convergence in the Himalaya and the Andes. The
margins of such plateaus are the sites of great earthquakes (such as the
devastating ones in Sichuan and Kashmir). Being immense areas of high
topography, such plateaus impact global climate by diverting the jet stream,
modulating the strength and path of the monsoon, and influencing patterns of
rainfall. These plateaus also provide the water that supports over 2 billion
people. An improved understanding of how plateaus grow, what controls where
faulting occurs, and whether topographic thresholds exist that control climatic
change is of significant scientific and societal value. This project focuses on
the eastern flank of the Puna Plateau in Argentina, where excellent exposures
and a rich diversity of datable volcanic ashes permit reconstruction of the
history of plateau growth in a detailed temporal framework. The results of this
study will assist the ongoing effort to understand the interactions among
climate and tectonics in large, actively deforming mountain ranges.