* 0838211
* The Ynalche Project:  The Political Ecology of Late Prehispanic Agriculture on the North Coast of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Frances Hayashida, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 259,048.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Frances Hayashida and a
team of students and specialists will explore the organization and ecology of
late pre-Columbian agriculture on the Pampa de Chaparrí, a remarkably well-
preserved archaeological landscape in the Lambayeque region of the north coast
of Peru. During the first phase of research, project members surveyed the
western half of the pampa and recorded nearly five hundred sites. The results
indicated that canals were initially built in ca. A.D. 900 by people of the
Sicán polity, which was based in Lambayeque. Under the Sicán, water management
was largely decentralized and in the hands of local social groups, a pattern
that persisted for nearly five hundred years. Following conquest by the Chimú
Empire in ca. A.D. 1350-1400, everything changed: new administrative centers
were built and the reorganization of settlements and fields suggest that the
state took direct control of the best-watered lands.

In the second phase of research, the project will take a closer look at local
transformations as the pampa was pulled into the Chimú economic, political, and
cultural spheres. How did the decisions of distant imperial rulers change local
land use practices and landscapes? What were the effects on local farming
communities and households and how did they respond? A secondary goal is to
collect preliminary information on El Niño-related flooding on the pampa to
inform future work on the impacts and effects of these disturbances on north
coastal populations and agricultural landscapes.

To address these issues, an international team of archaeologists, geologists,
and botanists will (1) complete the survey by covering the eastern pampa, (2)
map Sicán and Chimú farming settlements to document changes in organization, (3)
excavate houses for evidence of the daily economic and social lives of Sicán and
Chimú inhabitants, (4) excavate canals and gullies to develop local records of
El Niño events, and (5) collect modern plant specimens to help identify the
fragmented remains of crops and local vegetation from archaeological sites.

Intellectual merit: The project will examine the effects on local people and
landscapes of incorporation into a larger political economy. In modern contexts,
these effects (e.g., in the case of globalization) have received a great deal of
attention; archaeology provides a deep historical perspective on these dynamics
that is not obtainable through any other field of study. The project will also
contribute to comparative studies of imperialism and deepen our understanding of
the agrarian economies of Andean states.

Broader impacts: Results from the project will be broadly disseminated to both
professional and public audiences in presentations and publications in the U.S.
and Peru. American and Peruvian graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in all stages of fieldwork and analysis and will have the
opportunity to develop thesis and dissertation projects. Finally, the Pampa de
Chaparrí is under threat of development for industrial agriculture, which would
obliterate this unique pre-Columbian landscape and the history of the farmers
who lived there. The project will strengthen local efforts to document and
preserve the pampa's irreplaceable cultural and historical resources.