* 0838146
* Collaborative Research: Testing Channel-flow Models Using Mid-crustal Rocks of North Himalayan Gneiss Domes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Jeffrey Lee, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2014
* USD 201,872.00

Recent models suggest that the middle crust beneath the high Tibetan
&lt;br/&gt;Plateau flows southward toward India because of the difference in
&lt;br/&gt;topography between Tibet and India; the models further suggest that
this &lt;br/&gt;extruding material emerges at Earths surface in the high-erosion
area &lt;br/&gt;of the Himalaya. These models make specific predictions about
how the &lt;br/&gt;flow varies in magnitude and direction with depth. This
project uses &lt;br/&gt;structural geology and geochronology to test these
predictions to see &lt;br/&gt;whether the models are correct, and if they are
not, how the models &lt;br/&gt;might be refined. This is an important test to
conduct because the &lt;br/&gt;India?Asia collision is Earths largest ongoing
continent collision and &lt;br/&gt;serves as an important lens for viewing older
continental collisions that &lt;br/&gt;happened throughout Earths
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers Jeff Lee of Central Washington
University, Bradley Hacker&lt;br/&gt; from the University of California Santa
Barbara, and their students will &lt;br/&gt;investigate the spatial and temporal
distribution of kinematics, &lt;br/&gt;vorticity, finite strain, and deformation
temperature in strongly &lt;br/&gt;deformed middle crustal rocks exposed in the
North Himalayan gneiss &lt;br/&gt;domes, southern Tibet, using structural
petrology, finite-strain &lt;br/&gt;analysis, electron-backscatter diffraction
(EBSD), and metamorphic &lt;br/&gt;monazite geochronology. This research is
motivated by recently &lt;br/&gt;formulated thermal, mechanical channel
flow/extrusion models that &lt;br/&gt;postulate that the middle crust exposed in
the high Himalaya and &lt;br/&gt;southern Tibet was a low-viscosity, ductile
material, bounded above and &lt;br/&gt;below by coeval normal- and thrust-sense
shear zones, respectively, that &lt;br/&gt;flowed and extruded to the south.
Flow within a channel can range from &lt;br/&gt;pure Couette flow to Poiseuille
flow, or be a combination of the two. &lt;br/&gt;The investigators and their
students will document the deformation and &lt;br/&gt;timing during ductile flow
to provide a comprehensive spatial, thermal, &lt;br/&gt;and temporal history of
deformation and flow in middle crustal rocks &lt;br/&gt;in southern Tibet. These
studies, combined with similar published and &lt;br/&gt;ongoing studies in the
high Himalaya, will provide an unprecedented &lt;br/&gt;view of middle crustal
flow parallel to the transport direction over &lt;br/&gt;a distance of 50 to 100
km.