* 0838550
* Virtual Teams in 3D Virtual Environments:  A Comparative Analysis of Project Team Innovation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Alan Meyer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 358,795.00

This research investigates the conditions under which three-dimensional virtual
environments (3DVEs) best support innovation. Ideally, virtual teams can support
innovation by providing the benefits of diverse knowledge acquired from
different contexts. However, while traditional information communication
technology (ICT) has made virtual teams possible, it does not provide the ?co-
presence? that face-to-face communicators use to draw inferences about one
another?s knowledge, limiting the understanding and problem solving necessary
for innovation. 3DVEs offer an electronic surrogate for face-to-face
communication. But, despite the promise of 3DVEs, little is known of how teams
operate in 3D virtual worlds or what work practices are more successful. A
multidisciplinary team composed of researchers specializing in organization
theory and learning in virtual environments has partnered with computer
scientists from Sun Microsystems to explore the co-evolution of technical tools
and work routines in 3DVEs and to evaluate which technical tools and work
routines best support innovation. The team will conduct a comparative analysis
of nine project teams at Sun Microsystems: one group of three teams using
traditional ICT, a second group of three teams operating in Sun?s
3DVE?Wonderland?and a third group of three teams operating in Linden Labs?
3DVE?Second Life. This research will advance our understanding of virtual teams
and sociotechnical systems as well as collaborative innovation and learning in
3DVEs. Society at large will benefit from advancing understanding of the
effectiveness of 3DVEs for learning and innovation.