* 0838400
* VOSS:  HRCT Scanning as Glue:   Sociotechnical Analysis and Support of a Loosely-Coupled Virtual Organization of Emergent Distributed Projects
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Timothy Ryan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 07/31/2013
* USD 412,000.00

As the options for obtaining and sharing scientific information and problem-
solving expand, there is an increasing need to understand and support the
sociotechnical requirements of distributed scientific collaboration. While
considerable attention has been directed at technical infrastructures for
distributed science and engineering, little is known about how these entities
function as virtual organizations ? how they formulate and pursue shared goals,
acquire and manage resources, plan and implement tasks, and so on. This project
will examine these issues in the context of a hybrid two-layer structure common
in scientific communities: a persistent loosely-coupled virtual organization
that itself consists of emergent distributed projects. The focal case subject is
the virtual organization that has emerged around a rare piece of scientific
equipment, a High Resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT) scanner, one of three
such scanners worldwide. The scanner belongs to the Center for Quantitatitve
Imaging (CQI), a research center associated with Penn State?s Department of
Anthropology, which is used to generate three-dimensional internal maps of
physical structures for human and animal subjects. The availability of these
high-quality images has promoted many cross-institution and international
research collaborations within the scientific community of physical
anthropology. The HRCT virtual organization (henceforth HRCT-VO) is complex
because it has a two-layer structure that is constantly changing shape. In one
layer it provides persistent support for managing the scanning tasks and
resulting data; in the other, it supports emergent projects that overlap in
timeline, personnel, and resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of the
HRCT-VO is guided by these research questions: (1) What sociotechnical practices
have emerged for coordinating access to, interaction with, maintenance of, and
dissemination from the HRCT scanner and its datasets? (2) How do these practices
vary as a function of different distributed project needs and characteristics
(e.g., size, project age, research goals and methods)? (3) How can these
practices be better supported or enhanced through information and communication
technology (ICT)? (4) How does the sociotechnical system evolve in response to
new ICT support? The project will yield a rich qualitative account of the
dependencies and coordination practices of virtual organizations that leverage a
shared resource among diverse and overlapping distributed projects, including
how these practices evolve in the presence of customized technology support. A
direct impact will be improved practices for accessing and managing scientific
resources in physical anthropology and more broadly to virtual organizations
with similar two-layer structures in other domain areas. Finally the project
will train undergraduate students in methods for analyzing and addressing real
world socio-technical problems in the research domain.