* 0838247
* Ambient Near-Coastal Seismic Noise  and Temporal Monitoring
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Robert Clayton, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2013
* USD 323,200.00

The researchers will use the locations of secondary ocean microseisms noise to
improve the&lt;br/&gt;temporal resolution of changes in crustal velocity, and to
map the locations of coastal&lt;br/&gt;reflections of primary ocean waves. The
proposed microseisms source location technique&lt;br/&gt;is based on an
algorithm developed for real-time earthquake locations and is suitable
for&lt;br/&gt;areas like Southern California where multiple simultaneous sources
are located within a&lt;br/&gt;few hundred km offshore and where there is a well
distributed seismic array on land. The&lt;br/&gt;use of source locations
overcomes a problem with standard correlation methods that&lt;br/&gt;require a
random distribution of sources to achieve precise measurements,
which&lt;br/&gt;translates to long correlation times and hence a reduced
temporal resolution. Using a set&lt;br/&gt;of source locations, a shorter
synthetic seismogram can be used in the correlation. The&lt;br/&gt;coastal
reflection points will be determined by forming an adjoint problem with
the&lt;br/&gt;hypothesized reflection source and an incident primary wavefield
determined from high resolution&lt;br/&gt;Wave Action Models
(WAM's).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The source locations procedure is demonstrated
with both a synthetic and real data&lt;br/&gt;examples. The results show that
there are often many source points active at any given&lt;br/&gt;time. They
provide two independent approaches: (1)&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
measurements of the intensity of wave-wave&lt;br/&gt;interactions at the source
regions ? a necessary condition for microseisms generation. A&lt;br/&gt;new
airborne system that will be flown in June 2008 over the offshore S. California
to&lt;br/&gt;look for opposing ocean wavefields which are indicative of the
source points. (2) A&lt;br/&gt;comparison between the amplitudes of the observed
micoseisms and estimated&lt;br/&gt;amplitudes calculated using the source
locations and the theory of ocean microseisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature
of the&lt;br/&gt;coastal reflections is currently poorly understood. This
research will provide the&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to develop a model for this
process and to ultimately to generate a description&lt;br/&gt;of the complete
wave-field that can be incorporated into the next generation of
Wave&lt;br/&gt;Action Models. Microseisms provide a means to continuously
monitor the Rayleigh&lt;br/&gt;wave speed across the Los Angeles basins as a
potential proxy for stress changes. The&lt;br/&gt;use of sources in this
procedure increases the temporal resolutions and removes the&lt;br/&gt;problem
of systematic bias due to the assumption of random source
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research bridges three communities: radar
interferometry,&lt;br/&gt;oceanography and seismology and hence has the
potential to spur research in all these&lt;br/&gt;areas. Determining the
mechanisms for coastal reflections will significantly enhance
the&lt;br/&gt;community wave action models. The application to southern
California can be extended&lt;br/&gt;to several other areas including northern
California, Cascadia, and Japan. The procedure&lt;br/&gt;established by this
research could become part of the standard seismic monitoring
of&lt;br/&gt;Southern California