* 0838830
* Photoheterotrophic Microbes in the West Antarctic Peninsula Marine Ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 425,541.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light quality and availability
are likely to change in polar ecosystems as ice coverage and thickness decrease.
How microbes adjust to these and other changes will have huge impacts on the
polar marine ecosystems. Little is known about photoheterotrophic prokaryotes,
which are hypothesized to gain a metabolic advantage by harvesting light energy
in addition to utilizing dissolved organic matter (DOM). Photoheterotrophy is
not included in current models of carbon cycling and energy flow. This research
will examine three questions: 1. Are photoheterotrophic microbes present and
active in Antarctic waters in winter and summer? 2. Does community structure of
photoheterotrophs shift between summer and winter? 3. Which microbial groups
assimilate more DOM in light than in the dark? The research will test hypotheses
about activity of photoheterotrophs in winter and in summer, shifts in community
structure between light and dark seasons and the potentially unique impacts of
photoheterotrophs on biogeochemical processes in the Antarctic. The project will
directly support a graduate student, will positively impact the NSF REU program
at the College of Marine and Earth Studies, and will include students from the
nation?s oldest historical minority college. The results will be featured during
weekly tours of Lewes facilities (about 1000 visitors per year) and during Coast
Day, an annual open-house that attracts about 10,000 visitors.