* 0838607
* Science Plan of the WATer and Environmental Research Systems Network (WATERS Network)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2010
* John Braden, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Barbara Karn
* 12/31/2010
* USD 900,000.00

CBET-0838607&lt;br/&gt;Dozier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
WATERS Network is an initiative to transform science and engineering of the
water environment. The goal is to create a national capability to better predict
and manage the behavior of water-and its nutrients, contaminants, and sediments-
everywhere in the U.S. Population growth, evolving land use, and climate change
make the future water environment uncertain, so prediction and management
require understanding along with statistical relationships, and thereby require
integration among people who study how water moves and transforms landscapes;
who manage and treat water to ensure potable supplies and prevent floods; and
who consider how humans, institutions, and managed systems respond to and
superimpose variability on quality, scarcity, or hazard.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driving the requirement for an integrated, collaboratively
developed infrastructure is the recognition that we have to predict and manage
water nationwide. Predicting Water Quality and Quantity Everywhere at All Times
(WQ2EAT) requires a judicious integration of models and syn-thesis,
cyberinfrastructure, education and outreach, existing networks, and remotely
sensed data, along with new measurements, analyses, and experiments at a
realistic number of carefully chosen sites or basins. A network of observational
and experimental facilities, where processes are studied and manipulated, will
provide knowledge that can be transferred to any location on the continent. The
proposed network spans the domain of water environments-pristine, rural, and
urban areas and constructed networks and facilities for management and
treatment. The capacity for prediction ranges from episodic events such as
floods and storm-water overflows, through seasonal spring runoff and surges of
agricultural wastes, to multi-decadal projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The task
of the investigation is to create a prototype network design that will enable
detailed specification and budgeting to prepare for a conceptual design review.
The investigation will analyze existing sources of data across a domain
representing the extant human-influenced water environment, conduct modeling
exercises to identify new measurement needs and predict in locations where we
lack intensive measurements, and scrutinize emerging technologies and different
variables to observe at different scales. Alternative observational designs, as
well as experimental facilities and campaigns, will be evaluated according to
their capability to support key scientific objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
WATERS Network will help us understand and predict the ways in which
heterogeneous processes interact with one another at different scales to produce
the variability found in the water environment. Knowledge about explicitly
scale-dependent processes will thereby inform options for management and
engineering design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water for human consumption,
agriculture, and industrial processes is perhaps humanitys most fundamental
need. Our traditional methods of predicting and managing water and its quality
are based on statistical relations developed when human impacts were isolated
and climate was relatively stable. These boundary conditions are changing, hence
the need for new fundamental understanding. The WATERS Network focuses on the
U.S., but the knowledge gained and the technologies developed will apply
globally.