* 0838595
* Probabilistic models of learning and cognitive development, May 2009 workshop, Banff, Canada
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Thomas Griffiths, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2009
* USD 56,982.00

The proposed workshop, to be held at the Banff International Research Station
for Mathematical Innovation and Discovery, aims to capitalize on a major new
direction in research on formal models of human cognition, exploring
probabilistic models of learning and cognitive development. The technical
advances that have been made in the use of probabilistic models over the last
twenty years in statistics, computer science, and machine learning have made
this research enterprise possible, resulting in a set of mathematical and
computational tools that can be used to build explicit models of psychological
phenomena. By indicating the conclusions that a rational learner might draw from
the data provided by experience, Bayesian models can be used to investigate how
nature and nurture contribute to human knowledge. Although computational models
have been used to aid empirical research on learning in the past, the lack of
communication and collaboration between formal theorists and experimental
laboratories has always been a stumbling block. This workshop will bring
together two groups of researchers: experts in computational modeling and
scientists studying cognitive development. The goal is both to report and to
discuss the progress we have made so far with existing collaborative research
and to foster future collaborations between computational scientists and
learning researchers, leading to new insights and new models of how people learn
and develop. A special emphasis will be placed on developing strategies of the
application of these insights to educational research and practice.