* 0838914
* Rift Mechanisms and Thermal Regime of the Lithosphere across Beardmore Glacier Region, Central Transantarctic Mountains, from Magnetotelluric Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2012
* USD 430,245.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The investigators will examine competing hypotheses for the
mechanism of extension and creation of the Transantarctic Mountains, and
evolution of the thermal regimes of rifted West Antarctica and stable East
Antarctica using magnetotelluric (MT) profiles. Surrounded almost entirely by
ocean ridges, Antarctica is a special tectonic situation because of the need to
make accommodation space for rifting in the Transantarctic region. In the MT
method, temporal variations in the Earth's natural electromagnetic field are
used as source fields to probe the electrical resistivity structure in the depth
range of 1 to 200 km, or more. Geophysical methods, such as MT, are appropriate
in Antarctica because of the predominance of thick ice cover over most of the
Continent and the difficult operating environment. The proposed effort will
consist of approximately 50 sites over a distance approaching 500 km with a 10
km average spacing, oriented normal to the Transantarctic Mountains (TAM), in
the Beardmore glacier area. High quality MT soundings will be collected over
thick ice sheets using a custom electrode preamp design, updated from previous
Antarctic projects. Data acquisition will take place over two field seasons. The
primary goals are three-fold: to establish the location of the deeper tectonic
transition between East and West Antarctica that may be offset from the
physiographic transition at the surface, using deep resistivity structure
distinguish between modes of extensional upwelling and magmatism that may be
vertically non-uniform, depth and magnitude of quasi-layered deep crustal low
resistivity, particularly below West Antarctica, will be used to estimate
crustal heat flux into the ice sheet base.