* 0838100
* Survey of Networking Infrastructure Capabilities of EPSCoR, Minority-Serving and Rurally Located Higher Education Institutions
* O/D,EPS
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Mark Luker, Educause
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 12/31/2009
* USD 51,521.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
EPS-0838100&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Survey of Networking
Infrastructure Capabilities of EPSCoR, Minority Serving, and Rurally Located
Higher Education Institutions &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Educause&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals: Educause will design and conduct a survey
to assess the current bandwidth network connectivity available for academic
research at EPSCoR, minority serving, and rural institutions, as well as the
perceived needs bandwidth needs of these institutions. The University of
Michigan will aid Educause in the conduct of the survey and the compilation of
data. In addition, Educause will host a workshop to which higher education
leaders of these institutions will be invited to discuss the survey findings. In
addition, Educause will produce a comprehensive report of the data collected and
submit the report to the National Science Foundation (NSF), NSF will used the
findings to inform the Foundations? response to Section 7020 of the America
Competes Act. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This is a
timely project and recruits the appropriate expertise and methods to conduct the
survey, and to collect, analyze, and summarize the data. The information
collected will be essential for any Foundation level strategic planning in the
area of connectivity for academic research. The results of the activity will
enable the Foundation to meet one of its obligations under the America Competes
Act. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The ?digital divide?
remains a critical issue in national cyberinfrastructure. Bandwidth is one of
the limiting factors affecting access to information and computing capacity at
EPSCoR, minority serving, and rural institutions. Any effort that can assist in
developing implementation plans that can expand broadband access of these
institutions will improve their research and economic
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;