* 0838252
* Integrating Geologic, Geodetic, and Coastal Tide Gauge Observations with 100-year Vertical Deformation Models of California Earthquake History
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Bridget Smith-Konter, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2013
* USD 230,773.00

This project investigates earthquake-induced vertical deformation using a
synthesis of coastal tide gauge, geodetic, and geologic data of the Pacific-
North American plate boundary. While the growing archive of space geodetic data
in this region provides precise deformation measurements with a high degree of
spatial coverage, these data supply only a 15-year record of crustal motions and
therefore only weakly constrain time-dependence of crustal motions. Geologic
data provide a 1000-year averaged record of deformation, however these data are
often sparsely located and can have large uncertainties. Alternatively, sea
level change has been continuously recorded along the California coastline at
several tide gauge stations for over the past 50-100 years. These stations
provide a temporal record of sea level change, generally attributed to post-
glacial rebound and ocean climate phenomena. However, geologic processes,
including displacements from large earthquakes, have also been shown to produce
sea level variations, as vertical interseismic strain accumulation can
contribute uplift and subsidence rates of 1-3 mm/yr. Using coastal tide gauge
time series data, this project is exploring the correlation between sea level
variations and estimates of vertical displacements produced by a three-
dimensional earthquake cycle deformation model that is constrained by geologic
slip rates, geodetic velocities, and historical seismic data along the San
Andreas fault system. First order vertical deformation estimates derived from
geologically and geodetically constrained models are highly compatible with
long-term sea level trends, however further analysis is needed to thoroughly
explore model parameter space and investigate sources of misfit and unmodeled
phonomena. The project will integrate 100-year coastal tide gauge data
(Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level), geodetic data (EarthScope Plate Boundary
Observatory continuous GPS and InSAR) spanning the last 15 years, and a new
geologic database (Southern California Earthquake Center Geologic Vertical
Motion Map).

This study investigates the long-term role of tectonic deformation on sea level
change recorded over the past 100 years along the California coastline. In doing
so, these research activities contribute to the objectives of NSF?s EarthScope
Initiative by further advancing our understanding of fault system crustal
dynamics, earthquake hazards, and data synthesis. The data and model products
generated by this investigation will provide an enhanced infrastructure for
education and public awareness of both past and present earthquake hazards in
California. Furthermore, because a major California earthquake has the potential
for massive economic and human loss, quantitative seismic hazard estimates,
which rely on an accurate characterization of tectonic motions in California,
are critical to the advancement of earthquake science.