* 0838692
* A Sage/SciPy Developer Workshop: Special Functions and Computational Number Theory Meet Scientific Computing; Austin, TX
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Irene Gamba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 01/31/2010
* USD 9,000.00

This workshop is an instance of SAGE Days (number 11 to be precise),
a&lt;br/&gt;periodic gathering where developers of the software package SAGE,
a&lt;br/&gt;free and open software that supports research and teaching in
algebra,&lt;br/&gt;geometry, number theory, cryptography, and related areas,
address&lt;br/&gt;current issues of the software, program for very long hours,
either&lt;br/&gt;improving existing code or adding new code, and plan the next
steps to&lt;br/&gt;be taken. For example, this workshop includes working on
adding to&lt;br/&gt;SAGE the capability to work with modular forms over
function&lt;br/&gt;fields. In addition to the above standard features of such a
meeting,&lt;br/&gt;this particular workshop includes a strong emphasis in the
interaction&lt;br/&gt;betwen algebra and number theory (the area of the bulk of
the SAGE&lt;br/&gt;developers and researchers in attendance) and computer
science,&lt;br/&gt;supercomputing (from TACC, the Texas supercomputing center)
and&lt;br/&gt;applied Mathematics (from ICES, the Institute for
Computational&lt;br/&gt;Engineering and Sciences) at the University of Texas at
Austin, as&lt;br/&gt;well as researchers working outside academia (from
Entought, an Austin&lt;br/&gt;based
company).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this workshop are:
(i) to support the development of&lt;br/&gt;the free and open source software
SAGE by gathering some of its&lt;br/&gt;developers as well as researchers that
use it in their own research;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) to bring together the SAGE
commnunity and various research&lt;br/&gt;groups at the host location, the
University of Texas at Austin, that&lt;br/&gt;while might have very different
research focus share many common&lt;br/&gt;computational problems and needs. To
give just one example, being&lt;br/&gt;able to solve large linear algebra
problems accurately and fast is a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problem that underlies
essentially any type of scientific&lt;br/&gt;computation imaginable. The
availability of high level software is&lt;br/&gt;nowadays of crucial and
increasing importance for research in&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, both in applied and
pure Mathematics. SAGE is an example&lt;br/&gt;of a be very powerful computer
package that is at the cutting edge&lt;br/&gt;(in terms of the sophistication of
its capabilities as well as its&lt;br/&gt;speed) of existing tools for research
in Mathematics and its&lt;br/&gt;applications; particularly, in those areas
related to algebra, number&lt;br/&gt;theory, geometry and cryptography. The
workshop is planned with the&lt;br/&gt;SAGE development model in mind,
distinguished by an emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;openness, community, cooperation, and
collaboration.