* 0838773
* Collaborative Research: The Chemical Ecology of Shallow-water Marine Macroalgae and Invertebrates on the Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Charles Amsler, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 09/30/2013
* USD 703,313.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The near shore
environments of the western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) harbor extremely high
densities of mesograzers (small invertebrate predators approximately 1-25 mm in
length) such as benthic amphipods, as well as rich assemblages of macroalgae,
endophytes, and macroinvertebrates. Unlike temperate and tropical shallow marine
environments, where fish and sea urchins are key grazers structuring the
community, mesograzers appear to be much more important in the WAP. Accordingly,
the proposed research has two main objectives: (1) To further investigate the
interactions between the ecologically dominant large macrophytes, filamentous
epi/endophytes, and mesograzers and (2) To determine the nature of interactions
between mesograzers and sessile invertebrates. Specifically, the research will
examine the following hypotheses: 1: The effects of endophytes on macrophytes
are often negative, and consequently macrophytes defend against endophytic
infection. 2: Mesoherbivores prevent filamentous algal species, common in the
intertidal, from dominating subtidal assemblages. 3: Mesograzer predation
pressure on sessile benthic macroinvertebrates, primarily sponges and tunicates,
is greatest in shallow habitats dominated by macrophytes, and this impacts depth
distributions of macroinvertebrate species. 4: Benthic macroinvertebrates may
defend against mesograzers with secondary metabolites which effect molting
and/or deter feeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include involvement
of undergraduates, including minorities, in research; training of graduate
students, and continuation of the highly successful UAB IN ANTARCTICA
interactive web program (two time recipient of awards of excellence from the US
Council for Advancement and Support of Education). The researchers also will
share their scientific endeavors with teachers, K-12 students, and other members
of the community at large while in residence in Antarctica. In addition, the
investigators will request the participation of a PolarTREC teacher.