* 0838576
* Tectonic Evolution and Paleoclimatic History of the Basin and Range Province: New Constraints from Clumped-Isotope Thermometry
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2011
* USD 148,241.00

From the middle Mesozoic (approximately million year ago) to the present, the
topography of the western Cordillera of North America evolved in response to a
diverse history of uplift, exhumation, and down-drop, due in part to first
convergence and then transform motion along the western margin of North America.
This time interval also saw many dramatic changes in global climate, including
the transition from a Mesozoic-Paleogene greenhouse to a Neogene world with ice
on the poles. The role of climate change in the tectonic evolution of the
western Cordillera has been much discussed, as has the influence of topography
on paleoclimate. In this project, two cutting-edge techniques from stable
isotope geochemistry will be used to determine past temperatures and
paleohydrology, which will allow reconstruction of past elevations across the
northern Basin and Range Province. Variations in past temperature and hydrology
will be mapped during three key time intervals - the warm Late Cretaceous
(approximately 70 million years ago) and Early Eocene (approximately 55 million
years ago), and the relatively cool Late Miocene (approximately 10 million years
ago). By mapping isotopic variations at different time slices, past elevations
at interior sites can be estimated while controlling for the effects of global
climate change on geochemical records. This approach will address outstanding
questions about the tectonic history of western North America, such as: Was
there a very high plateau in western Nevada in the Late Cretaceous, analogous to
the current South American Altiplano? Was the region east of the Sierra Nevada
Mountains at low or high elevation during the Eocene? The answer should be clear
in temperature and isotope hydrology profiles across the region.

Elevation is a fundamental parameter in tectonics. Reconstructing past elevation
is therefore critical for testing geodynamic models that have been proposed to
explain the tectonic evolution of the western Cordillera. In addition to
constraints on the tectonic evolution of the western U.S., this study will add
to the growing body of continental paleoenvironmental data that are critical for
comparison to output from computer climate simulations. As new simulations are
developed at finer spatial scales, it is essential to have paleoclimatic data at
a similar scale, particularly in regions with great topographic relief.