* 0838015
* Collaborative Research:  CubeSat Firefly--Understanding Earth's Most Powerful Natural Particle Accelerator
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Allan Weatherwax, Siena College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 09/30/2012
* USD 329,432.00

The goal of the Firefly cubesat is to unambiguously determine if Terrestrial
Gamma Ray Flashes (TGFs) are produced by lightning, and to determine the
characteristics of lightning that produce the fluxes of gamma rays observed at
high altitude. This information will strongly constrain the processes that
accelerate electrons to ~35 million electron volts (MeV) above thunderstorms,
since these electrons are thought to be the source of TGFs. Firefly will detect
a minimum of 50 TGFs, with a goal of more than 200, to definitively determine
the types of lightning that produce gamma rays. TGFs are of inherent interest,
as they result from the most powerful natural particle acceleration process on
Earth, in which thermal electrons are energized to tens of MeV in less than 1
millisecond. These energized electrons create copious bremsstrahlung gamma and
X-rays that can be observed from orbiting platforms, and the electrons
themselves may escape to magnetospheric altitudes and populate the inner
electron radiation belt. By studying the TGF phenomena and the acceleration
processes responsible for them on Earth, the investigators will improve
understanding of other regimes of electron acceleration, including the radiation
belts, solar flares, cosmic shocks, and other planets, including Venus, the
outer planets, and dust devils and dust storms on Mars. Firefly CubeSat
satellite will be designed, built, tested, and operated on-orbit as part of this
project. Firefly consists of two instruments: a gamma-ray detector (GRD) and a
very low frequency receiver/ photometer experiment (VP). GRD will measure
photons between 10 keV - 10 MeV, and up-going energetic electrons over an energy
range of 10 keV to a few MeV. The Firefly team is a collaboration between the
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and Siena College, with the Hawk Institute for
Space Sciences serving as the spacecraft bus provider, and the systems
engineering, education, and public outreach lead. Students will be involved in
all aspects of the project, from design and development, through fabrication and
test, to mission operations and data analysis. Firefly will help to train
undergraduate students at Siena College and the University of Maryland Eastern
Shore (UMES), as they get hands-on experience designing, building, testing, and
operating the spacecraft, as well as analyzing the data. Local high school
students and interns will also have access to the Firefly data, educational
materials, and website. Finally, the Firefly project includes the installation
of two World Wide Lightning Location Network ground stations at Siena and UMES,
giving the students access to a tool that can be used for many data analysis
projects, and that will be a permanent addition to the educational
infrastructure at these institutions. Firefly will support the development of a
website, with continuous updates on the development of the instrument and
spacecraft, and on-orbit mission status, open access to the data and science
results, a "data users' manual", and a Firefly manual, including lessons.