* 0838810
* Collaborative Research: Mass Transit: Controls on Grounding and Ungrounding at Marine Ice Sheet Outlets
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Christina Hulbe, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2013
* USD 365,432.00

Hulbe/0838810 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a modeling study of the
processes in West Antarctic grounding zones, the transition from ice resting on
bedrock to ice floating on the ocean surface with an eye toward understanding
the interrelated causes of rapid change in grounding line configuration and
outlet flow. A combination of satellite remote sensing and numerical modeling
will be used to investigate both past and ongoing patterns of change. New high-
resolution surface elevation maps made from a novel combination of satellite
laser altimetry and remotely observed surface shape provide a unique view of
grounding zones. These data will be used to diagnose events associated with the
shutdown of Kamb Ice Stream, to investigate a recent discharge event on
Institute Ice Stream and to investigate ongoing change at the outlet of Whillans
Ice Stream, along with other modern processes around the West Antarctic. An
existing numerical model of coupled ice sheet, ice stream, and ice shelf flow
will be used and improved as part of the research project. The broader impacts
of the project relate to the importance of understanding the role of polar ice
sheets in global sea level rise. The work will contribute to the next round of
deliberations for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Improved
views, interpretations, and insights into the physical processes that govern
variability in ice sheet outlet streams will help correct the shortcomings of
the last IPCC report that didn?t include the role of ice sheets in sea level
rise. The PIs have a strong record of public outreach, involvement in the
professional community, and student training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;