* 0838857
* Support for Student Participation in the International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces '08
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Rana el Kaliouby, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2009
* USD 26,000.00

This is funding to support attendance by approximately 10 graduate students in a
Doctoral Spotlight (workshop) to be held in conjunction with the Tenth
International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI 2008), which will take
place October 20-22, 2008, in Chania, Greece, and is organized by the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) with co-sponsorship from the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). ICMI is the foremost conference
representing the growing interest in next-generation perceptive, adaptive and
multimodal user interfaces. Such interfaces represent an emerging
interdisciplinary research direction, involving spoken language understanding,
natural language understanding, image processing, computer vision, pattern
recognition, experimental psychology, etc. They aim at efficient, convenient and
natural interaction and communication between computers and human users, and
represent a radical departure from previous computing that should ultimately
enable users to interact with computers using everyday skills. The main goals of
ICMI 2008 are to further scientific research within the broad field of
multimodal interaction and systems, to focus on major trends and challenges, and
to help identify a roadmap for future research and commercial success. Topics of
interest this year include multimodal and multimedia processing, multimodal
input and output interfaces, multimodal applications, user modeling and
adaptation, multimodal architectures, tools and standards, and evaluation of
multimodal interfaces. The 3-day event will bring together researchers from
academia and industry from around the world to present and discuss the latest
multi-disciplinary work in the field. The invited talks, panels, single-track
oral and poster presentations will facilitate interaction and discussion among
researchers. Participants in the Doctoral Spotlight will get to showcase their
ongoing thesis work, either orally or via posters, in a special "spotlight
session" during which they will receive feedback from an invited committee
composed of approximately half a dozen senior personnel (including the
conference General and Program Chairs). As in previous years, students funded
under this award will all be U.S. residents enrolled at U.S. institutions of
higher education. More information about the ICMI 2008 conference is available
at http://www.icmi2008.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Doctoral
Spotlight will give students exposure to their new research community, both by
presenting their own work and by observing and interacting with established
professionals in the field. It will encourage students at this critical time in
their careers to begin building a social support network of peers and mentors.
Participants will be selected with the goal of increasing the breadth of
participation at ICMI, with priority given first to minority students, female
students, students from geographically under-represented states, and finally to
students whose advisors or departments have insufficient funds to otherwise
support their participation in ICMI.