* 0838224
* The Hydrology of Desiccation and Cracking with Application to Desertification
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Cushman, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 358,020.00

The Hydrology of Desiccation and Cracking with Application to Desertification
Proposal # EAR-0838224 John H Cushman, Purdue University

ABSTRACT To understand the desertification process it is important to know
where nitrogen is located and how it is transported, deposited and accumulated.
Recent studies have suggested that nitrogen reservoirs in the vadose zone have
been potentially underestimated by 3% to 16% globally and 14% to 71% in warm
deserts. It has also been conjectured that the accumulation of nitrate in the
desert subsoil is the result of infrequent deep-wetting events, and it has been
suggested that there is a positive correlation between the amount of nitrate
found in the subsoil and the age of the desert. In regard to unusual nitrate
deposits found in desert soils, of particular interest is the Atacama Desert in
Chile. The origins of the highly concentrated nitrate deposits have been the
subject of much debate. This desert is one of the driest environments on earth
with an average annual rainfall of 1 to 2 mm per year and it is estimated that
it has been this dry for 10 to 15 million years. For this reason it is often
used as a model for the environment of Mars. Ongoing desiccation of the nitrate
deposits in the area have caused both small and large desiccation polygons to
form via shrinking of the porous formation. Over time the fractures left by the
large desiccation polygons have become filled with saline-cemented sand, silt
and rock debris forming nitrate rich sand dykes. While several models exist that
address the constitutive modeling of both saturated and unsaturated soils
undergoing large inelastic deformations, the mathematical tools available either
cannot account for the two time scales that result from the fracturing of soils
during desiccation, or do not include the evolving scales necessary to model
long-term chemical transport. We will develop a generalized mathematical model
to describe flow and transport in saturated/unsaturated cracking soils. In
particular, we will use a hybrid mixture theoretic (HMT) approach to model flow
and block-transport mechanisms, predict crack formation, and obtain a dynamic
description of the hydraulic and transport properties of soils undergoing
desiccation. The HMT approach to this problem will improve over previous
approaches for elasto-plastic behavior of multi-phase systems, by relaxing some
of the restrictive assumptions, such as the use of the standard Darcy?s law to
describe flow in the water phase, and identification of appropriate independent
variables that permit development of rigorous and meaningful yield functions for
analyzing plasticity. This includes modeling the dual time-scale problem where
elastic sediment fills the void space of cracks created during the drying
process, and the non-local transport through the fractal fracture paths that
often result. For the latter part, we will model constituent velocity in fractal
fractures using subordinated stochastic ordinary differential equations;
upscaling will be accomplished with generalized central limit theorems. Should
time and man-power be available, we will apply the theoretical findings to the
nitrogen deposits in the Atacama Desert in Chile.