* 0838906
* SGER: Robust Optimal Real-Time Control of Multiproduct Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Alberto Bressan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 07/31/2010
* USD 180,000.00

Some estimates put the number of people in the U.S. that work in call centers as
high as 3 million. This is consistent with the well-known shift of the U.S.
economy from a manufacturing base to a service base. The proposed research is to
study the dynamic control of service systems with three major innovations:
upgrades, reneging, and retrials. Although the motivation in each case stems
from call centers, the results obtained will be applicable more generally. The
following questions are to be considered:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? After market
segmentation, are there simple modifications to classic resource allocation
policies that can reduce waiting times for lower class customers, while
guaranteeing high quality service for higher class customers?&lt;br/&gt;? Do the
insights drawn from classic allocation policies continue to be useful in the
advanced systems of today?&lt;br/&gt;? In models with controlled the admission
rates, are there simple, implementable policies given today's new decision-
making paradigms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tackle each of these questions
specific models of service systems are presented. Each model presents new
challenges from both a theoretical and managerial standpoint. If successful,
insights into optimal resource allocation in service systems will be provided as
well as opening the door for new exploration of service system
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of our proposed research
include examining extensions of some of the classic models in scheduling and
admission control. These extensions stand to update the state of the art to
cover more recent innovations in service systems and answer new paradigms
introduced in the current service economy of the United States. In some cases we
expect that the insights gained can serve as a warning against
blindly&lt;br/&gt;using classic results as the models become more intricate.
Indeed, the proposed models are not even proposed the most general possible, yet
the insights even so far are profound. The author continues to work vigorously
to pursue top Minority graduate students to be involved in his work. Moreover,
the results will enhance classroom instruction for advanced courses in applied
probability and operations research/management that the author teaches at
Cornell University.&lt;br/&gt;