* 0838596
* Collaborative Research: High-resolution Basin Analysis of a Large-offset Extensional System, Lake Mead Domain, East-Central Basin and Range Province
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Paul Umhoefer, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2014
* USD 222,564.00

This project aims to determine the tectonic and paleogeographic development of
the central Basin and Range in the Lake Mead area near Las Vegas, Nevada,
through a high-resolution analysis of syn-extensional basins. This region
includes low-angle detachment faults, normal faults, transtensional fault
systems, areas of complex three-dimensional strain with extensional and
contractional structures, and locally voluminous magmatism. This study will
focus on three major questions that are important for extensional tectonics
globally: (1) Is there a predictable series of processes in the evolution of a
major extensional episode in wide, magmatic rifts built on thick crust such as
in the Basin and Range? (2) Are extensional processes in the internal part of
wide continental plate boundaries controlled by far-field or internal forces?
(3) How does climate change and evolving topography affect sedimentation in a
major extensional orogen? The main hypotheses the research team is testing are
that: (1) the Lake Mead domain developed from east to west in discrete stages
from detachment faulting to transtensional faulting, to tectonic escape
accompanied by shortening; (2) extension, detachment faulting, and exhumation
were initially driven by over thickened crust, but the temporal evolution was
controlled by far-field plate boundary changes; (3) changes in patterns and
rates of faulting exert a first-order control on basin geometry and stratal
thickness, but climate controls significant details of the stratal architecture
that have heretofore been attributed to tectonic processes. Basin analysis
techniques - including characterization of stratigraphic architecture, facies
analysis, geochronology, structural mapping, and stable isotope geochemistry -
are being utilized to address these hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will examine Miocene age basins in Lake Mead to determine the detailed
development of faulting and the changing landscape between 6 and 10 million
years ago during an episode of crustal extension. This is the geologic episode
that fundamentally formed the low landscape of the region and made the Basin and
Range a distinct province from the adjacent Colorado Plateau. Despite decades of
research, there remain fundamental unanswered questions about the mechanism and
evolution of deformation in the central Basin and Range that this project aims
to address. The research has wide application because extensional regions are
common hosts of oil and gas globally and the Basin and Range is considered a
well exposed example of these processes.