* 0838918
* Workshop on Synthesizing Transient Climate Evolution of the Last 21,000 Years (SynTraCE-21000); Madison, Wisconsin; August 11-13, 2008
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Zhengyu Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2009
* USD 24,995.00

This award helps to support a synthesis of multi-proxy evidence for the
transient evolution of the climate system over the last 21,000 years. This
synthesis, which will be accomplished through a workshop and the development of
a database of the relevant climate records, serves two purposes. First, it will
help produce a comprehensive database of multi-proxy records of the last 21,000
years. Secondly, it will help provide a unique benchmark for testing state-of-
art climate models on climate sensitivity and abrupt climate change because the
last 21,000 years of climate history contains a comprehensive record of climate
variability under extreme climate forcing.

Specifically, the award helps provide partial participant support for scientists
to attend a workshop in Madison, WI from August 11-13, 2008. Participants at the
workshop will have expertise in paleoclimatology and related aspects of climate
research and will discuss the pros and cons of specific simulations of past time
periods. The participants will include seasoned researchers, new investigators,
and students. In this manner, an open and lively exchange of views on the
science will be enabled. The workshop has two key objectives: 1) to identify
relevant paleoclimate data which will synthesize the major features of deglacial
climate evolution, meltwater forcing, global monsoon evolution, and abrupt
changes in ocean and terrestrial ecosystem; and 2) develop priorities in both
data collection and model development aimed at more realistic transient
simulations.