* 0838217
* New Insights on Mantle Volatiles from Noble Gas Radionuclides
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Neil Sturchio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2013
* USD 231,812.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Noble gases provide
crucial constraints on the origin of volatiles on Earth, and the evolution of
the atmosphere and mantle. However, atmospheric contamination of mantle-derived
volatiles, generally complicates interpretation. This proposal addresses the
origin of the atmospheric component associated with the mantle He signature,
both for a rift zone and a subduction-related volcano using noble gas
radionuclides in conjunction with other chemical and isotopic data. These
radionuclides are present in the atmosphere at extremely low abundance
(81Kr~10^-12, t1/2=229000yr; 85Kr~10^-11, t1/2=10.8yr; 39Ar~10^-15, t1/2=269yr)
and they act as chronometers when isolated from their source. The main objective
of this proposal is to use these radionuclides to resolve superficial air
contamination in 'primordial' volatile samples, as well as atmospheric
components that may be recycled to the mantle via subduction. This work will
focus on two localities (Rio Grande Rift and Poas Volcano, Costa Rica) that are
well characterized and readily accessible for sampling. The analyses require the
extraction and purification of Kr and Ar from large quantities of bulk gas
(&gt;5,000 liter STP) using methods previously applied to study of CO2-rich
geothermal gases. Purification of Kr will be performed at University of Illinois
at Chicago (UIC), and noble gas radionuclides will be analyzed via Atom Trap
Trace Analysis (ATTA; 81Kr and 85Kr) at Argonne National Laboratory and by low-
level counting (39Ar) at University of Bern. Additional data for the samples
will be obtained at UIC, Berkeley's Center for Isotope Geochemistry, and the
University of New Mexico (UNM). The proposed measurements may provide decisive
constraints that could help to resolve a number of long-standing questions
regarding implications for the origin of terrestrial volatiles, evolution of the
atmosphere and ocean, surface-mantle volatile exchange, mantle heterogeneity,
and the behavior of volatile elements during
subduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The lead PI is an early career
female investigator. Several undergraduate students from UIC and UNM will
participate in development and testing of sampling apparatus as well as field
work. This project will broaden the diversity of subjects studied at these
universities, and provide broader views and unique opportunities to diverse
populations of students. This project will also enhance international
collaboration between geoscientists from Costa Rica and Switzerland.