* 0838564
* Collaborative: VOSS:  Understanding and enabling network dynamics in virtual communities
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Brian Uzzi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,269.00

To solve the most critical intellectual and social problems, teams need to be
made up of the best possible people, linked to the best possible resources.
While there is growing awareness of the socio-economic consequences of team
collaborations, there is little socio-technical understanding of how teams are
assembled or how a given mode of assembly impacts its effectiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to address this limitation by
developing a theoretical framework to understand the socio-technical dynamics
shaping the assembly of teams in virtual communities. These multidimensional
networks include a variety of links that exist not only among individuals, but
also with documents, datasets, workflows, analytic tools, and concepts. With
these new configurations in mind, this project addresses two main research
questions: First, what are the socio-technical motivations that explain the
assembly of teams in virtual communities? Second, to what extent do the assembly
mechanisms of teams influence their effectiveness? Empirically testing such
models poses formidable data collection challenges. However, this project has
access to six major initiatives serving diverse scientific virtual communities
including nanoscience, environmental engineering, earthquake engineering,
chemical sciences, media research and tobacco
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This effort is uniquely
positioned to usher a new generation of theories and methods focused on
explaining an important precursor to all collaborations - the socio-technical
assembly mechanisms used to generate effective teams in virtual communities.
Methodologically, this project will significantly extend network analytic
techniques for statistically modeling high-dimensionality multimodal networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposed research will have broad
impacts on three stakeholder communities. First, individual researchers,
especially students and those not in elite institutions will learn strategies to
assemble effective teams in virtual communities. Second, leaders of virtual
communities will gain a dashboard to assess and steer strategies within their
initiatives. Third, funding agencies will get new insights in assessing their
portfolios and directing science policy.