* 0838314
* Collaborative Proposal:  Ash Particles and the Bubbles that Make Them: Measuring Bubble Size from Ash Fragments for New Insights Regarding Eruption Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Dork Sahagian, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,748.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explosive volcanic eruptions are driven
by the rapid growth of gas bubbles in magma that burst in the eruption column as
they rapidly expand. By measuring the size of these bubbles just before they
burst, it is possible to explore the processes that culminate in dangerous,
explosive eruptions. However, it is impossible to monitor the interior of an
exploding eruption column at the level of detail required, and by the time the
final volcanic product of ash is observable, the bubbles that drove the eruption
have already burst. Consequently, it is necessary to examine the surfaces of
individual ash particles to analyze the imprints that these exploding bubbles
have left on ash surfaces. This project is directed to developing a technique to
determine the size distribution of these bubbles, and thus shed light on the
processes of vesiculation and disruption immediately prior to fragmentation
during explosion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bubble sizes can be measured on the
basis of the radius of curvature of concavities on the surfaces of ash
particles. These ash particles would have been the remnants of inter-bubble
films and Plateau borders that existed prior to the fragmentation of the
erupting magmatic foam, so should preserve information about the bubbles that
separated them. Bubble fragment curvature can be constructed using digital
elevation maps for individual ash fragments derived from Stereo-Scanning
Electron Microscopy (SSEM). 3D shapes and bubble volumes can then be
reconstructed from the imprinted curvatures in orthogonal cross sections of
bubble "craters." This way, it is possible to determine bubble size, even when
the expanding bubbles have burst during eruption (fragmentation). The technique
developed in this project will be applied to natural ashes from recent eruptions
of Fuego, Mt. Spurr, and Mt. St. Helens volcanoes, and the relations between
bubble size distributions (BSD), bubble number densities (BND), and ash particle
size distributions (PSD) will be quantified. This will make it possible to test
a number of scientific hypotheses that can determine the relations between magma
vesiculation dynamics of energetic volcanic eruptions and their products. It is
expected that this study will result in new volcanic product analysis tools
available for the broader community of volcanologists for application to, among
others, pre-fragmentation vesiculation in ashes from highly energetic volcanic
eruptions; hazard assessment of past and future eruptions; and stratospheric ash
and its climate implications. &lt;br/&gt;