* 0838565
* An investigation into compositionally heterogeneous plume clusters in 3D spherical geometry
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Allen McNamara, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 01/31/2013
* USD 247,645.00

Observations from seismology reveal two large regions of the lowermost mantle,
beneath Africa and the Pacific, that exhibit slower-than-average seismic
wavespeeds. Additional observations infer the cause of these anomalies to
include both thermal and compositional heterogeneity. A few, competing
hypotheses exist to explain them, each of which have significant
consequencestoward our understanding of mantle convection patterns,
&lt;br/&gt;thermal transport, geochemical evolution, and cooling of the Earth?s
interior. Here, we test the hypothesis that the large seismic anomalies beneath
Africa and the Pacific are due to the interaction of ancient, subducted oceanic
crust with plumes of hot, upwelling mantle that are expected to form in these
regions. By performing 3D numerical modeling studies of mantle convection,
combined with processing our results in a manner that best reproduces the
distortion inherent to seismological techniques, we will examine whether this
hypothesis is dynamically feasible. If so, we will investigate the important
thermal and chemical transport properties associated with it, comparing and
contrasting them to those of competing ideas. We will investigate how well this
hypothesis fits numerous geological, geochemical, and seismological constraints,
with the ultimate goal of understanding the nature of large-scale mantle
convection. Combined with advances from other research, this research will work
toward the larger goal of understanding how mantle convection causes plate
tectonics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this project is to perform a
comprehensive fluid dynamical study to better understand the fundamental
dynamics associated with multiple plumes in the presence of compositional
heterogeneity. Using numerical finite-element modeling in 3D, spherical
geometry, we will investigate the morphology, time-dependent dynamics, heat
transport properties, and expected surface expression of mantle plume clusters
in an environment &lt;br/&gt;dominated by external stress forces (i.e.,
background convection) and various degrees of compositional heterogeneity.
Secondly, we will investigate whether compositionally-heterogeneous plume
clusters are consistent with observations from seismology and geology. Employing
Earth?s plate history to guide subduction patterns in thermochemical numerical
models, we will investigate how subducted oceanic crust is segregated into
upwelling mantle regions. Through tomographic filtering of geodynamical model
results, we will investigate how well plume clusters, combined with
compositional heterogeneity, fit observations of seismic tomography, compared to
other conceptual thermochemical mantle models. Furthermore, we will investigate
the expected surface expression of plume clusters, determining their consistency
with characteristic patterns of hotspot islands observed on Earth?s surface.