* 0838973
* Collaborative Research:  Polenet East:  An International Seismological Network for East Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrew Nyblade, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2012
* USD 155,488.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The high elevations of East Antarctica are critical in
localizing the initial Cenozoic glaciation and stabilizing it with respect to
melting during warm interglacials. However, the geological history for this
region and the geophysical mechanism for maintaining the highlands are poorly
understood. In 2007-2009, an array of 24 broadband seismographs (named GAMSEIS)
was installed across the Gamburtsev Mountains area of the East Antarctic Plateau
as part of the Antarctica?s Gamburtsev Province (AGAP) International Polar Year
project. The IPY AGAP/GAMSEIS program included plans by other international
partners to install seismographs at locations along the flanks of the Gamburtsev
Mountains and in other East Antarctic regions. The proposed project will
continue operating six of the deployed AGAP/GAMSEIS stations for two more years
together with two new broadband seismic stations added to broaden the geographic
scope of the array. Most stations will be located at the existing U.S.
Autonomous Geophysical Observatories and the USAP fuel cache locations in order
to minimize logistical support. This array, combined with seismographs deployed
by China and Japan (and possibly Australia, France, and Italy in near future)
will provide a sparse but large-scale network of seismometers for the longer-
term studies of the crustal and upper mantle structures underneath the East
Antarctic Plateau. Continued reliance on students provides a broader impact to
this proposed research and firmly grounds this effort in its educational
mission.