* 0838264
* Collaborative Research: Testing Channel-flow Models Using Mid-crustal Rocks of North Himalayan Gneiss Domes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Bradley Hacker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2015
* USD 227,664.00

Recent models suggest that the middle crust beneath the high Tibetan Plateau
flows southward toward India because of the difference in topography between
Tibet and India; the models further suggest that this extruding material emerges
at Earths surface in the high-erosion area of the Himalaya. These models make
specific predictions about how the flow varies in magnitude and direction with
depth. This project uses structural geology and geochronology to test these
predictions to see whether the models are correct, and if they are not, how the
models might be refined. This is an important test to conduct because the
India?Asia collision is Earths largest ongoing continent collision and serves as
an important lens for viewing older continental collisions that happened
throughout Earths history.

Researchers Jeff Lee of Central Washington University, Bradley Hacker from the
University of California Santa Barbara, and their students will investigate the
spatial and temporal distribution of kinematics, vorticity, finite strain, and
deformation temperature in strongly deformed middle crustal rocks exposed in the
North Himalayan gneiss domes, southern Tibet, using structural petrology,
finite-strain analysis, electron-backscatter diffraction (EBSD), and metamorphic
monazite geochronology. This research is motivated by recently formulated
thermal, mechanical channel flow/extrusion models that postulate that the middle
crust exposed in the high Himalaya and southern Tibet was a low-viscosity,
ductile material, bounded above and below by coeval normal- and thrust-sense
shear zones, respectively, that flowed and extruded to the south. Flow within a
channel can range from pure Couette flow to Poiseuille flow, or be a combination
of the two. The investigators and their students will document the deformation
and timing during ductile flow to provide a comprehensive spatial, thermal, and
temporal history of deformation and flow in middle crustal rocks in southern
Tibet. These studies, combined with similar published and ongoing studies in the
high Himalaya, will provide an unprecedented view of middle crustal flow
parallel to the transport direction over a distance of 50 to 100 km.