* 0838683
* Communicating Forecast Information to Optimize Evacuation Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Hugh Gladwin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2014
* USD 391,145.00

The research objective of this project is to model the difference between what
would have been optimal evacuation and what is actually observed. Understanding
evacuation behavior is a part of the planning puzzle for emergency management
agencies as they plan the movement of a large number of people out of their
homes to safer areas. A wide variety of factors (e.g., forecast uncertainty,
mode of transmission of forecast information, risk perception and constraints on
people's ability to prepare themselves, transportation means, and an acceptable
destination) affect evacuation behavior. Integrated modeling of these factors to
predict how people will respond to diverse hurricane forecasts is quite complex.
Given this context, the investigators attempt to answer some basic questions in
a unified research framework such as (1) what is the link between objective
hurricane forecast information and subjective risk perception, (2) how
subjective risk perception and its interactions with other relevant factors
affect evacuation behavior and (3) how observed (and intended) evacuation
behavior deviates from optimal evacuation behavior. From a set of hurricane
events that provide contrasting forecasts and timing scenarios, the
investigators propose to model the difference between what would have been
optimal evacuation and what is actually observed. Built on interdisciplinary
knowledge from sociology, economics, meteorology, and media research on
hurricane risk communication, the investigators propose to combine both
descriptive (the way people actually behave) and prescriptive (the way people
should behave under perfect information) approaches in a unified research
framework to integrate user-specific cognitive and local risk information with
objective scientific forecast information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating
subjective risk perception in the modeling approach to provide realistic
predictions of evacuation behavior will be useful to develop efficient risk
management options in evacuation planning for reducing vulnerability against
coastal hazards.