* 0838874
* SGER:  Green Energy via Control-Based Design of Free-Piston Stirling Engines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Eric Barth, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 02/28/2011
* USD 124,935.00

The research objective of this work is to apply linear and nonlinear dynamical
systems and control design tools to formulate a systematic design methodology
for free-piston Stirling engines, which have been traditionally designed from a
purely thermodynamic point of view. Historically, the design of Stirling engines
has progressed from its original purely kinematic arrangement, where the motion
of the displacer and the piston are kinematically constrained, toward a purely
dynamic arrangement ? such engines are called ?free-piston? Stirling engines.
Unfortunately, this shift toward a dynamic engine has not seen a commensurate
development in the tools needed to realize their design. In this research, free-
piston Stirling engines are recast and reinterpreted from a dynamic systems and
controls perspective by viewing the interacting dynamic system elements in the
context of designing a feedback loop. The design methodology is twofold: 1)
apply linear control design tools to design parameter groups of the system as
feedback gains, and 2) apply nonlinear dynamical systems analysis tools to
verify and refine the design with regard to the full nonlinear
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research will be both
intellectual and societal. On an intellectual level, the proposed dynamic design
methodology is applicable to power production from dynamically dominant devices
more general than free-piston Stirling-based designs, and has the potential to
form the basis and framework for the design of all such ?dynamic? engines. On a
societal level, as the availability of the world?s traditional fossil fuels
continues to decline, the development of a viable alternative engine capable of
transitioning society toward renewable, environmentally friendly fuels and
energy sources becomes a paramount call to such research. Given the need only
for a heat source, Stirling engines offer the advantage over conventional
internal combustion engines of utilizing non-refined and/or non-petroleum-based
energy sources such as: biomass, solar, geothermal, and other ?green? sources of
heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;