* 0838105
* Workshop:  Internationalization of Research and Graduate Studies and Its Implications in the Transatlantic Context; November 17 -18, 2008; Atlanta, GA
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Mary Realff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 08/31/2009
* USD 40,000.00

OISE-0838105&lt;br/&gt;Mary L. Realff, Georgia Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports U.S. participation in an international workshop to be held at
Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia from November 17?18, 2008.
The workshop will address issues relating to the internationalization of
research and higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an increasingly
globalized economy, science careers are becoming more and more international,
and the market place for talent in science and technology goes beyond national
boundaries. Universities and research institutes worldwide are addressing these
developments by setting-up exchange programs, double and/or joint degrees, as
well as foreign campuses. Several European Union/United States (EU/US)
cooperation schemes are already promoting the training and mobility of
researchers and are likely to be further developed in the future. The proposed
workshop will enable the determination and exchange of best practices in
existing programs, identify barriers to increasing internationalization of
graduate education and identify means of increasing the exchange of students in
graduate programs in the EU and US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop planning
and organization has been a collaborative effort during the French Presidency of
the European Union and includes the U.S. Department of State, the U.S.
Department of Education, the Georgia Institute of Technology, the Delegation of
the European Commission, the French, Czech, Slovenian and Swedish Embassy and
the other 23 European Union Embassies in Washington,
DC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposal includes the advancement of best practices in international
graduate education and research and the development of plans for increasing the
number of US graduate students and researchers engaged in international graduate
education. The workshop will bring together experts such as scientists and
engineers with experience in conducting international research collaborations,
graduate study abroad programs and graduate student exchange programs.
Participants will also include policy-makers at universities, research
institutes, companies, ministries, agencies and research promotion organizations
concern with international exchange of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will include approximately 200 participants from
the European Union and from the United States. The workshop will impact the
graduate education programs offered in the US and abroad. Participants will be
chosen such that a diverse group will be attending the workshop. Particular
attention will be given to include participants from groups underrepresented in
science and engineering (e.g., underrepresented minorities, women, and persons
with disabilities. The findings of the workshop will be presented in a final
report. Workshop findings will also be presented at the NSF sponsored Women?s
International Research Engineering Summit that will be held in Barcelona, Spain
in April 2009.&lt;br/&gt;