* 0838948
* Collaborative Research: Seasonal Evolution of Chemical and Biological Variability in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Eileen Hofmann, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 07/31/2013
* USD 197,814.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ross
Sea is a highly productive area within the Southern Ocean, but it experiences
substantial variability in both physical (temperature, ice concentrations,
salinity, winds, and current velocities) and biogeochemical (chlorophyll,
productivity, micronutrients, higher trophic level standing stocks, gases, etc.)
conditions. Understanding the temporal and spatial oceanographic variations in
physical forcing is essential to understanding the ecological functioning within
the Ross Sea. There are a number of models of the physical oceanography of the
Ross Sea that characterize the observed circulation. Unfortunately, data on the
appropriate time scales (daily, monthly, seasonal, and interannual) to
completely evaluate those models are lacking. The proposed research is a
demonstration project to characterize the physical and biological oceanography
of the southern Ross Sea using newly developed Glider technology to sample the
region continuously through the growing season, to collect temperature,
salinity, fluorescence, oxygen and optical transmission data. These field data
will be used to assist in evaluation of an eddy-resolving ROMS-based coupled
circulation-biological model, and, along with satellite ocean color information,
will be assimilated into an ecosystem model. Data assimilation techniques will
reduce the model uncertainties of the circulation and food webs of the region.
The intellectual merit of this effort arises from the combination of field-based
investigations using a novel technology (one that is far more cost-effective
than ship-based studies) with state-of-the-art biological-physical models and
advanced data assimilation techniques. The research will provide new insights
into the complex oceanographic phenomena of the Antarctic continental shelves
and is a novel method of continuing the studies of the southern Ross Sea.
Broader impacts of the proposed research include training of graduate and
undergraduate students and partnership with several ongoing outreach programs
dealing with scientific research in the Southern Ocean. At least 2 graduate
students will be supported by this research, and it will be a critical component
of a variety of outreach programs in Virginia, including a High School Marine
Science Day, Boy and Girl Scout education, and middle school curriculum
improvement. The investigators also will create a web site to foster immediate
release of the data collected by the glider, and seek a linkage with schools at
various levels (middle, high school and Universities) that potentially could
incorporate the data into classroom activities