* 0838611
* Testing In-situ Crystallization of High-S Apatite in Silicic Magmas at Pinatubo Volcano: Key for Developing Apatite as Monitor for Magmatic Sulfur
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Martin Streck, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2011
* USD 68,338.00

Apatite is a ubiquitous accessory mineral that crystallizes from many magma
types. As apatite crystallizes, it incorporates minor elements in addition to
phosphorus and calcium that are the main constituents of this mineral. Sulfur
and rare earth elements are incorporated into the apatite structure by chemical
substitutions, in concentrations that reflect the contents of these elements in
the magmas. This study will investigate the uptake of sulfur into apatite and to
what extent the uptake is not only dependent on the sulfur concentration in the
melt but also on the concentration of sulfur in exsolved vapor bubbles. The
overall aim of the project is to enable the use of sulfur concentration in the
apatite to infer changing sulfur concentrations in the magmatic reservoirs. This
study will be focused on the magmatic system of the Pinatubo volcano,
Philippines as recorded by the climactic 1991 eruption. The 1991 Pinatubo
eruption is remarkable and well suited as case-study for this project because it
released excessive amounts of sulfur gases to the atmosphere that were probably
stored as a separate vapor phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will follow up
on a prior study by the investigator that identified some natural apatites that
appeared to be overly sulfur enriched compared to what is predicted from the
experimental data for sulfur solubility and partition coefficients into this
mineral. It is unknown what process could lead to such high-S apatite in silicic
magma. Understanding this is of critical importance in the use of apatite as
monitor of magmatic sulfur and may be the missing link in explaining the often
observed inter- and intra-grain variability of sulfur content in apatite. The PI
and collaborators located at the USGS, University of Freiburg, Germany, and the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, (ETH, Zürich), Switzerland will
investigate the occurrence of high-S apatite in lavas of the 1991 Pinatubo
eruption. They seek to test the proposition that high-S apatites that are
present in silicic melts at Mount Pinatubo were affected by input from sulfur-
rich fluids emanating from underplated mafic magmas. In order to test this
hypotheses, they will acquire a comprehensive major, minor and trace element
data set on naturally occurring apatite from Pinatubo magmas and will perform
experiments using Pinatubo dacite as starting material. The ultimate goal is to
evaluate when and where the high sulfur apatite crystallized and whether these
apatites are indeed overly enriched relative to their host melt composition.