* 0838249
* Joint Seismic and Magnetotelluric Imaging of the San Andreas Fault Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Paul Bedrosian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2012
* USD 98,445.00

Geophysical methods are key tools for exploring the deep structure of fault
zones. Different geophysical techniques are sensitive to different physical
properties. Commonly, multiple techniques are applied to the same study area
with structural results for each technique obtained separately, and the
resulting structures compared for interpretation. Joint inversions provide an
alternative in which a single structural model is used to try to fit multiple
datasets, most commonly with empirical relationships linking the different
physical properties (for example, seismic velocity and density). Our work will
involve the joint inversion of seismic wave travel time and magnetotelluric
profiling data to determine seismic wave velocity and electrical resistivity
structure across two segments of the San Andreas Fault in California. One
profile passes through the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD) where
in-situ information is available from the SAFOD borehole, and the other is along
the creeping section of the San Andreas near Hollister. This work will improve
our understanding of the structure of active transform faults and the complex
inherited framework in which they are emplaced. The constrained inversion
methods we will develop should have broad applicability to the study of fault
zones. The spatial relationship between subsurface structure, seismicity, and
hydrologic constraints will result in a better understanding of the primary
factors (lithology, fluids, fault geometry) controlling fault behavior.

We will apply a novel variation of the joint inversion approach that involves a
constraint where spatial variations in model properties are encouraged to occur
at the same places in the model. Specifically, the gradient fields of the
physical properties (in our case seismic velocity and electrical resistivity)
are computed and the cross product of the two gradients at each cell in the
model space is evaluated. Models are "penalized" for having a non-zero cross
product, which has the effect of producing models for which a spatial change in
one parameter is accompanied by a change in the other that shares the same
geometry but can have the same or opposite sign (parallel or anti-parallel
gradient), or has no change (zero gradient).