* 0838714
* Collaborative Research:  Southern Ocean Current Observations from the U.S. Antarctic Research Vessels, 2010-14
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Eric Firing, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 09/30/2013
* USD 324,060.00

"This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 0f 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from Scripps Inst of
Oceanography (UCSD) and the University of Hawaii will continue an effort
commenced in 1999 to use underway current profiling capabilities of the
Antarctic Research Ice Breakers, Nathaniel B Palmer and Lawrence M Gould. Hull
mounted shipboard acoustic Doppler current profilers (ADCPs) enable the
acquisition, processing and archiving of upper ocean current velocities and also
the structure of the acoustic backscatter signal of Southern Ocean waters
through which these vessels ply their transects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high
density of the repeat cruise tracks of the lengthening time series in the Drake
Passage (RVIB Gould), a major choke point of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC), is of interest in providing a record of the effects of climate change in
the remote and under observed Southern Ocean. &lt;br/&gt;Global circulation
models suggest that the Southern Ocean is sensitive to climate change, and
likely to warm much faster than other parts of the global ocean. Seasonal to
interannual variability of the ACC, the balance of eddy induced exchange
compared to mean current mixing, the vorticity balance of the Drake passage and
the interaction of circumpolar winds with the planet?s largest ocean current
system under changing climate regimes are some of the fundamental questions
informed by these measurements. The variability of the backscattering parameter
serves additionally as an integrating signal of diurnally migrating zooplankton
populations such as Euphausia superba, a key Antarctic food chain species.