* 0838404
* Copper (Cu) Ligand Distribution Across Multiple Detection Windows in Natural Waters: Influence of pH,  DOC Abundance, and Ligand Composition
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Gaboury Benoit, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 188,528.00

Proposal 0838404&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This first study to measure Cu binding ligand abundance
across the full range of strength from very weak to very strong in two lakes
would cover a range of pH, DOC (dissolved organic carbon) amount and
composition, trophic status, and level of watershed development (both clean and
contaminated sites). Chemical speciation controls a metal?s environmental
behavior and biological availability in natural waters. Speciation is largely
controlled in aquatic systems by metal-binding ligands that decrease the free
(aquo) metal ion concentration through the formation of stable metal complexes.
I hypothesize that the relationship between abundance ([CL]) and stability (K?)
of naturally occurring, copper-binding, aquatic ligands follows the form [CLi]
&amp;#61621; K?i-n, and that this is caused by the relative abundance and
strength of functional groups based on the elements O, N, and S. Scatter around
this trend is introduced by variations in pH and amount of DOC. The relationship
between CL and K? has a profound influence on the relative importance of strong
and weak ligands, the concentration of free reactive copper (Cu2+), and the
environmental behavior, toxicity, and bioavailability of copper. I will test
these hypotheses across the full range of ligand strength (logK? from 5 to 15)
with multiple detection windows (&amp;#8805; 5) via a range of analytical
methods. DOC composition (O, N, S), the importance of reduced S ligands, a
possible DOC-CL correlation, and the influence of pH will all be measured as
well. Finally, I hope to evaluate the utility of pseudopolarography for
measuring Cu binding ligands in fresh waters.&lt;br/&gt;