* 0838958
* Extending the record of Antarctic landscape evolution into the Pliocene with neon-21 measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2010
* USD 47,265.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The proposal seeks limited funds to develop the capability
of the Berkeley Geochronology Center to measure the stable cosmogenic nuclide
21Ne, and to use this capability to measure 21Ne concentrations in an existing
set of bedrock and sediment samples from the Antarctic Dry Valleys (DV). These
samples were collected during two previous Antarctic field seasons and
concentrations of the cosmogenic radionuclides 26Al and 10Be was measured in
order to determine whether the observed antiquity of DV surface sediments and
landforms was the result of vanishingly small erosion and degradation rates or
of long periods of cover by cold-based glaciers. If the former hypothesis is
confirmed, measure the degradation rates of these processes. These results
quantify existing stratigraphic observations that many DV landscape surfaces are
very old and erode very slowly. One consequence of the results is that, unlike
in most environments worldwide where relatively rapid surface erosion limits the
period about which cosmogenic-nuclide measurements can provide information,
surfaces in the DV are sufficiently stable that the factor governing this time
scale is not surface erosion, but the radioactive decay of 26Al and 10Be. The
research results will have important implications in understanding Antarctic ice
sheet and climate evolution.