* 0838862
* Workshop on Frontiers in Networked Game Theory and Control. To be held on October 10-12, 2008 at MIT.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Asuman Ozdaglar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2009
* USD 25,002.00

The proposal is to support the Frontiers in Networked Game Theory and Control
workshop, to be held at MIT, on October 10-12, 2008.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
workshop is to bring together leading researchers from Control Theory, Game
Theory, and Economics to create a strong interface and facilitate future
collaborative research in these areas. The workshop will host leading
researchers from across these disciplines and will invite a significant number
of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, thereby playing a major
educational role as well. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is to
foster new research and to enable researchers from different disciplines to
become familiar with new complementary techniques and approaches. In addition,
the attendees will have an opportunity to learn about the latest developments in
these fields and share their different perspectives on research questions
emerging from the widespread use of game-theoretic techniques in control theory
and distributed optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will be to lay the
foundations for future cooperation among researchers from these various
disciplines and to introduce students and junior researchers to new and exciting
directions. With the growing demands on large-scale distributed control coming
from networked-systems in many different applications, the topics covered in
this conference are becoming increasingly important in both academia and
industry. Such a conference, in bringing together experts from different
disciplines, is very timely, and its broad impact will be in both academic
research and applications.