* 0838572
* Experimental Determination of Argon Diffusion Kinetics and Mechanisms in Plagioclase
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2013
* USD 258,280.00

The radioactive decay of potassium to argon provides one of the most important
means of dating events in the geologic past. Because argon is a gas, it can
escape from geologic materials, i.e., minerals, especially at elevated
temperatures, through the process of diffusion. The diffusion process can be
described mathematically in terms of a few kinetic parameters which can be
determined by laboratory studies, and knowing the values of these parameters
enables the determination of the thermal histories of rocks over time. Thermal
histories of rocks have proven critical to understanding a wide range of
phenomena, including large scale motions of the crust along major faults,
thermal maturation of hydrocarbons in deep basins, the heating effects of magma
intrusions, and the thermal histories of meteorites derived from other planetary
bodies which in turn governs whether organic molecules necessary for life could
survive impact and interplanetary transport. Kinetic parameters for argon
diffusion have been determined for some minerals, but plagioclase, the most
abundant mineral in the Earth's crust has until now been largely unstudied. This
project will use novel laser heating techniques and ultrasensitive mass
spectrometry to determine the kinetic parameters for plagioclase from a variety
of occurrences, and thereby provide powerful new tools for determining rocks'
thermal histories in a significantly broadened range of geologic
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three argon isotopes (masses 37, 39, and 40)
are degassed from neutron-irradiated plagioclase and measured with a noble gas
mass spectrometer. The kinetic parameters of activation energy and frequency
factor (diffusivity at infinite temperature) are determined by regression of
incremental heating data defining linear Arrhenius relationships. A high
priority of this project is to distinguish between diffusion mechanisms
operative in nature versus experimental artifacts. This is addressed by cyclic
incremental heating of single crystals, emphasizing temperatures below 500 °C,
and analysis of reirradiated samples to distinguish between domain depletion and
domain destruction during heating. The length scale of diffusion is investigated
by analyzing a range of crystal sizes, and laser ablation studies with high
spatial resolution to map out isotopic gradients. The importance of
microstructures such as exsolution lamellae and antiphase boundaries is
evaluated using transmission electron microscopy. Software for analysis and
application of the data are being developed and will be publicly available by
the end of the grant period.