* 0838139
* Collaborative Research: Magmatism and Mineralization in the Owyhee Mountains, ID: A Case Study of Mid-Miocene Au-Ag Ores and the Emergence of the Yellowstone Hotspot
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Matthew Brueseke, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2014
* USD 162,082.00

Collaborative Research: Magmatism and mineralization in the Owyhee Mountains,
ID: A case study of mid-Miocene Au-Ag ores and the emergence of the Yellowstone
Hotspot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Voluminous Columbia River-
Steens flood basalt volcanism in eastern Oregon and Washington, southwestern
Idaho, and northern Nevada occurred during the proposed ~16.7 Ma initiation of
the track for the nascent Yellowstone hotspot. This magmatic event coincided
with three phenomena that affected the southern portion of the flood basalt
province (e.g. the Oregon Plateau): [1] region-wide development of focused zones
of extensional tectonism Â± eruption of flood basalt magmas (e.g. the northern
Nevada rift and Oregon-Idaho graben); [2] development of numerous silicic
dominated magmatic systems (e.g. the McDermitt and Santa Rosa- Calico volcanic
fields); and [3] abundant epithermal Au-Ag mineralization, (e.g. Buckskin-
National, Sleeper, DeLamar). Recent work by the lead PI suggests that the
combination of dominantly bimodal basalt-rhyolite magmatism and focused
extension resulted in magmatic systems that were not just caldera-forming, but
instead were characterized by multiple discrete eruptive loci and a diversity of
eruptive products and styles. It is hypothesized that the eruptive products and
styles locally included Au-Ag ores that were transported from the mantle with
mafic magmas and emplaced locally in epithermal systems. The validity of this
model will be tested in two focus regions, the Owyhee Mountains (ID) and the
Jarbidge district (Jarbidge Mountains, NV), where there are excellent exposures
of mid-Miocene flood basalt lava flows and shallow intrusive bodies, silicic
volcanic and hypabyssal products, and Au-Ag mines that are economically and
historically significant. Field, petrographic, geochemical, isotopic, and
geochronologic data will be obtained to evaluate the relation of epithermal Au-
Ag mineralization to the associated magmatic activity. The proposed research
will specifically examine whether local mineralization and silicic magma
production was stimulated by periods of enhanced mafic magmatism. The field,
geochemical, and geochronologic results will provide additional constraints on
the poorly understood spatial-temporal pattern(s) and styles of mid-Miocene
Oregon Plateau volcanism, which are needed to fully understand how this magmatic
event affected the North American lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This project addresses a fundamental question, namely, in what Earth
reservoir do precious metals originate? The hypothesis that epithermal precious
metal mineralization is intimately related to mafic magmatism (specifically,
flood basalts) has worldwide economic implications, and could guide global
precious metal exploration efforts. The proposed research will expose students
from two EPSCoR institutions to basic geologic field work as well as detailed,
laboratory-based analytical work. Additionally, this work will provide the basis
for a dynamic digital map of the Owyhee field area that will be used in
undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as a series of laboratory exercises
regarding volcanology, petrology, and ore genesis. Finally, this project will
provide invaluable mentoring aspects to a young scientist (lead
PI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;