* 0838922
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Snow Patches on the Spatial Distribution of Soil Microbial Communities and Biogeochemical Cycling in the Antarctic Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* John Barrett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Nemergut
* 07/31/2012
* USD 244,066.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two models
have been proposed to describe controls over microbial biogeography. One model
proposes that microbes are ubiquitously distributed across the global
environment, and that environmental conditions select for taxa physiologically
adapted to local physical conditions. An alternative model predicts that
dispersal is the important limitation to the distribution of microorganisms and
that spatial heterogeneity of microbial communities is a result of both
dispersal and local environmental limitations. According to both models, spatial
heterogeneity of microbial communities may be especially pronounced in extreme
ecosystems where the environmental selection for organisms with suitable
physiology is most strongly manifest. We propose that Antarctic terrestrial
environments are ideal places to examine microbial biogeography for 3 reasons:
1) the pristine nature and remoteness of Antarctica minimizes the prevalence of
exotic species dispersed through human vectors; 2) the extreme conditions of
Antarctic environments provide a strong environmental filter which limits the
establishment of non-indigenous taxa; and 3) extreme heterogeneity in the
terrestrial environment provides natural gradients of soil conditions
(temperature, water and nutrient availability). In the proposed research we will
investigate the influence of snow on the composition and spatial distribution of
soil microbial communities and linked biogeochemical cycling in the McMurdo Dry
Valleys. We will conduct fieldwork at the landscape scale (repeated remote
sensing to characterize snow distribution), at the valley and patch scales
(quantify snow patch ablation, microbial communities and biogeochemical cycling
in subnivian soils). We hypothesize that snow patches play an important role in
structuring the spatial distribution of soil microbial communities and their
associated ecosystem functioning because of the physical and hydrological
influences that snow patches have on the soil environment. The research will
contribute to greater public awareness of the importance of polar research to
fundamental questions of biology, ecology and hydrology through direct linkages
with International Antarctic Institute public outreach activities, including
dissemination of web-based learning units on environmental science and
microbiology, targeted as resources for secondary and post-secondary educators.
Three graduate students, one postdoctoral scholar and multiple undergraduates
will participate in the research activities. &lt;br/&gt;