* 0838227
* Magnesium Isotopic Investigations of Oceanic Basalts and Olivines
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Fangzhen Teng, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2013
* USD 175,022.00

Intellectual Merit. Magnesium isotopic composition of the Earth can potentially
place strong constraints on the formation and evolution of the early solar
system but Mg isotope systematics is still poorly known and interpretation of
existing data under debate. Studies of mantle-derived magmas (e.g., oceanic
basalts) can shed light not only on the composition of the Earth but also on
mantle heterogeneity produced by crustal recycling. Here, the PI proposes to
investigate stable Mg isotopic variations globally, in well-characterized
midoceanic ridge basalts (MORBs) and oceanic island basalts (OIBs). Previous
studies have documented that Mg isotopes do not fractionate during basalt
differentiation, hence basalts can be used to constrain the isotopic composition
of their sources. To date, Mg isotopic data are still very sparse with only ~20
analyses available for basalts: most of them are from Kilauea Iki lava lake,
Hawaii while the others are basalt standards. In this study, Mg isotopes will be
analyzed for 46 MORBs and 63 OIBs. All samples have been analyzed for Fe
isotopes by the PI and coworkers. An aliquot of the stock solution will be
analyzed for Mg isotopes. These studies will help to better constrain Mg
isotopic variations (if any) in global oceanic basalts, clarify the role of
crustal material in creating mantle heterogeneity and provide estimates on Mg
isotopic composition of the bulk Earth.&lt;br/&gt;Studies of Mg isotopic
variations in basalts and olivines can also help to unravel
the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms that fractionate stable isotopes at high temperatures.
Recent experimental studies have found significant Mg and Fe isotope
fractionation during chemical and thermal diffusion. Significant Fe isotopic
variations have also been observed in natural basalts and olivines from Hawaii;
this has been interpreted as either equilibrium isotope fractionation enhanced
by chromatographic effects or kinetic isotope fractionation associated with
thermal and chemical diffusion. Analyses of Mg isotopes for the same olivine
grains will help to elucidate the process; i.e., a lack of Mg isotopic variation
in olivine grains indicates an equilibrium isotope fractionation. Therefore, Mg
isotopic compositions for the same olivine grains (N = 77) that the PI used in
Fe isotopic studies will be measured here. In addition, a few large olivine
grains will also be micro-drilled and analyzed for Mg and Fe isotopes and Fe/Mg
ratios. These in-situ analyses will further examine which process fractionated
Fe (Mg) isotopes during magmatic differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The proposed work is a follow-up of the PI's postdoc and dissertation
work at Chicago and Maryland. This proposal will enable the PI to establish for
the first time a state of the art geochemical facility at Univ. of Arkansas.
Students and members of the community around Arkansas will have a chance to
visit the laboratory to gain background in analytical methods and to analyze
samples and standards. This proposal will support a full-time PhD student and
several undergraduate research assistants, some of whom are expected to
undertake their senior theses on Mg isotopic studies, and ultimately, this
proposal will help the PI to develop his own research group at
Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;