* 0838022
* Travel Support for Young Faculty and Graduate Students to Attend the Symposium on "Active and Responsive Surfaces" at the ACS National Meeting, 3/22-26/09, Salt Lake City, UT
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Ryan Hayward, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2009
* USD 3,000.00

TECHNICAL: A central challenge in polymers research today is the creation of
materials that can dynamically alter their structures and properties on demand,
or in response to changes in their environment. Surfaces and interfaces
represent a particularly attractive area of focus in the design of responsive
materials, since the small amount of material that resides at an interface
exerts disproportionately large effects on many properties such as wetability,
adhesivity, optical appearance and bioactivity. Thus, remarkable changes in
properties may be accomplished through the application of relatively mild
stimuli to materials with responsive surfaces.

NON-TECHNICAL: The purpose of this symposium is to bring together established
leaders and rising stars in the area of active and responsive surfaces of five
half-day sessions are planned, with a total of 30-35 oral presentations
describing the preparation, characterization and application of responsive
materials systems at surfaces and interfaces, including grafted polymer layers,
self-assembled monolayers, multi-layer coatings, and micro fabricated
structures. All of the funds from the NSF will be used to support travel of
faculty members in the early stages of their careers, and graduate students, who
might not have other funding to allow them to participate. Attention will be
give to groups traditionally under-represented in science and engineering
disciplines.