* 0838562
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Volcano Geodesy and Seismology: Earthquakes at Silicic Domes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Jeffrey Johnson, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2013
* USD 215,129.00

Collaborative Research: Integrated Volcano Geodesy and Seismology: Earthquakes
at Silicic Domes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico Tech PI - Dr. Jeffrey
Johnson&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative University of North Carolina PI - Dr. Jonathan
Lees&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicic dome growth represents one of the most common
eruptive manifestations of volcanic activity along continental arcs. This study
will investigate the links between geodesy and broadband seismicity at volcanic
domes by employing novel optical image analyses, conventional tilt measurements,
and broadband seismic studies. Recent work by the PIs has shown that long period
earthquakes at Santiaguito dome, of andesitic / dacitic chemistry, are
accompanied by rapid (~few s) and dramatic (10s of cm) surface uplift, however
this linked geodesy and seismology has only been explored for a very few
eruptive events in a limited band. Proposed work at Santiaguito will incorporate
stereoscopic videographic and time lapse observations of dome activity in
conjunction with a seismic network geometry that is capable of inverting for
both the seismic long period and very long period source mechanisms. Coupled
with year-long tiltmeter and time lapse imagery we will investigate seismic
response to static and dynamic dome motions. Surveys conducted over twelve
months will serve to investigate both short and long term magma mass flux
cycles, temporal trends in subsurface dome structure, and their relation to
explosive activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquakes are traditionally recorded
with seismometers, but some types of volcanic earthquakes occurring at (or near)
the Earth?s surface can also be ?seen? with other types of geophysical
instrumentation. In this study, novel optical tools, such as high resolution
digital cameras, will be used to quantify surface ground motion occurring at a
range of time scales ranging from seconds to days to months. Our project focuses
on earthquakes that occur at silicic volcanic systems, and in particular at
Santiaguito Volcano in Guatemala, which tend to effuse viscous lava and also
erupt explosively and intermittently and sometimes hazardously. This type of
volcano is common worldwide and tends to exhibit a wide range of enigmatic
earthquake types that need to be better understood to more reliably predict
volcanic unrest. Optical and seismic observations, coupled with acoustic and
traditional geodetic monitoring, will enable us to understand the movements that
occur within and at the surface of this type of active volcano. &lt;br/&gt;