* 0838639
* Collaborative Research:  Communicating Hurricane Information to Local Officials for Protective Action Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Donald House, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2013
* USD 183,041.00

The past 30 years have seen major advances in many aspects of hurricane
forecasting, but there has been little systematic research on the way coastal
populations interpret the weather information that is communicated to them. To
date, most evaluations of hurricane information have comprised reaction criteria
(asking whether potential users like a display) rather than learning (testing
whether users understand a display) or performance (whether a display changes
users? decisions) criteria. However, there is a growing body of anecdotal
evidence that many people misunderstand the displays meteorologists are
providing. To better understand how people interpret hurricane forecasts and the
uncertainties in those forecasts, this research will systematically examine the
cognitive processes involved in hurricane tracking by conducting an evaluation
of existing and novel hurricane information displays. The first task will assess
the ways in which users interpret three basic elements of storm track
information?the trailing track (where the storm has been), the forecast track
(where it is most likely to go), and track uncertainty (how likely it is to
deviate from the forecast track). Participants in different experimental
conditions will observe simulated hurricanes described by these three basic
elements. Some participants will be given information about only one basic
element (e.g., forecast track only), others will be given information about two
basic elements in combination (e.g., forecast track and uncertainty cone), and
some will be given information about all three basic elements. By comparing
participants in these information conditions, the research team will be able to
gain insight into how each of the three basic elements affects people?s
expectations about storm tracks over time. The second task will focus on the
third basic element of hurricane track information (track uncertainty) by
comparing a conventional uncertainty cone with five alternative track
uncertainty displays?numeric probabilities, color-coded probabilities, terrain
coded probabilities, arrow glyphs, and dynamic tracks. Comparing the data from
these six information conditions will allow us to determine if any of the
alternative displays provides a better way of conveying track uncertainty.
Finally, the third task will use the findings from the first two tasks to design
and evaluate new ways of visualizing storm information.

The proposed research will provide a rigorous assessment of the cognitive
processes involved in hurricane tracking. Accordingly, it has implications for
the cognitive psychology (especially judgment and decision making) of complex
dynamic tasks. In addition, the project will have implications for instruction
because there is very little research that addresses the problems of training
adults to perform rarely performed, but critical, judgment tasks such as
hurricane tracking. The project will provide meteorologists with a better
understanding of the ways in which people interpret hurricane forecasts and the
uncertainties in those forecasts. This improved understanding will allow them to
communicate more effectively with coastal populations and reduce the probability
that lives will be lost in hurricanes that deviate from their forecast tracks.