* 0838888
* Atmospheric Dynamics at Austral High Latitudes
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Gonzalo Hernandez, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 05/31/2013
* USD 668,324.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The proposal seeks funding to continue investigations of the
dynamical coupling between the stratosphere and the upper regions of the
atmosphere, such as the mesosphere and thermosphere. The long-term wintertime
mesospheric kinetic temperature observations at South Pole and McMurdo have
shown clearly the presence of this dynamical coupling in the Southern Hemisphere
through a strong correlation with the maximum stratospheric springtime
temperatures at the altitudes of polar stratospheric clouds and. The latter
temperatures identify the area where air is sufficiently cold for ice crystals
to form. The ice crystals are catalysts in the ozone destruction process and
therefore may control the ozone hole area. These results indicate that the
dynamical processes leading to the stratospheric warming or cooling are already
in place during the austral winter and the early mesospheric signals lead to the
potential capability to estimate the springtime ozone hole area. Further
observations on these phenomena are needed to better understand the underlying
physical processes. The long-term mesospheric measurements in Antarctica provide
a window of knowledge into the dynamics of the atmosphere and their effects on
global climate changes. Continued reliance on students provides a broader impact
of this proposed research and firmly grounds this effort in its educational
mission.