* 0838871
* Applying Ice Cores, Instrumental Climate Records and Climate Modeling Towards a Mechanistic Understanding of Antarctic Climate Variability on Interannual to Multidecadal Time Scale
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Clara Deser, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2012
* USD 495,539.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at NCAR aim to address Antarctic
climate variability on interannual, multidecadal and longer timescales over the
past ~250 years as a means to better understand the underlying physical
mechanisms controlling climate change in the southern polar region. A range of
observational, modeling and proxy (e.g. ice core) information will be combined
and interpreted. &lt;br/&gt;Effort will be focused on the analysis and
mechanistic interpretation of the interannual-to-multidecadal variability in the
Antarctic ice core records over the past ~250 years. Analyses of observational
ice core records will be used to define the leading patterns of variability and
relate those to existing Antarctic temperature reconstructions and to tropical
climate anomalies from various instrumental data sets. In particular, modeling
experiments will be used to examine the relative roles of sea surface
temperature forcing (tropical vs. extra-tropical) and direct atmospheric
radiative forcing associated with changes in greenhouse gas and stratospheric
ozone concentrations on Antarctic climate variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
modeling component will use existing and modified atmospheric general
circulation simulations driven with observational history from 1870 to the
present. An augmentation of the most recent CCSM CAM (Community Climate System
Model, Community Atmospheric Model) model explicitly incorporating a water
isotope tracer scheme will be used to evaluate the isotope model performance,
and to broaden current interpretation of ice core
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in an ongoing and independently
funded NCAR minority serving education effort (SOARS - Significant Opportunities
in Atmospheric Research) is offered as a means of broadening participation in
the atmospheric and related sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;