* 0838206
* Collaborative Research:   VOSS:   Joining a Virtual Organization: A Multi-Method Study of Newcomer to Established Collaborations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Erik Johnston, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 91,119.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) and other major funding agencies have
emphasized the need for more distributed centers of research in order to solve
problems of science and engineering that are too big for single investigators.
Entry into new work settings is already challenging enough when newcomers are
physically co-located with coworkers, but joining such a virtual research
organization may prove even more difficult. This multi-method project studies
the socialization processes newcomers face when joining existing virtual
research organizations (e.g., collaboratories). Specifically, this study focuses
on Post-Doctoral Fellows as newcomers joining either distributed or co-located
research teams. Survey, comparative case study, and agent-based modeling methods
will be employed to better understand how Post-Doctoral Fellows transition into
their new positions and how such transitions can be improved. The objectives of
the project are (1) to better understand under what general conditions Post-
Doctoral Fellows are successful and (2) to identify social and technical
barriers for Post-Doctoral Fellows entering virtual organizations. Understanding
the practices that lead to Post-Doctoral Fellow success under co-located as
compared to distributed conditions will improve virtual organizations by
providing benefits to both the researcher and the research program. The long-
term goal of this study is to identify, formalize, and gain insights into the
smart practices of virtual organizations planning for and engaging newcomers.
The results will be of value to all domains of science and engineering
interested in virtual organizations, particularly those with fluid team
membership.