* 0838491
* MSI: The COsmic-ray Soil Moisture Observing System (COSMOS)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* William Shuttleworth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,449,995.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rationale: Soil water exerts a critical
control on weather, climate, ecosystem, and water cycle, and hence is crucial
for many fields within atmospheric sciences and related disciplines. A serious
handicap in soil moisture measurements is the mismatch between limited point
measurements using contact methods and remote sensing estimates over large areas
(100 km2 - 2500 km2) without thick vegetation cover. The purpose of this
research is to fill this gap by using a novel, non-contact technique capable of
measuring average soil water content over a footprint of 34 hectares (a circle
with a radius of 330 m) and depths up to 50 cm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method
involves measuring low-energy cosmic-ray neutrons above the ground, whose
intensity is inversely correlated with soil water content and with water in any
form above ground level (Note: the contributions from subsurface and surface
waters are distinguishable). The instrument, called a "cosmic-ray moisture
probe," is brand new, but it is built on existing technologies that are put
together in an innovative way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fifty probes will be
deployed to identify and rectify any remnant technical issues associated with
routine field use of the instrument; to identify and rectify any data
collection, processing and distribution issues; and to better understand probe
responses over different terrains and vegetations. Depending on the success of
this pilot project, a proposal to deploy an additional 450 probes is planned by
the Principal Investigators (PIs). The ultimate goal is a COSMOS facility-
network that will continue operating indefinitely after deployment, perhaps
under the auspices of a government agency, to provide data on a continuing
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most probes will be installed in existing
facilities, which will simplify the logistics, make the probes secure, and
facilitate long-term operations and maintenance. The following data will be
available to all in near-real time over the internet: neutron counts in two
energy bands (fast, &gt;1 keV; and thermal, &lt;0.5 eV), soil water content,
snow pack water equivalent (and possibly also vegetation water equivalent),
temperature, pressure and relative humidity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility
and the data can be used in research that involves: local and mesoscale
meteorological processes and phenomena, weather forecasting and monthly to
seasonal climate outlook, land-atmosphere interactions, climate/drought
monitoring, vegetation dynamics and carbon cycle, remote sensing validation,
irrigation engineering, space and cosmic-ray physics, and interdisciplinary
water studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts The continuous data streams
from the new network will have broad impacts beyond the atmospheric sciences.
For example, relevance to: hydro meteorologists interested in land-atmosphere
interactions, ecologists interested in the impact of soil water and frozen
precipitation on ecological status and evolution, remote sensing scientists for
soil moisture calibration and validation, surface-water and groundwater
modelers, agricultural scientists interested in understanding and predicting the
relationship between soil moisture and crop yield, and geoscientists interested
in processes in the critical zone (between vegetation top and the bottom of
ground water). This project has a strong education potential, including training
scientists and engineers in the use of cosmic ray related techniques and
methods, teaching students of atmospheric science the effects of near-surface
water availability on weather and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
generated in the project will be available on the internet, and project results
will be presented at conferences, published in journals, and posted on the
internet. American industry will benefit by taking a leadership role in the
manufacturing of this new technology that will surely spread to other countries
as they set up their own COSMOS networks. Likewise, American science will
benefit by providing the leadership in this important area through delivering
world-class and unprecedented field data.