* 0838294
* RUI: The Frazier Mountain Paleoseismic Site: Evaluation of Fault Behavior Models with Geologic Data from the Big Bend Section of the San Andreas Fault, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Cynthia Liutkus, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2013
* USD 219,567.00

The characteristic earthquake model is based on the idea that over time, rupture
segments and earthquake displacements at a point along a fault are fairly
constant so all large earthquakes are similar in size and extent. This model has
dominated fault behavior theory for the San Andreas fault because it generally
agrees with several aspects of historic data. However, to test fault behavior
models, long (1000 year) records of earthquake ages and slip along a fault are
needed but an approximately 200 km gap in paleoseismic sites near the Big Bend
prevents correlation of earthquakes along the southern San Andreas fault. In
this project, research collaboration between Appalachian State University, the
University of Oregon and the U.S.Geological Survey is filling this gap at site
near Frazier Mountain in southern California. The goals of this investigation
are to (1) extend the record of earthquakes to greater than 1000 years, (2)
determine slip per event by detailed structural mapping of offset layers, and
(3) develop a chronostratigraphic framework that combines traditional
radiocarbon dating with paleoclimate indicators to provides additional temporal
attributes for correlating earthquakes between sites. These data will contribute
to earthquake rupture scenarios for the past 1500 years along the southern San
Andreas fault for comparison with fault behavior models and add a dataset to the
small pool of studies that permit tests of earthquake recurrence models and
comparison of slip rates on different time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
its fame, the San Andreas fault is poorly understood. For example, while
sufficient data exist to forecast about a 59% chance of an earthquake larger
than M6.7 on the southern San Andreas fault in the next 30 years, the portion of
the fault that will rupture and the amount of slip that will be produced is
unknown, in part due to a spatial gap in the available paleoseismic records.
Paleoseismologic studies investigate recent deposits and offsets produced by
large earthquakes to determine the age and displacement of past earthquakes.
This study will result in paleoseismic data from this gap and which will be used
to refine models of fault behavior and earthquake recurrence. Because these
models underpin probabilistic seismic hazard analyses required by Federal and
State agencies and which set insurance rates, building codes, and allocation of
seismic hazard mitigation resources, adding this critical data will further
scientific understanding of faults and ultimately reduce societal risk from
earthquakes.