* 0838034
* Colllaborative Research:  CubeSat:  Focused Investigations of Relativistic Electron Burst Intensity, Range, and Dynamics (FIREBIRD)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Klumpar, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 08/31/2013
* USD 911,637.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration
between space scientists and engineers at Boston University and Montana State
University. The objective of this three-year cross-disciplinary team effort is
to build and operate a set of tiny, so-called CubeSat, spacecraft. Each
satellite will carry a single large-geometry-factor, solid-state detector,
sensitive to electrons precipitating from the radiation belts. The FIREBIRD
mission (Focused Investigations of Relativistic Electron Burst Intensity, Range,
and Dynamics) is a targeted, goal-directed, space weather CubeSat mission to
resolve the spatial scale size and energy dependence of electron microbursts in
the Van Allen radiation belts. Relativistic electron microbursts appear as short
durations of intense electron precipitation measured by particle detectors on
low altitude spacecraft, seen when their orbits cross magnetic field lines which
thread the outer radiation belt. While microbursts are thought to be a
significant loss mechanism for relativistic electrons, they remain poorly
understood, thus rendering space weather models of Earth?s radiation belts
incomplete. FIREBIRD?s unique two-point, focused observations at low altitudes,
that fully exploit the capabilities of the CubeSat platform, will answer three
fundamental scientific questions with space weather implications: What is the
spatial scale size of an individual microburst?; What is the energy dependence
of an individual microburst?; and How much total electron loss from the
radiation belts do microbursts produce globally? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to addressing fundamental space physics research and space weather
applications, the FIREBIRD investigation also contributes to the training and
education of a diverse population of university students in all phases of the
project. Students will have major responsibility for the design and
implementation of the instruments and the spacecraft while at the same time
being mentored by professionals in each expert area. The impact is that the
fruits of this investigation will continue strongly for years, if not decades,
as the twenty or more students who ?cut their teeth? on this science mission
become practicing scientists and engineers. The new, largely unproven technology
involved in cubesat missions, inherently makes the project associated with
significant risks. On the other hand, however, the project has tremendous
potential to be transformational not only within its own research area but also
for the larger field of space science and atmospheric research as well as within
aerospace engineering and education. In addition, the project will be one of the
first two to carry out a multi-spacecraft CubeSat mission, thus pushing the
limit of this emerging technology.&lt;br/&gt;