* 0838975
* Collaborative research aboard Icebreaker Oden:  ASPIRE (Amundsen Sea Polynya International Research Expedition)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Sharon Stammerjohn, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 01/31/2013
* USD 179,599.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Amundsen Sea Polynya is areally the most productive Antarctic polynya,
exhibits higher chlorophyll levels during peak bloom and greater interannual
variability than the better-studied Ross Sea Polynya ecosystem. Polynyas may be
the key to understanding the future of polar regions as their extent is expected
to increase with anthropogenic warming. The project will examine 1) sources of
iron to the Amundsen Sea Polynya as a function of climate forcing, 2)
phytoplankton community structure in relation to iron supply and mixed-layer
depths, 3) the efficiency of the biological pump of carbon to depth and 4) the
net flux of carbon as a function of climate and micronutrient forcing. The
research also will compare results for the Amundsen Sea to existing data
synthesis and modeling efforts for the Palmer LTER and Ross Sea. The project
will 1) build close scientific collaborations between US and Swedish
researchers; 2) investigate climate change implications with broad societal
relevance; 3) train new researchers; 4) encourage participation in research
science by underrepresented groups, and 5) involve broad dissemination of
results via scientific literature and public outreach, including close
interactions with NSF-supported PolarTrec and COSEE K-12 teachers