* 0838261
* Astronomical Studies with the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Thomas Phillips, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Barvainis
* 03/31/2013
* USD 8,950,000.00

The Caltech Submillimeter Observatory employs a precision 10.4-meter-diameter
telescope operating within a dome to observe the sky at submillimeter
wavelengths. This award will continue funding for the next three years for
observatory operations, staff and student support, and for instrumentation
development. Areas of research will include studies of molecular gas and dust in
distant primeval galaxies, large-scale imaging of star-forming clouds using
powerful new bolometer cameras, and observations of the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect
on the cosmic microwave background. Instrumentation will be developed to
increase overall system sensitivity and mapping speed. The CSO trains many
undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, in both
observational science and instrumentation development. A considerable fraction
of telescope time is allocated to students, both at Caltech and at other
institutions; overall, more than 50% of telescope usage is by astronomers from
outside of Caltech. The CSO is noteworthy for its pioneering research in
astronomical receiver and bolometer technology, which is used at many other
observatories both national and worldwide. A new bolometer camera system based
on Microwave Kinetic Induction Devices (MKIDs) will be developed and used on the
telescope during this award period.