* 0838256
* Collaborative Research: Last Glacial Maximum and Deglaciation Chronology for the Foundation Ice Stream and Southeastern Weddell Sea Embayment
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Claire Todd, Pacific Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 09/30/2013
* USD 122,250.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to find
and date geologic evidence of past ice-marginal positions in the Pensacola
Mountains, which border the Foundation Ice Stream at the head of the Weddell Sea
embayment. The project will involve glacial geologic mapping and cosmogenic-
nuclide surface exposure dating of glacially transported erratics. An ice-flow
model will be used to link our exposure-dating results together in a
glaciologically consistent way, and to relate them to regional LGM to Holocene
elevation changes. A secondary focus of the project seeks to improve the
effectiveness of exposure-dating methods in understanding ice sheet change.
Changes in the location of the ice margin, and thus the exposure ages that
record these changes, are controlled not only by regional ice sheet mass
balance, but also by local effects on snow- and icefields immediately adjacent
to the exposure-dating sites. This part of the project will combine
glaciological observations near the present ice margin with targeted exposure-
age sampling in an effort to better understand the processes controlling the ice
margin location, and improve the interpretation of very recent exposure-age data
as a record of latest Holocene to present ice sheet changes. The intellectual
merit of the project is that it will provide direct geologic evidence of LGM-to-
Holocene ice volume change in a region of Antarctica where no such evidence now
exists. The broader impacts of the work involve both gathering information
needed for accurate understanding of past and present global sea level change.
Secondly, this project will help to develop and maintain the human and
intellectual resources necessary for continued excellence in polar research and
global change education, by linking experienced Antarctic researchers with early
career scientists who seek to develop their expertise in both research and
education. In addition, it brings together two early career scientists whose
careers are focused at opposite ends of the research-education spectrum, thus
facilitating better integration of research and education both in the careers of
these scientists and in the outcome of this project. This award has field work
in Antarctica.