* 0838058
* Lithium Isotopes and Mineral Inclusions in Zircons- 4.4 Ga to Recent
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2011
* USD 404,355.00

Intellectual merit. Zircons that are older than 4 billion years (&gt; 4 Ga)
provide the only known geochemical record of conditions on earliest Earth, and
their study has stimulated considerable interest and controversy. They are
variously interpreted to have formed in parent rocks and tectonic regimes
ranging from wet melting of true granites (sensu stricto) in fully developed
continental crust to forming in mafic rocks in gabbroic crust. Resolution of
this question would help constrain the emergence on Earth of plate tectonics,
full-size sialic continents, and true granites. Zircons are widely studied as
time capsules of igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary processes in younger
rocks. Lithium compositions and isotope ratios in zircon are potentially a
powerful new tool for coupling fluid-rock interaction to geologic time. Our
preliminary lithium studies in zircons show that [Li] is enriched by a factor of
over 1000 in zircons from continental crust vs. zircons from ocean crust and
that values of _7Li are much more fractionated in continental crust. The
compositions of Jack Hills zircons support the hypothesis, based on oxygen
isotope ratios, that oceans and extensive weathering existed on Earth as early
as 4.3 Ga. If correct, this indicates that Earth was hospitable for life much
earlier than previously thought. We propose new studies of lithium composition
[Li] and isotope ratio (_7Li) in zircons and of mineral inclusions in zircons.
Zircons will be analyzed in situ by ion microprobe at 1 - 10 micron resolution.
The primary goals will be to:&lt;br/&gt;1) better understand the systematics of
Li substitution and exchange in zircon&lt;br/&gt;2) systematically identify
mineral inclusions in zircons as a tool to determine host rock for detrital
zircons, and&lt;br/&gt;3) constrain the genesis of 4.4 to 4.0 Ga detrital
zircons from the Jack Hills, Western Australia. Zircons from selected younger
terranes, including mafic and felsic ocean crust, will also be studied as
possible analogs for the now missing &gt;4 Ga parent rocks. These studies and
data will be correlated to other geochemical parameters of zircons and host-
rocks including: age, oxygen isotope ratio, trace elements, zoning, and other
radiogenic isotope systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. These include
training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. This program has been
very successful in training academic researchers; 20 graduates have research or
teaching positions and 10 have established their own stable isotope
laboratories. This grant will be the main operating grant of the UW Geology
Stable Isotope Laboratory and will help develop the new capabilities of the
Wisc-SIMS ims-1280 ion microprobe that are required by the stable isotope
research proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;