* 0838359
* Probing Depth-dependent Heterogeneities under Japan Using Transmitted Seismic Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Ru-Shan Wu, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2010
* USD 49,339.00

At present, the Earth?s interior dynamics are mainly inferred by detecting
seismic wave velocity anomalies in the Earth using deterministic approaches such
as seismic tomography. The anomaly is mapped point-wise within the Earth and it
can be interpreted as a snapshot of the convective mantle and crust. However,
the spatial resolution of such deterministic methods is limited by sparse
geographic distribution of seismographs. Given the distribution of current
seismograph networks, the length scale of the heterogeneity resolved by global
tomography is on the order of several hundred kilometers. On the other hand,
there are important geological processes, taking place on the Earth?s surface at
much smaller length scales, from the order of tens of kilometers to meters. In
order to gain a sound understanding of Earth dynamics, the ?missing? information
at the high end (i.e., those small-scale heterogeneities) of the continuous
heterogeneity spectrum must be supplemented. However, seismic tomography is far
from achieving high-resolution deterministic models for structures below the
crust, and a novel approach must be devised.

In the work proposed here, a new stochastic inversion theory is formulated
mathematically, which is based on wave propagation through random media, and it
is able to yield statistical information on small-scale heterogeneities as an
assemblage, such as the size distribution of heterogeneities, the wave
scattering strength of the heterogeneity, and how they are distributed with
depth. They physics behind the theory is that small-scale heterogeneities
manifest themselves in transmitted seismic body waves as fluctuations of phase
(or travel time, or arrival time) and wave amplitude across a seismic array.
These observed fluctuations are then used to form coherence functions, which
simultaneously depend on the distance between two seismic stations and the
incident angles between two plane waves. The coherence function has sharp depth
resolution and can be used to invert for the depth-dependent heterogeneity
spectrum. This newly developed mathematical framework will be used to analyze
data recorded by the HiNet seismic network in Japan. This densely instrumented
large-aperture network has the potential to constrain heterogeneity spectra over
depths from the surface to several hundred kilometers. The proposed work here
may address several fundamental issues concerning: (1) the fate of subducted
materials in the mantle (2) characterization of the seismic wave scattering
properties for ?hot fingers?, source regions feeding the volcanoes under Japan,
and non-volcanic regions; (3) seismic constraints on the slab-mantle interaction
and evolution of the mantle wedge; (4) multi-scale analysis of mantle
heterogeneities and at different depths may provide a means to isolate different
physical and chemical mechanism that is responsible for each length scale. The
statistical information on the small-scale heterogeneity is also critical in
other disciplines of Earth sciences, for instance, petrology, geochemistry,
tectonics and hydrodynamic modeling of the convective Earth. The mathematical
methods developed here can potentially be used in other scientific areas related
to wave propagation in random media, such as, ocean acoustics, electromagnetic
wave propagation and communications, medical imaging, and helioseismology.