* 0838313
* Multi-modal, shape-based Inverse Methods for the Characterization of DNAPL Source Zone Architecture
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Linda Abriola, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 359,557.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Multi-Modal and Shape-Based Inverse Methods for the
Characterization of DNAPL Source Zone Architecture&lt;br/&gt;Groundwater
contamination by dense, non-aqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs) represents a major
societal problem both within the United States and worldwide. Costly in situ
remediation methods directed at the complete removal of contaminant mass from
the subsurface have failed to provide a comprehensive solution to this problem
thereby leading to recent, increased interest in an approach to remediation
aimed at the reduction of downstream contaminant mass flux. Developing a
quantitative understanding of the spatial distribution of DNAPL contamination in
the source zone is critical to flux-based remediation and management strategies.
Indeed, it has been shown that this source zone architecture is closely linked
to downstream behavior of the plume. Unfortunately, the estimation of the source
zone architecture is a very challenging inverse problem.&lt;br/&gt;We propose an
approach to source zone characterization based on the joint, physics-based
inversion of hydrological (down-gradient flux and concentration) and geophysical
(electrical impedance tomography) data. Our processing approach addresses the
ill-posed nature of this inverse problem by employing a novel representation of
the source zone. Rather than using the limited data to recover a fine scale,
pixilated representation of the spatial distribution of DNAPL, we parameterize
the boundaries separating pools, ganglia, and non-contaminated regions.
Algorithms are being developed to estimate this geometry along with the space-
varying DNAPL saturation in the contaminated zones. Building on recent work in
the image processing and computer vision fields, we employ a new form of
parametric active contour models to describe the boundaries of the pool and
ganglia regions. These models combine the topological flexibility of traditional
level set ideas with the low order parametric representation associated with
snakes. The performance of our approach is evaluated using an extensive suite of
numerical simulations, as well as a set of laboratory-scale experiments.
Simulations and experiments will explore (a) the accuracy and utility of Archie-
type mixing rules for mapping geophysical to hydrological variables, and (b) the
robustness of the method to un-modeled volumetric heterogeneities in both the
electrical and hydrological properties of the subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Knowledge gained from this research will improve geometry-based methods
for inversion by extending these concepts into hydrology. In addition to
advancing the field of hydrology, our research will expand mathematical imaging
through the development of new, shape-based methods for multi-modal inverse
problems. This research also seeks to quantify the limits associated with using
electrical impedance and hydrological data to characterize quasi-static DNAPL
source-zone architecture.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project has potential
to impact areas of basic science, engineering, and educational training. Proper
identification of source zone architecture will provide guidance in designing
and choosing appropriate remediation strategies. The methods developed in this
project have the potential for application in fields such as earth sciences,
medical imaging, and nondestructive evaluation, as the problem of extracting
geometric information from highly heterogeneous data sources is widely
encountered in all these areas.