* 0838781
* Constraining the Deglaciation of the Antarctic Peninsula Using OSL Dated Beach Deposits
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Regina DeWitt, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,978.00

Lead PI/Institution: Simms, Alexander (Oklahoma State;
alex.simms@okstate.edu)&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0838781&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Constraining the Deglaciation of the Antarctic Peninsula Using OSL Dated Beach
Deposits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The purpose of this proposal is
to acquire Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) dates from whole cobbles
within raised beach ridges and boulder pavements from five areas in the
Antarctic Peninsula. The PIs propose to use OSL to date features indicative of
sea level variations that are not accessible with radiocarbon methods because of
low organic carbon contents of coastal sediments from the Antarctic Peninsula.
The PIs suggest that OSL measurements are possible in particular cobbles within
raised beach ridges and boulder pavements and preliminary OSL ages from beach
ridges in the South Shetland Islands show agreement with existing reservoir-
corrected radiocarbon-derived sea-level curves. The PIs hypothesize that
systematic differences in sea level histories can be seen from north to south
and east to west across the Antarctic Peninsula. Paleo-ages of beach ridges and
boulder pavements could, along with isostatic modeling, provide important
constraints on the thickness and retreat history of the Antarctic Peninsula Ice
Sheet since the Last Glacial Maximum. Accurate reconstructions of the ice sheet
are important for researchers attempting to disentangle the isostatic adjustment
from satellite gravity measurements that suggest melting in the region, and thus
could help predict the future fate of ice sheets in light of predictions of sea-
level rise and global warming. The broader impacts of this proposal are that
these data could help constrain the prediction of future ice-sheet responses to
global warming. Both PIs are from an EPScOR state institution that has a new PhD
program in Geology. This institution awards the second-most number of BS degrees
to Native American students in the country increasing the chance that
undergraduate students associated with this work are from under represented
groups. Lectures developed from this research will be given at three smaller
universities within the state of Oklahoma that do not grant degrees in geology.
The grant includes support for two graduate students.