* 0838988
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Langmuir Circulation on Gas Transfer and Photosynthesis in the Southern Ocean: A Large Eddy Simulation Study
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Andres Tejada-Martinez, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2013
* USD 169,533.00

Langmuir circulation (LC) in the upper ocean mixed layer (UOML) is a feature
most familiarly observed as linear stripes or sea surface streaks approximately
parallel to the wind direction. These result from helical (ovoid) water cells
rotating clockwise and anticlockwise, forming alternating bands of convergence
(downwelling) and divergence (upwelling) at the surface. Windspeed determines
the depth and the spacings of these circulation cells. As a driver of surface
renewal in the UOML, LC may then be responsible for processes such as divergence
zone capture and transport of phytoplankton upwards to the surface and the
convergence zone collection and sinking of surfactants and transferable gases
into the water column. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators from the University
of South Florida and the Smithsonian Research Center wish to extend numerical
modeling studies of the effects of LC on two topics of interest to Antarctic
oceanography, firstly, a) photoinhibition of the primary productivity of
phytoplankton under Antarctic summer light fields (including effects of surface
UV penetration) and possibly, b) parameterizations of sea-air gas exchange. Two
recent field data sets including productivity studies in the Ross Sea polyna and
the Southern Ocean Gas Experiment (SO-GasEx) will form the basis for comparisons
of field data with fine scale numerical computations of LC effects using large-
eddy simulations (LES).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;