* 0838235
* Collaborative Research: Consensus on Climate Predication by Adaptive Synchronization of Models
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Benjamin Kirtman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2009
* USD 80,000.00

The ultimate goal of this project is to fuse climate models, as they run in a
21st century simulation, so as to form a consensus on the details of climate
change. The proposed fused "multi-model" should be more reliable than any of the
separate models or any average of their outputs, since it would use the best
predictive features of each model at each point in
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fusion of models is based on the commonly
observed tendency of chaotic systems to synchronize when they are connected
through only a few of many variables. Synchronization of chaos has been advanced
as a view of data assimilation for ongoing observations into a running model,
effectively synchronizing the model with reality. Here, the models will
assimilate information from each other. Since synchronization schemes can
generally be extended to synchronize parameters as well as states, the
connection coefficients linking different pairs of variables in different pairs
of models can be dynamically adapted. After a series of experiments in a
hierarchy of increasingly complex models, the consensus scheme would ultimately
be applied to fuse three full-complexity global climate models, with the best
predictive features of each selected automatically by adapting the connection
coefficients in a training run using 20th century
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take the first steps towards this
goal of synchronized climate models, by exploring the theory of synchronization
and developing an understanding of how synchronization may best be carried out
in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project are in
providing an example of adaptive synchronization-based consensus formation that
can be applied in any situation where a collection of alternative models is used
to represent an ongoing physical process of any sort. In particular, any new
climate model could be added to the consensus by including it in the training
scheme, thus giving climate change predictions a higher level of objectivity,
with greater resulting impact.