* 0838385
* VOSS:  Collaborative Research:  Towards Collaboration Strength in Virtual Research Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Sara Kiesler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 216,000.00

Technology has made possible virtual research organizations involving
researchers from different institutions. Virtual research organizations are
expected to improve the speed of innovations and the creativity of scientists by
bringing expertise to projects that would otherwise be unavailable. This project
contributes to the scientific study of this new way of organizing scientific
work and examines the problem of collaborating in virtual research organizations
at the level of the collaboration and collaborators. The purpose of the research
is to better understand how dispersed, interdisciplinary projects succeed, and
to explore how virtual organizations might best use new tools and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on the investigators?
prior work in understanding the Information Technology Research (ITR)
initiative, which included close to 500 interdisciplinary technology research
projects supported by the NSF. The proposed work entails an archival analysis of
ITR final reports to discern the longer-term impact of the ITR projects and a
longitudinal follow-up survey of ITR investigators. This research will
contribute to organization science and social network theory, and to a better
understanding of science and technology. The results will be useful for social
scientists interested in organizations, computer scientists and technologists
interested in tools and infrastructure that work, and decision and policy makers
who invest in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual research organizations in
science and engineering are essential to the nation?s future and to solving
global problems. This research will aid policy understanding of requirements of
distributed interdisciplinary collaboration, improve metrics and approaches for
evaluating the direct and indirect outcomes of research programs, suggest
policies for future programs in innovative scientific research and education,
and provide information to organizations, particularly departments and
universities, about the institutional policies and practices that best support
distributed interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;