* 0838356
* Collaborative Research: MSI--Mid-Latitude SuperDARN Radar Infrastructure for the Study of Ionospheric Electrodynamics and Atmospheric Processes on Global Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2015
* Simon Shepherd, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,526,357.00

The goal of this Mid-Size Infrastructure (MSI) project is to build a mid-
latitude extension of the SuperDARN High Frequency (HF) radar network. Radars in
the international SuperDARN network measure important properties of Earth's
ionosphere, including electric fields, plasma structures, and acoustic gravity
waves. Progress in the study of Earth's near-space environment increasingly
relies on the availability of these critical measurements on global scales. The
interest in SuperDARN data products has spurred the recent development of a pair
of polar cap radars by Canadian colleagues, extending SuperDARN capabilities to
the highest latitudes. This MSI project, which is a collaborative effort
involving four institutions, will result in eight new radars distributed over
four sites situated along an arc extending from the Azores through the central
United States to the Aleutian Island chain. The new radars will provide
unprecedented views of the dynamics of the subauroral ionosphere and inner
magnetosphere. The feasibility of such measurements at middle latitudes has been
demonstrated with the deployments of single, isolated SuperDARN radars in the
eastern United States (Wallops Island, Blackstone) and in Japan (Hokkaido). The
existing radars will be operationally folded into the MSI chain. The realization
of this large-scale and long-term observational capability will furnish the
space physics community with new infrastructure and a valuable tool for engaging
students in cutting-edge research. SuperDARN data collected from high latitudes
are used by space scientists all over the world. The existing radar network was
developed incrementally over 15 years with the steady addition of international
partners. This project will initiate the acquisition of comparable
infrastructure at mid-latitudes thereby taking advantage of recent developments
at polar latitudes and the existing high-latitude SuperDARN network to provide
expanded coverage of effects in the magnetosphere, ionosphere, and neutral
atmosphere. The protocols and distribution methods currently used for SuperDARN
data and data products will be utilized to ensure the same ease of access to
data. As occurred with high latitude SuperDARN, international partners are
simultaneously seeking funds to build complementary radars in Europe and Asia.
The participants in this project are all associated with institutions of higher
learning and view the infrastructure as both a teaching and research investment.
Data from the high-latitude SuperDARN radars have contributed to numerous
advanced degrees and the mid-latitude extension will furnish many more
opportunities. Students at the collaborating institutions will be heavily
engaged in the work of this project both at their home institutions and at the
individual radar sites. Measurements provided by the infrastructure will enable
transformational science and support research across a broad range of topics in
the physics of the magnetosphere, ionosphere, and upper atmosphere. At the same
time, this effort will: (1) provide the research community with extensive mid-
latitude ionospheric and atmospheric datasets; (2) provide large-scale context
for ongoing and future spacecraft and rocket missions; (3) generate new research
possibilities in space science for students; (4) provide opportunities for
students at U.S. universities to gain hands-on experience with radar technology
and in the management of a major scientific collaboration. All data and data
products will be made freely available through the SuperDARN website.