* 0838255
* Experimental and theoretical investigation of rock friction at seismic slip rates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 225,426.00

The PIs present new experimental data and theory that describe the thermal
weakening of fine-grained gouges during earthquake slip. They postulate that the
particles in fine-grained gouges thermally soften due to an intrinsic decrease
in the elastic shear modulus and increases in plasticity in response to rapid
heating of the gouge layer. High-speed weaken processes directly bear on
earthquake propagation physics and the origin of the anomalously low state of
resolved shear stress on many major plate boundary faults systems, hazardous
long run out landslides, and the motion on misaligned faults and low angle
detachments. They suppose a simple non-linear weakening model and supporting
experimental evidence that explains the principal properties of initial high
velocity weakening phase in terms of a thermally controlled increase in the
plasticity and decrease in yield strength of the contacting asperities in fault
in response to frictional heating. It relies on the well understood concepts of
rock plasticity at elevated temperatures and stresses and accounts for the
factor observed of 3 to 4 weakening seen in high speed friction tests by
considering both the Wachtman-Anderson relationship for the temperature
dependent decrease of the elastic modulus and the hyperbolic sine creep law to
account for asperity creep at elevated stresses and temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They plan to test the assumption that flash weakening is a
truly adiabatic process where the heat caused by the friction is confined to a
very thin thermal boundary layer along the asperity contact leaving the bulk of
the asperity and attached grains uninvolved in the heating and deformation. The
initial data experimental data confirms there is a systematic evolution of the
friction coefficient from ~0.5 to as low as 0.15 as velocities increase from
0.14 m/s to 2.5 M/s. However, it does not support the simplified current simple
form of the flash-weakening hypothesis. To constrain the theoretical development
They will do the following: (1) Obtain thermal record of the average
temperatures in the shear zone so we can properly constrain the temperature
dependence of the gouge rheology. (2) Examine the shear zone fabrics with a SEM
at different velocity and normal stresses to look at the nature of the grain
size distribution and evidence for the onset of plastic deformation and melting
of gouge particles. (3) Check for the effects of composition (clay vs.
crystalline rock) and presence of water on the friction properties. (4) Modify
the rotary shear apparatus so that it will run 2 to 4 times slower to extend
measurements over a wider velocity range.&lt;br/&gt;