* 0838166
* Using mesoscale climate simulations to reduce input data errors in energy balance snow hydrology models
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Alan Hamlet, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 306,405.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mountain snowmelt is an essential resource to 40% of the
world?s population but is threatened by warming associated with climate change.
Accurate model predictions of the climate sensitivity of individual watersheds
are needed for watershed impacts analysis, local and regional planning
processes, and the development of water policy. Currently the quality of
meteorological driving data sets in mountain environments is a major obstacle to
characterizing the sensitivity of particular watersheds and simulating climate
related impacts using hydrologic models. In particular, accurately
characterizing where precipitation falls as rain vs. snow on an event basis, and
when and how fast snow melts is essential to the assessment of climate
sensitivity at small to medium (10-1000 km2) spatial scales. Errors in
precipitation, temperature and radiative data sets in mountain environments are
related to the scarcity of high elevation measurements, poor measurement quality
due to adverse conditions, relatively few measured variables, and interpolation
errors in complex terrain. Such highly scale-dependent errors are propagated
through hydrologic simulation models in a complex manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the density of in situ data will always be less
than ideal for most watersheds, we propose to develop and evaluate new methods
for combining physical process-based information from meso-scale climate models
with low elevation meteorological stations and high resolution topographic
information to remap available meteorological driving data more accurately
across complex terrain. The performance of meso-scale climate models in this
application is currently poorly understood, and we will use the intensively-
monitored Tuolumne and North Fork American River watersheds in the Sierra
Nevada, California to develop, evaluate, and refine these new techniques at
basin scales ranging from 10 to 800 km2. While specific research experiments
will focus on two mountain watersheds in the western United States, the research
is designed to develop and evaluate tools that will be broadly applicable in
mountain environments across the western U.S. and potentially at the global
scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following research questions will be
addressed:&lt;br/&gt;1) What forcing data errors contribute most to hydrologic
errors in the simulation of snow accumulation and melt processes at various
spatial scales?&lt;br/&gt;2) How can simulations from high-resolution
meteorological models best be combined with topography and limited low-elevation
station data on multiple scales to produce distributed forcing data for
hydrologic simulations in complex terrain?&lt;br/&gt;3) What are the strengths
and limitations of meso-scale climate models when used for long-term hydrologic
predictions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout, the study will focus on impacts on
water resources, and results will be shared with resource managers. We will
develop a course on combined hydrologic data collection and modeling for UW
graduate students and will employ both undergraduates and graduates in data
collection and analysis. We will work with National Park Service interpretive
rangers to communicate climate-hydrology connections to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;