* 0838847
* Collaborative Research: Alternative Nutritional Strategies in Antarctic Protists
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Sanders, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 07/31/2013
* USD 388,242.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Most organisms meet their carbon and energy needs using photosynthesis
(phototrophy) or ingestion/assimilation of organic substances (heterotrophy).
However, a nutritional strategy that combines phototrophy and heterotrophy -
mixotrophy - is geographically and taxonomically widespread in aquatic systems.
While the presence of mixotrophs in the Southern Ocean is known only recently,
preliminary evidence indicates a significant role in Southern Ocean food webs.
Recent work on Southern Ocean dinoflagellate, Kleptodinium, suggests that it
sequesters functional chloroplasts of the bloom-forming haptophyte, Phaeocystis
antarctica. This dinoflagellate is abundant in the Ross Sea, has been reported
elsewhere in the Southern Ocean, and may have a circumpolar distribution. By
combining nutritional modes. mixotrophy may offer competitive advantages over
pure autotrophs and heterotrophs.

The goals of this project are to understand the importance of alternative
nutritional strategies for Antarctic species that combine phototrophic and
phagotrophic processes in the same organism. The research will combine field
investigations of plankton and ice communities in the Southern Ocean with
laboratory experiments on Kleptodinium and recently identified mixotrophs from
our Antarctic culture collections. The research will address: 1) the relative
contributions of phototrophy and phagotrophy in Antarctic mixotrophs; 2) the
nature of the relationship between Kleptodinium and its kleptoplastids; 3) the
distributions and abundances of mixotrophs and Kleptodinium in the Southern
Ocean during austral spring/summer; and 4) the impacts of mixotrophs and
Kleptodinium on prey populations, the factors influencing these behaviors and
the physiological conditions of these groups in their natural environment. The
project will contribute to the maintenance of a culture collection of
heterotrophic, phototrophic and mixotrophic Antarctic protists that are
available to the scientific community, and it will train graduate and
undergraduate students at Temple University. Research findings and activities
will be summarized for non-scientific audiences through the PIs' websites and
through other public forums, and will involve middle school teachers via
collaboration with COSEE-New England.