* 0838529
* Collaborative Research:   VOSS:   The Emergence of Collaborative Social Structure in nanoHUB Cyberspace
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Lisa Ncube, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 197,052.00

A science gateway can be defined as a community-specific set of tools,
applications, and data that are integrated via a portal or suite of
applications. The nanoHUB was created as a new form of science gateway, intended
to enable collaboration for learning and discovery in nanoscience and
technology. The nanoHUB is only four years old but has grown to more than 60,000
members from 170 countries. The goal of this project is to understand the degree
to which nanoHUB generates new intellectual capital; the technical and social
features of the nanoHUB that support knowledge generation; and, the conditions
needed to improve design choices for the expansion and creation of science
gateways. The project will compare processes and outcomes in nanoHUB with
Indiana CTSI, one of several new gateways that have been launched in other
domains using the suite of software and tools available in nanoHUB. IndianaCTSI
supports clinical and translational research to improve human health.

In the past it was assumed that virtual spaces like nanoHUB and IndianaCTSI
could not be considered sites of situated practice or generative of knowledge on
their own terms, and no midrange theory of collaborative practice in virtual
organizations exists. One aim of this study will be to contribute to the
development of a conceptual framework to fill this theoretical gap. In doing so,
the project draws on literature in the areas of socio-technical systems,
knowledge generation, and collaboration. The research will be conducted in a
series of three phases: 1) interviews and focus groups; 2) surveys; and 3)
social network analysis. Findings from this study will contribute to a small but
growing body of literature that will help to optimize gateway design and use.