* 0838054
* Collaborative Research:  CubeSat-based Ground-to-Space Bistatic Radar Experiment--Radio Aurora Explorer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Hasan Bahcivan, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 11/30/2011
* USD 457,017.00

This project is a collaboration between a space science Principal Investigator
(PI) at SRI International and an engineering PI at University of Michigan. The
objective of this three-year cross-disciplinary team effort is to build and
operate a tiny, so-called CubeSat, spacecraft carrying a UHF radar receiver
payload. Launch of the satellite will be as a secondary on a Department of
Defense launch scheduled for December 2009. The satellite will be operated in
coordination with the AMISR incoherent scatter radar from the ground to
investigate the radio aurora from field-aligned irregularities in the high-
latitude ionosphere. The primary scientific objective of the Radio Aurora
Explorer (RAE) mission is to understand the microphysics of plasma instabilities
that lead to field-aligned irregularities (FAI) of electron density in the polar
lower (80-300 km) ionosphere. The RAE mission is specifically designed to
remotely measure, with extremely high angular resolution (~0.5 degree), the wave
spectrum of ~1 m scale FAI as a function of altitude, in particular measuring
the magnetic field alignment of the irregularities. Due to the magnetic field
geometry at high latitudes this bi-static (ground radar to satellite)
configuration, in which a narrow radar beam is scattered off the FAI and then
observed by the CubeSat receiver, is the only way to perform these measurements.
Better understanding of ionospheric irregularities and their role in ionospheric
dynamics is an important space weather research objective because plasma
structures in the ionosphere can have an adverse effect on communications via
satellite, HF and VHF radio and as well as an adverse effect on navigation,
tracking, and positioning. The project has a very strong educational component;
it relies on extensive undergraduate and graduate student involvement through
all aspects of the mission. The new, largely unproven technology involved in
cubesat missions, inherently makes the project associated with significant
risks. On the other hand, however, the project has tremendous potential to be
transformational not only within its own research area but also for the larger
field of space science and atmospheric research as well as within aerospace
engineering and education.