* 0838735
* Ice sheet Dynamics and Processes along the West Antarctic Continental Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Frank Nitsche, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2013
* USD 160,179.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;PI: Frank O. Nitsche&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0838735&lt;br/&gt;Title: Sheet Dynamics and Processes along the West Antarctic
Continental Shelf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The West Antarctic Ice
Sheet is believed to be vulnerable to climate change as it is grounded below sea
level, is drained by rapidly flowing ice streams and is fringed by floating ice
shelves subject to melting by incursions of relatively warm Antarctic
circumpolar water. Currently, the most rapidly thinning glaciers in Antarctica
occur in the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Sea sectors. This study seeks to place
the present day observations into a longer-term geological context over a broad
scale by high-resolution swath bathymetric mapping of continental shelf sea
floor features that indicate past ice presence and behavior. Gaps in existing
survey coverage of glacial lineations and troughs indicating ice flow direction
and paleo-grounding zone wedges over the Ross, Amundsen and Bellingshausen Sea
sectors are targeted. The surveys will be conducted as part of the 2010
Icebreaker Oden science opportunity and will take advantage of the vessel?s
state-of-the-art swath mapping system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This activity will supplement and complement more focused
regional studies by US, Swedish, UK, French, Japanese and Polish collaborators
also sailing on the Oden. The PI will compile bathymetric data to be acquired by
the Oden and other ships in the region over the duration of the project into the
existing bathymetric data base. The compiled data set will be made publically
available through the NSF founded Antarctic Multibeam Bathymetry and Geophysical
Data Synthesis (AMBS) site. It will also be integrated into the GEBCO
International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean (IBCSO) and so
significantly improve the basis for ship navigation in the Pacific sector of the
Southern Ocean. Undergraduate students will be involved in the research under
supervision of the PI via the Lamont summer internship program. The PI is a
young investigator and this will be his first NSF grant as a PI.&lt;br/&gt;