* 0838250
* Evaluation of Uncertainty in CO2 Sequestration Modeling: a Flow Relevance Study using Experimental Stratigraphy and Field Verification (Teapot Dome, Wyoming)
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Ye Zhang, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2012
* USD 262,416.00

Evaluation of Uncertainty in CO2 Sequestration Modeling: a Flow Relevance Study
using Experimental Stratigraphy and Field Verification (Teapot Dome, Wyoming)

Ye Zhang EAR-0838250 University of Wyoming

ABSTRACT

Injection of supercritical carbon dioxide (CO2) into deep permeable formations
of sedimentary basins has been proposed as a viable approach to greenhouse gas
sequestration (geostorage). Both aquifer storage efficiency and potential
leakage subsequent to injection are critical factors for consideration. Though
numerical modeling provides a key assessment tool, multiple sources of
uncertainty exist in the model construct, creating significant uncertainty in
predicting CO2 flow in the storage formations. For example, one important
conceptual model uncertainty is the multiple levels of homogeneity with which a
formation can be represented, which are typically constrained by the quality and
accessibility of site-specific data. For a given model, some parameters exert
more influence on the prediction outcomes than others, thus in site evaluations,
the value and relevance of diverse data types need to be better understood. This
proposal aims to address this fundamental assessment issue with a two-pronged
strategy. First, CO2 flow simulations will be conducted in a novel, experiment-
based synthetic aquifer as well as in three increasingly homogenized models
(i.e., facies-scale, facies-assemblage-scale, formation scale representations).
To assess parameter uncertainties, the simulations will be conducted within an
efficient computation framework based on the Design of Experiment. By comparing
model predictions (full range of scenarios) and sensitivity (the most
significant parameters impacting CO2 flow), an optimal level of model complexity
will be determined. The insights gained will then help guide the development of
a site-specific model for a CO2 injection test in the Teapot Dome, Wyoming. In
modeling the field test, the analysis workflow will be validated in a dynamic
setting by integrating simulation with data collection and field observation.
Results will clarify the most relevant data types in CO2 modeling that require
better characterization. Since successful implementation of carbon geostorage
depends on both the accuracy and cost-effectiveness of the technical assessment
studies, our work will be of broad scientific significance as well as high
societal relevance.