* 0838513
* Building and Maintaining Simultaneous Dynamic Relationships in a Virtual Organization:   The Case of Virtual Intensive Care Units
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Kenneth Wood, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 399,984.00

Nurses in virtual Intensive Care Units (ICUs) function in virtual teams whose
configuration and membership is fluid and rapidly changing. They face many
challenges related to the development and management of simultaneous dynamic
relationships. This study will examine the role trust across these various
relationships, and the role of communication and technological support for
communication that can affect trust and conflicts. An in-depth analysis of five
cases of a virtual ICU will be conducted to understand the strategies and
methods that virtual ICU nurses use in developing and managing dynamic
interactions with multiple ICUs. Virtual ICUs evolved out of the need to provide
around-the-clock care of ICU patients in the face of national shortages of both
nurses and intensivists, a 250% increase in hospital ICU beds over the past 20
years, and pressure from external organizations. Understanding virtual ICU
sociotechnical systems and their impact on the workers (e.g., virtual ICU
nurses) and their performance is critical as this technology may be a solution
for the shortage of practitioners, as well as a tool for providing access to
healthcare services in remote rural areas. Anchored in the literatures on
virtual teams, human factors engineering and sociotechnical systems, this
research will identify solutions for improving performance and quality of
working life of practioners involved in multiple virtual teams. The results will
be broadly applicable beyond virtual ICU?s to other contexts, including academic
science and engineering. Increasingly researchers are not only working in one
but instead across many distributed teams, and understanding the role of trust,
prioritization, and decision management in these new modalities of scientific
practice is crucial to the success of science and engineering in the twenty-
first century. Undergraduate and graduate students in industrial and systems
engineering will be involved in the research and dissemination activities.
Results from the project will be used disseminate findings of our research to a
broad and public audience.