* 0838939
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Polylithium Salts for Small and Full Size Rechargeable Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Robert Filler, TechDrive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop and employ
novel cost-effective lithium salts for mass production of full size lithium-ion
batteries for EV/HEV applications. Small lithium-ion batteries containing
fluorinated low lattice energy lithium salts are used in computers, cell phones,
cameras, and medical devices. For mass production of full size batteries to be
used in electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles (EV/HEV), the
electrolytes derived from these salts are far too expensive and are potentially
hazardous to the environment. In a Li-ion battery, the liquid electrolyte is the
second most expensive component after cathode materials. Therefore, there is a
great demand for lithium salts that are inexpensive compared to that of the
current lithium salts. The availability of such salts will be a major advance in
Li-ion battery technology. This project will develop low-cost lithium salts that
have excellent electrochemical properties.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to introduce to the
marketplace new lithium salts for large-scale production of full-size lithium-
ion batteries for electric vehicles and consumer products. These environmentally
safer and less costly materials will provide improved batteries compared to
those currently available. Due to worldwide concerns about environmental issues
and the depletion of natural fossil fuels, there have been increasing demands
for sustainable EVs (electric vehicles) and FCEVs (fuel cell electric vehicles).
These electric powertrains need secondary batteries that can be charged and
discharged frequently. One of the most promising types of secondary batteries is
the lithium-ion(Li-ion) battery, because of its high energy and power densities
and because it has the potential to last the lifetime of the car. Li-ion
batteries are also currently in large-scale commercial production for use in
consumer electronic products, such as laptop computers and cellphones. However,
the high cost of small cells precludes their use in economically-demanding mass-
market vehicles. To improve their competitive position and with a view to
potential long-term expansion of the vehicle market, considerable research and
development must be devoted to lowering the costs of Li-ion batteries. The
technology developed in this project will advance this goal.