* 0838391
* Laboratory Measurements of Trace Element Partition Coefficients Between Zircon, Aqueous Fluid and Silicate Melt at High and Ultrahigh Pressures
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* John Ayers, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2012
* USD 261,031.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory Measurements of Trace
Element Partition Coefficients Between Zircon, Aqueous Fluid and Silicate Melt
at High and Ultrahigh Pressures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
Although zircon is widely used for dating geologic events and identifying the
source (mantle versus recycled crust) of crustal rocks, it has not been
developed as a tool for characterizing fluid-rock interaction. Zircon could
potentially be used to date fluid infiltration events and estimate the trace
element composition of fluids. This would be particularly useful for evaluating
the role of fluids in the formation of High- and Ultrahigh-Pressure (HP and UHP)
rocks that typically form in subduction zones. Laboratory experiments are
proposed to characterize the behavior of zircon in the presence of aqueous
fluids and silicate melts. D(zircon/fluid) partition coefficients will be
measured for P, Na, Ca, Mg, Sc, Sr, Y, Nb, Ce, Pr, Nd, Pm, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy,
Er, Tm, Yb, Lu, Hf, Pb, Th and U at 1.5-3.5 GPa. In subsolidus synthesis
(forward) experiments at 800-1100°C the assemblages zircon + quartz and zircon +
baddeleyite will be equilibrated with various fluid compositions (H2O, 1m NaOH,
1m HCl) at fO2 = NNO to allow measurement of zircon aqueous solubility and
D(zircon/fluid) values. D(zircon/fluid) values measured in recrystallization
(reversal) experiments at similar conditions will be used to test for
equilibrium. Measured D(zircon/fluid) values will be compared with
D(zircon/melt) values recently measured at the same conditions to identify the
distinctive features of the trace element patterns of hydrothermal and magmatic
zircons. Supersolidus experiments at 1000-1200°C in which zircon, melt and
aqueous fluid are equilibrated will allow simultaneous measurement of
D(melt/fluid), D(zircon/melt), and D(zircon/fluid) for all 25 trace elements.
These values will be compared with D(zircon/melt) and D(zircon/fluid) values
measured at the same conditions using other methods to check for internal
consistency. The applicability of lattice strain theory to mineral/fluid systems
will also be tested. Characterizing the trace element signatures of magmatic and
hydrothermal zircons will allow for more accurate identification of hydrothermal
zircons and interpretation of zircon U-Pb ages measured in-situ. Measured
D(zircon/fluid) and D(zircon/melt) values can be used to estimate compositions
of fluids and melts that equilibrated with zircons in subducting slabs or other
HP-UHP settings. Zircon partition coefficients will enable more accurate
classification of 'out of context' zircons, including Hadean detrital and
xenocrystic zircons, some of which have been shown to contain diamond
inclusions, and can be used to calculate the composition of the source rock
(e.g., REE pattern) and to identify by analogy the type of source (crust vs.
mantle, granite vs. tonalite).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This
project will fund one post-doctoral researcher, one current Vanderbilt Ph.D.
student, 1-2 future M.S. or Ph.D. students, and 1-2 undergraduate students. It
will also fund the research of 1-2 high school students through a research
internship program that the P.I. is involved in. Results will be presented by
the P.I. and students at national and international meetings and in journal
publications. The P.I. will continue outreach activities such as primary school
presentations and publication of popular accounts of his research. He has
written or contributed to three popular articles about his research in the last
two years.