* 0838587
* RUI: Collaborative Research: How does changing glacial coverage affect the transport and fate of DOM and nutrients in coastal watersheds on the Gulf of Alaska?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Eran Hood, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 168,187.00

Glacier thinning rates along the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) are commonly as high as
6-8 m yr-1. This rapid glacial recession has important implications for coastal
watershed hydrology and biogeochemistry because the loss of glacier ice
decreases hydrologic storage and dramatically alters catchment landcover by
exposing new land to the process of primary succession. The ecological
development of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems following deglaciation has
been explored extensively, however there has been very little research on how
landcover change will alter material delivery into and through the river network
to coastal estuaries. This project will fill this critical knowledge gap by
evaluating how glacial recession is altering hydrologic and biogeochemical
processes in coastal watersheds in southeastern Alaska. In particular, our
research will develop a comprehensive understanding of how the speciation, fate
and transport of riverine nutrients and dissolved organic matter (DOM) will be
altered by ongoing glacial retreat. Weekly and storm sampling combined with
continuous discharge measurements will provide the first detailed and complete
comparison of nutrient and DOM yields between paired glacial and non-glacial
watersheds. Continuous measurements of discharge, oxygen, temperature and
turbidity will be used to quantify the effects of glacial meltwater on
hydrologic and physical parameters. Experimental approaches (laboratory and
field-scale) combined with longitudinal surveys and stream tracers will be used
to elucidate the fate of nutrients and DOM during downstream transport. Finally,
longitudinal synoptics and source sampling will also be used to access the
primary landscape sources of nutrients and carbon to the stream. Ultimately,
project findings will provide new insights into how land-to-ocean fluxes of
organic and inorganic nutrients are being altered by glacial recession along the
GOA and in other glaciated coastal regions.&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
laboratory and field research opportunities for undergraduates at the University
of Alaska Southeast (UAS), a small, undergraduate university with a high (16%)
enrollment of native Alaskan students. Additionally, the project will provide
training for one graduate student and one post-doctoral researcher. The
integration of undergraduate students in this research project will provide a
framework for students and researchers to cooperatively investigate important
linkages among climate, landcover change, and hydrological and biogeochemical
processes in coastal watersheds. In addition, the project will strengthen an
existing partnership between scientists at UAS and naturalists at the Mendenhall
Glacier Visitor Center who will work collaboratively to incorporate project
results into an interpretive display at the center. The Mendenhall Glacier is
the most visited glacier in the United States and hosts over 300,000 visitors
each year and thus provides a unique and effective opportunity for public
outreach and education related to the findings of this project. Finally, a
science educator from Montgomery County, VA will partake in field work during
one of the summers. The science educator will bring their experience into the
local classrooms and share their experience with their peers.&lt;br/&gt;