* 0838579
* In-situ Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction Study of Quartz Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Pamela Burnley, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,314.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of&lt;br/&gt;2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
explanation:&lt;br/&gt;The ability to predict the response of crystalline solids
to forces that&lt;br/&gt;cause them to change shape, or in other words deform,
is important in many&lt;br/&gt;areas including materials engineering, metallurgy
and geoscience and has&lt;br/&gt;applications to problems ranging from metals
forming to mountain building.&lt;br/&gt; This research project will investigate
the deformation behavior of&lt;br/&gt;quartzite, a common quartz-bearing rock,
at the temperatures and pressures&lt;br/&gt;relevant to the earth's interior. We
will use a combination of in-situ&lt;br/&gt;synchrotron x-ray diffraction,
computer based simulations and sample&lt;br/&gt;analysis to study the behavior
of specific groups of crystals within the&lt;br/&gt;rock which will improve our
understanding of how the behavior of groups of&lt;br/&gt;crystals within a rock
integrate to produce the overall behavior of the&lt;br/&gt;rock. Our results
will be most useful in understanding geological&lt;br/&gt;processes such as
those that produce mountains or determine where in&lt;br/&gt;Earth's crust,
earthquakes occur. However, because the deformation&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms that
allow quartz crystals to deform are the same as those that&lt;br/&gt;operate in
metals and ceramics, we anticipate that our results will also&lt;br/&gt;shed
light on more general questions that have applications to a range
of&lt;br/&gt;engineering problems. The majority of the funding requested for
this&lt;br/&gt;project will support the education of young scientists
including&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate scholars by
supporting them as&lt;br/&gt;they participate in cutting edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical explanation:&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use in-situ synchrotron x-ray diffraction from high&lt;br/&gt;pressure,
high temperature deformation experiments on quartz combined
with&lt;br/&gt;elastic plastic self consistent modeling and careful examination
of sample&lt;br/&gt;microstructures to learn about the distribution of stress
between grain&lt;br/&gt;populations during deformation. The experiments are
designed to allow us&lt;br/&gt;to examine the relative roles of various
deformation mechanisms and&lt;br/&gt;grain-grain interactions in generating the
overall rheological behavior of&lt;br/&gt;polycrystalline quartz. In addition,
the combination of microstructural&lt;br/&gt;analysis with synchrotron
diffraction observations will add a great deal&lt;br/&gt;to the understanding
and interpretation of diffraction data gathered from&lt;br/&gt;high pressure
deformation experiments. Therefore the results from this&lt;br/&gt;study will
have implications for and applications to deformation studies&lt;br/&gt;of other
earth materials made with large volume high pressure apparatus,&lt;br/&gt;as
well as ultrahigh pressure deformation studies in the diamond
anvil&lt;br/&gt;cell (DAC) that utilize the same type of diffraction data. The
results&lt;br/&gt;will also have implications for neutron and x-ray diffraction
studies of&lt;br/&gt;engineering ceramics and metals.