* 0838099
* Long-term in situ chemical sensors for monitoring nutrients: phosphate sensor commercialization and ammonium sensor development
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* J. Ronald Zaneveld, Western Environmental Technology Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,781,468.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's request funding to develop reliable,
accurate, stable in situ nutrient sensors for long-term ocean observing. WET
Labs has been developing a core set of technologies to utilize optical detection
techniques for determination of nutrient concentrations using low volume,
reagent-based reaction chemistry. This development has been ongoing in
partnership with SubChem, focusing on the in situ measurement of phosphate
concentration and has led to a mature prototype sensor. Evaluation of the in
situ data obtained using this system has shown that the measurement technology
is robust, and that the sensor provides stable and accurate readings. In
addition, the PI?s will develop an Ammonium sensor using a similar technology as
the Phosphate sensor. This will likely involve one more reagent and hence pump,
and possibly fluorometric detection, which will require redesign the manifold
for this purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissolved nutrient dynamics broadly affect issues related
to public health, ecosystem status, and resource sustainability, including
impacts of climate variability, eutrophication, harmful algal blooms, carbon
cycling, and species composition among others. The need for in situ, autonomous,
real-time nutrient monitoring capabilities has been clearly documented in
several national reports on ocean observing and water quality monitoring. The
development and commercialization of long-term, reliable, traceable phosphate
and ammonium in situ sensors would enable enhanced monitoring of nutrient inputs
(natural and anthropogenic) into the coastal zone. Nutrient additions have been
postulated to contribute to algal blooms when the effluent rises sufficiently
high in the water column to intersect with the euphotic zone and may promote
harmful algal blooms (HABs). Providing a long-term nutrient monitoring
capability would allow scientists, environmental managers and regulators to
better understand the role of nutrient discharges in contributing to blooms and
their effects on the phytoplankton community.