* 0838476
* Collaborative Research: Mid-crustal Strain during Extension: A Field-based Investigation of Rheological Transitions, Doming, and Vertical Coupling
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* David Foster, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2013
* USD 144,518.00

&lt;br/&gt;The manner in which the Earths crust responds to tectonic and
gravitational forces depends on the strength distribution of crustal rocks. It
has been widely proposed that in certain settings, rocks in the lower half of
the crust may be sufficiently weak that they flow laterally in response to
pressure differences induced by topographic gradients. Such behavior has
important implications for many processes in the continental crust, for example,
the growth of mountain plateaus, formation of basins and continental shelves,
and seismicity within the continents. These models, however, need to be
rigorously tested through better field-based investigations. The Pioneer
Mountains of Idaho, where these PIs will focus their study, expose rocks that
may represent a boundary zone between strong rocks and underlying weaker flowing
rocks, and if so will provide an excellent opportunity to test models that
involve flow of weak lower crustal rocks. Better field documentation of the
vertical changes in rocks strength will provide us with a more comprehensive
view of continental deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many recent models of
crustal deformation feature a middle to lower crust that is sufficiently weak
that it decouples and flows in response to lateral pressure gradients. Such flow
has profound implications for several aspects of crustal deformation. Many of
the current models for weak decoupled middle to lower crustal flow, however, are
derived from indirect observation and the extent to which model rheological
layers are represented in the rock record is unclear. Preliminary work shows
that the Pioneer core complex in Idaho contains a midcrustal section exposing a
decoupling boundary, which presents an opportunity to test models of weak and
decoupled flow. In this project the PIs with test models of variable decoupling
will be tested through documentation of the strain history in the midcrustal
rocks through field-based structural and AMS analysis, combined with U-Pb
geochronology, and Ar/Ar thermochronology. Together these data will allow us to
compare in detail, the kinematic and strain histories at the various structural
levels and investigate the relationships between the mid-crustal rheological
layering, domes, and upper crustal extension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;