* 0838563
* Understanding the Volatile Evolution of Arc Magmas:  Alkalies and Mixed (H2O + CO2) Volatile Solubility in Basalts and Basaltic Andesites
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Kurt Roggensack, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2011
* USD 204,683.00

Intellectual merit. This proposal aims to improve understanding of the
solubility relationships of mixed (H2O + CO2) magmatic volatiles in mafic, arc-
related lavas over a broad composition range. Recent work has shown that the
compositional variability found in mafic arc lavas can lead to significant
changes in solubility behavior that are poorly accounted for in current models.
The lack of constraints on such fundamental chemical behavior severely hampers
the interpretations of observational work involving volatiles in arc settings,
particularly that of melt inclusion measurements. This directly affects our
ability to understand critically fundamental processes such as the influence of
magmatic volatile contents on magma chemistry and eruption/degassing dynamics,
or the role of arc volcanic processes in global H2O and CO2
budgets.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will address this important need via
experimentally saturating mafic melts of strategically chosen compositions with
various H2OCO2 fluids at pressures and temperatures relevant to pre-eruptive
magmatic conditions. The experiments will be conducted in a piston cylinder
apparatus using new techniques that accurately achieve sub-volcanic pressures
(200-500 MPa), while maintaining the rapid-quench advantage of the device.
Supporting experiments at 100 MPa will also be conducted in a rapid-quench
internally heated pressure vessel. In each experiment, the H2O/CO2 ratio of the
fluid phase will be precisely measured by vacuum manometry, and the dissolved
H2O and&lt;br/&gt;CO2 in the melt measured using high temperature manometry,
FTIR spectroscopy, as well as SIMS. The data thereby gathered will be used to
develop an empirical model to accurately calculate mixed volatile saturation
over a range of basaltic compositions.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the behavior and
evolution of volatiles in mafic arc magmas is a key part of interpreting
petrologic and volcanologic observations of subduction-zone magmatism. This
understanding can only achieved by combined measurements of pre-eruptive
magmatic volatile content and precise estimates of the volatile solubility
behavior of a given magma composition. The proposed work represents a
significant step towards generating critical experimental data needed to
interpret the mixed volatile contents currently being measured by other workers
over a broad compositional range of mafic, arc-related
magmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The experimental petrology
laboratory where this work will be conducted has been very successful in
training graduates and undergraduates, as well as many international
collaborators and independent researchers, in high pressure-temperature
techniques. This specific proposal includes support for two female
undergraduates, and will help the lab to continue to develop novel experimental
approaches and applications to experimental petrology. We also anticipate the
large number of manometrically analyzed glasses that will result to be useful
for comparison of secondary volatile measurement techniques such as SIMS and
FTIR.&lt;br/&gt;