* 0838107
* DEVELOPMENT AND DEPLOYMENT OF A MODULAR, AUTONOMOUS IN SITU UNDERWATER STABLE ISOTOPE ANALYZER
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 957,276.00

The PI's request funding to develop two instruments based upon an existing
technology (off-axis integrated cavity optical spectroscopy, or ICOS): an in
situ autonomous methane concentration and isotope analyzer and an in situ carbon
dioxide concentration and isotope analyzer. ICOS technology has become extremely
popular for gaseous quantification and isotopic analyses, and is supplanting
traditional instruments such as isotope-ratio mass spectrometers. ICOS-based
instruments are moderate in size and, when compared to mass spectrometers,
require relatively little power. As such, they have been deployed in a wide
range of challenging terrestrial and atmospheric environments, including tree
canopies, weather balloons and NOAA aircraft. They are very resilient to
moisture, changes in temperature and shock and vibration. With only one moving
part (a diaphragm pump), the ICOS systems are very robust and do not expend
tremendous energy on sample acquisition or processing. &lt;br/&gt;The PI?s have
allied with Los Gatos Research Inc., the inventors and manufacturers of
terrestrial ICOS instruments to adapt the existing instruments to an appropriate
form for underwater deployment, and develop the additional technologies required
to operate these instruments underwater In order to accomplish this, the PI?s
are proposing to design a 6000 meter rated inlet system, design and develop a
gas exhauster system (to allow for extremely long-term deployments), and
interface the instrument to a seafloor cabled observatory. They plan to deploy
the ICOS in three configurations: as an ROV or submersible-based instrument, a
standalone instrument operating off battery packs, and as an integral component
of a cabled observatory node. As part of this effort, they will work closely
with Los Gatos Research Inc to commercialize this instrument within six months
of completion of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project has the potential to provide
the oceanographic community with their first in situ methane and inorganic
carbon isotope analyzers capable of high-resolution determinations of both
concentration and isotopic composition. This will pave the way for further
developments that leverage off ICOS technology, including in situ analyzers for
many other gaseous analytes (e.g., N2O, CO, NH3, H, NO, H2S etc.). The project
will involve participation of a postdoctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate
students.