* 0838605
* Seismological Constraints on Global Mantle Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Paul Davis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2014
* USD 260,748.00

Technical Description: The goal of the proposed research is to determine the
three-dimensional variations of azimuthal anisotropy in the upper 1000 km of the
mantle, at the global scale. Seismic anisotropy, that is the dependence of
seismic wave velocity on the direction of propagation or polarization, offers a
more complete description of Earth's elastic structure than isotropic velocities
alone, and may be a signal of mantle deformation. Therefore, it constitutes a
unique way of understanding and constraining Earth?s interior. However, aside
from the base of the mantle and the top of the upper mantle, little is known
about mantle seismic anisotropy, mostly because of the reduced resolution of
commonly used seismic data below ~250 km. The proposed work will take advantage
of a new global surface wave dataset to model the three-dimensional changes in
azimuthal anisotropy in the upper 1000 km of the mantle. These data are
azimuthally anisotropic fundamental mode and overtone surface wave phase
velocity maps for Love and Rayleigh waves, and because higher mode measurements
are included these data have high sensitivity to the targeted deep structure. In
order to constrain anisotropy, we will combine a traditional least-squares
inverse technique with a model space search approach. This forward modeling
method will enable us to determine the common properties of all the models that
satisfy the data. It will therefore allow us to ascertain which model features
are robust and which parameters trade-off with others, a key-element in making
meaningful interpretation of the results.

This project will enable us to determine the likelihood of presence of azimuthal
anisotropy in the transition zone and the top of the lower mantle, how azimuthal
anisotropy changes with depth, and how it differs beneath oceans and continents.
To the extent we can relate seismic anisotropy to deformation, these results
will be used to shed new light on (1) the geometry of mantle deformation, (2)
whether and where sub-lithospheric deformation couples with plate motion, (3)
the contribution to shear-wave splitting of present-day asthenospheric
deformation versus fossil lithospheric deformation, and (4) the passive vs.
active nature of mid-ocean ridges.

Non-Technical Description: Our current knowledge of Earth?s deep mantle is poor,
but essential to comprehend surface plate tectonics and how they relate to
deformation at greater depths. The goal of this project is to improve our
understanding of mantle deformation at large depths by mapping the three-
dimensional directional dependence of seismic wave velocities, i.e. seismic
anisotropy, down to depths of 1000 km. Seismic anisotropy is probably a signal
of mantle deformation and therefore constitutes a unique tool to constraint its
mineralogy, composition, and dynamics. Combined with mineral physics data and
geodynamic modeling, it can help us understand the evolution of our planet.

To reach our goal we will combine a new global seismic dataset with an
innovative forward modeling method, which will help us explore many different
types of models and select those that explain the data the best. With this
computationally intensive approach we will be able to estimate model
uncertainties, a key-element to make sensible interpretation of the results in
terms of composition, mineralogy, and deformation. The models obtained will help
constraining geodynamic models, and will guide mineral physics experiments
trying to understand mantle deformation. Funding of this project will thus
benefit a large part of the Earth science community. The results, methods and
models will be shared with the broader audience and the seismological research
community through scientific publications, conference presentations, and a
website. In addition, the proposed research will provide support for a graduate
student who will be trained and acquire knowledge in the fields of global
seismic tomography, modeling techniques, and parallel computer programming.