* 0838842
* Determining Middle Miocene through Pliocene Changes in Paleo Ice-flow and Basal Ice Conditions in East Antarctica through Sedimentological Analyses of Core Samples
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Sandra Passchier, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2011
* USD 75,817.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The project aims on studying sediment cores collected from
Prydz Bay and the Ross Sea to unravel the Neogene paleoclimatic history of the
East Antarctic ice sheet. In the light of current measurements and predictions
of a substantial rise in global temperature, investigations into the sensitivity
of the East Antarctic ice sheet to climate change and its role in the climate
system are essential. Geological records of former periods of climate change
provide an opportunity to ground truth model predictions. The scientific
objective of this project is to identify a previously proposed middle Miocene
transition from a more dynamic wet-based East Antarctic ice sheet to the present
semi-permanent ice sheet that is partially frozen to its bed. The timing and
significance of this transition is controversial due to a lack of quantitative
studies on well-dated ice-proximal sedimentary sequences. This project partially
fills that gap using the composition and physical properties of diamictites and
sandstones to establish shifts in ice-sheet drainage pathways, paleoenvironments
and basal ice conditions. The results from the two key areas around the
Antarctic continental margin will provide insight into the behavior of the East
Antarctic ice sheet across the middle Miocene transition and through known times
of warming in the late Miocene and Pliocene.