* 0838995
* Collaborative research aboard Icebreaker Oden:  ASPIRE (Amundsen Sea Polynya International Research Expedition)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Robert Sherrell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 01/31/2013
* USD 865,980.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Amundsen Sea Polynya is areally
the most productive Antarctic polynya, exhibits higher chlorophyll levels during
peak bloom and greater interannual variability than the better-studied Ross Sea
Polynya ecosystem. Polynyas may be the key to understanding the future of polar
regions as their extent is expected to increase with anthropogenic warming. The
project will examine 1) sources of iron to the Amundsen Sea Polynya as a
function of climate forcing, 2) phytoplankton community structure in relation to
iron supply and mixed-layer depths, 3) the efficiency of the biological pump of
carbon to depth and 4) the net flux of carbon as a function of climate and
micronutrient forcing. The research also will compare results for the Amundsen
Sea to existing data synthesis and modeling efforts for the Palmer LTER and Ross
Sea. The project will 1) build close scientific collaborations between US and
Swedish researchers; 2) investigate climate change implications with broad
societal relevance; 3) train new researchers; 4) encourage participation in
research science by underrepresented groups, and 5) involve broad dissemination
of results via scientific literature and public outreach, including close
interactions with NSF-supported PolarTrec and COSEE K-12 teachers