* 0838383
* VOSS:   Delegating Organizational Work to Virtual Organization Technologies:  Beyond the Communicational Paradigm
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Thomas Finholt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 05/31/2009
* USD 395,685.00

Virtual organizations (VOs) are increasingly significant to research and
teaching. Traditional tools to support VOs (e.g., electronic mail) enable
communication and coordination at a distance and across institutional barriers.
In such cases, the organizational work of forming and sustaining VOs focuses on
the use of these tools to foster trust and to negotiate equitable and efficient
resource utilization. More recently, research in computer science has sought to
delegate such organizational work to a new class of VO tools, collectively
termed ?Grid? technologies. Grid technologies are envisioned to provide new
modes of collaboration, improved allocation of scarce resources, and novel
pathways for discovery and innovation. While past research has successfully
addressed questions of long-distance communication and coordination involving
traditional tools, much less is known about how new tools may transform VOs.
Open questions include: the consequences of delegating trust, access and
resource distribution to Grid-based systems; the challenges of sustaining
computationally-supported VOs; and the new kinds of organizational roles and
responsibilities necessary for the upkeep and maintenance of VOs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project undertakes a comparative study of VO
formation and maintenance in two leading collaborative science networks: the
Long Term Ecological Research Network (LTER) and the Open Science Grid (OSG).
Both LTER and OSG are mature enterprises for supporting multidisciplinary
scientific research; however, they differ in the nature of their VO tool use.
Whereas LTER uses a broad variety of conventional tools to augment
organizational communication (exhibiting the communicational paradigm, or a
'weakly technically delegated' VO), OSG delegates key components of
organizational life and maintenance to Grid-based mechanisms (i.e., a ?strongly
technically delegated VO, exemplifying the computational paradigm). Using
ethnographic and comparative methods, and drawing on theories from science and
technology studies (STS), organization science, and human-computer interaction,
this study will compare the different approaches taken by LTER and OSG to: i)
provide a better and more sophisticated mapping of the characteristics of
individuals, groups and organizations that embrace VOs; and ii) develop rigorous
comparative models for the differential human and technical work which sustain
VOs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;