* 0838421
* Collaborative Research: Timescales of Crystal Residence and Magma Mixing at Mount Hood, Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 01/31/2012
* USD 178,006.00

Intellectual Merit. An essential component of studies of magmatic systems is the
ability to place the thermal, physical, and compositional evolution of magmas
within a temporal context. In recent years there has been increased interest in
constraining the rates of igneous processes and also an emerging awareness that
crystals in magmatic systems often record complex histories of magmatic
processes that are obscured in the liquid fractions of magmas. Three effective
techniques used to constrain the timescales of crystallization and crystal
residence in intermediate and silicic magma systems include textural studies,
studies of diffusional relaxation of chemical gradients in crystals, and
uranium-series crystal dating. However, efforts to apply these techniques have
also revealed large variations (up to four orders of magnitude) in the apparent
timescales of crystal storage and magma residence. Although this likely reflects
natural variations in crystal residence times between different types of
magmatic systems, there also appear to be systematic differences in the results
recorded by each technique, which implies that each technique may respond to and
record somewhat different signals. Accordingly, this project has two goals: (1)
to quantify the characteristic timescales of crystal residence prior to eruption
and to investigate whether these timescales vary over time at a single volcano,
and (2) to apply and compare three different techniques for estimating magmatic
timescales on the same suite of rock samples. To this end, this project
addresses timescales of crystal residence and magma mixing at Mount Hood,
Oregon. Existing data indicate that mixing between felsic and mafic magmas there
has been remarkably consistent throughout the ~500 ka life of the modern
edifice, Crystal populations derived from the respective endmembers are readily
recognized, and importantly, initial results suggest that the pre-eruptive
residence times of crystals from each of these populations have remained broadly
constant throughout the volcano?s history. This hypothesis will be tested by
measuring pre-mixing crystal residence times, and estimating the time elapsed
between mixing and eruption. It is proposed to quantify the timescales of
crystal and magma storage and magma mixing at Mount Hood by applying textural
quantification (CSD), diffusional relaxation and 238U-230Th-226Ra dating. There
have been few studies that directly compare any two of these techniques on the
same sample suites, and none that have applied all three. Direct comparison will
provide an increased level of confidence in estimates of magmatic timescales and
provide a methodology that can be used for other studies. Moreover, the three
techniques interact to provide more information than would be provided by using
any one technique in isolation.

Broader Impacts. This study will provide valuable insight into the behavior of
intermediate composition silicic volcanoes and likely will have valuable
implications for understanding the hazard potential of such volcanoes to nearby
transportation corridors (Columbia River) and metropolitan regions (Portland).
The project will promote collaboration between scientists from Oregon State and
UC-Davis, as well as from Durham Univ. (Dougal Jerram - an expert in
quantification of magmatic textures) and the USGS. It will advance the careers
of a female PI and a promising female graduate student. Jerram will teach an
informal workshop while in Corvallis, and his visit will be scheduled so as to
allow for participation by the graduate students supported by this proposal in
addition to others in the Northern California and Pacific Northwest region. The
proposal will also support continued outreach efforts to demonstrate basic
volcanologic principles to undergraduate and K-12 students in the Corvallis
area.