* 0838499
* VOSS:   The Social Life of Spacecraft:   The Organization of Interplanetary Sociotechnical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Paul Dourish, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 08/31/2010
* USD 218,091.00

Theorists in the social and historical studies of science and technology have
long explored how technologies are constructed alongside assumptions about the
organization of scientific labor and ideologies of the human and the machine.
Space science projects are perhaps the most iconic examples of large-scale
scientific endeavor in which to test these sociotechnical assumptions, involving
collaborations across disciplines, across organizations, across nations, and
even across interplanetary distance. Building on existing engagements, this
project will explore these interconnections in detail through ethnography,
interviews, and archival work on NASA's Mars Exploration Rover mission and
comparative case studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In earlier studies of the NASA
Mars Exploration Rover mission, team members consistently characterized their
mission as uniquely successful and harmonious as compared to other NASA-funded
unmanned missions which were seen as hierarchical and fragmented. Whereas
earlier missions allegedly suffered antagonistic relationships between members
of the spacecrafts' science and operations teams, the Rover mission was
purposefully organized so as to espouse different principles. In this study, the
investigators ask: Is the Rover project as unique as members believe? What
factors distinguish this project, as a sociotechnical system, from others? What
characterizes the role of cyberinfrastructure as an element of their work?
Answers to these questions will offer a detailed, grounded case study of high-
visibility scientific work conducted under extreme conditions of distribution
and virtuality, in a complex organizational setting. By engaging in comparative
work, the project will draw out the particular importance of, and relationship
between, organizational culture and structure in these cases of "interplanetary
sociotechnical systems."