* 0838317
* VOSS:    Constructing and Modifying Meaning in Complex Projects
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* David Andersen, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 02/28/2010
* USD 100,626.00

This small-scale feasibility demonstration of a multi-method research design
combines sociological and technical approaches to understanding boundary-
crossing work. Building on three foundational theoretical threads ?( 1) Mead?s
symbolic interactionism, (2) the use of artifacts as boundary objects to support
innovative work, and (3) Bourdieu?s practice theory, it deepens and extends
theoretical insights into the creation and sustainment of meaning?and related
communication breakdowns?among distributed actors jointly engaged in developing
innovative complex products and services. The research focuses on virtually
organized networks of collaborators on innovative work, advancing novel concepts
to concrete products and services, which are often characterized both by lack of
a single governance office and an absence of shared understanding at the outset
of the work-to-be-done. It builds on previous field investigations by project
team members at The Aerospace Corporation, a federally funded research and
development center; employs rich social theories to inform grounded and formal
theorizing; and uses simulation technologies to represent and generalize an
emerging theory of communication breakdowns in large virtually organized
innovation programs from the rich, empirical setting originally studied to the
broader class of problems that it represents. This collaboration across
disciplines and across governmental and academic institutions will produce: (1)
Deepened descriptions and understanding of cross-boundary communication
patterns; (2) A formal theory of the accumulated consequences of communications
in an extended virtually organized network, identifying points of leverage in
preventing communication breakdowns; and, (3) Paper(s) and presentation(s)
describing the research findings, including preliminary validation of the
theory, to be shared at interdisciplinary conferences and in governmental,
nonprofit, and industry workshops focused on improving communication processes
across organizational boundaries. Addressing challenges in sustaining meaning in
virtually organized efforts is critical to timely, accurate production of novel
goods and services in many contexts. This project?s research products can
advance productivity on virtually organized national and international
technological and humanitarian programs that undertake development and delivery
of new, complex products and services, as well as lay the foundation for more
extensive mixed-method approaches to understanding virtually organized
work&lt;br/&gt;