* 0838271
* Rates, Sources and Magmagenesis of Alkalic Lavas at the Edge of an Intraplate Hotspot: A Multi-tracer Study of the Youngest Volcanics on Oahu, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Douglas Pyle, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2013
* USD 297,682.00

Intellectual Merit. Late-stage, alkalic magmatism at mid-plate hotspots is an
enigmatic occurrence that is poorly understood. Geochemical models suggest that
magma genesis is strongly dominated by melts of metasomatised lithospheric
mantle, whereas most geophysical models require buoyant upwelling in the
asthenospheric mantle. Neither model predicts the full range of observations of
time, composition and geology in the volcanic deposits. This proposal addresses
multiple outstanding questions to inform models for alkalic rejuvenation
volcanism, occurring far downstream of the primary locus of active mid-plate hot
spot volcanism.&lt;br/&gt;1. What causes the magma production that feeds late
stage alkalic rejuvenation volcanism?&lt;br/&gt;2. Are rejuvenation volcanics
formed primarily by melting the lithosphere or the asthenosphere?&lt;br/&gt;3.
Are the lithospheric lithologies possibly involved in petrogenesis old or
young?&lt;br/&gt;4. What are the length and temporal scales of heterogeneity in
sources or melting processes?&lt;br/&gt;5. What magmatic plumbing conditions
allow extreme compositional heterogeneity in erupted lavas over short time and
length scales?&lt;br/&gt;The Honolulu Series volcanics on Oahu, Hawaii serves as
a case study of the causes and conditions of alkalic rejuvenation volcanism.
This project focuses on its last two eruption sequences (the subaerial Tantalus
rift and the submarine/subaerial Koko rift) because they exhibit the extreme
compositional range within Honolulu Series volcanism (and elsewhere), there
isstrong geologic control (nearly contemporaneous volcanism at multiple vents
along each rift), and eruption ages young enough (80 ka) to constrain rates and
timing of igneous processes with 230Th-238U and 231Pa-235U disequilibria.
Moreover, samples are fresh and previously have been well
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;U-series disequilibria can distinguish syn- and recent
premagmagenetic chemical fractionation in melts and sources to determine when
they occurred. A pilot project to determine the age of Koko rift zone volcanism
from recrystallized coral xenoliths also produced preliminary U-series analyses
of lavas that show extensive 230Th-238U disequilibria. The relative youth, great
distance from the active hotspot (340 km), and other attributes make these
eruptions exceptional examples for a detailed study about sources and styles of
magmatism at what is effectively a type-locality for intra plate alkalic
volcanism. The project will involve samples already in hand, including legacy
samples studied by Jackson, Clague and Frey, provided by the Smithsonian
Institution and submarine Koko samples provided by Dave Clague. The project will
primarily utilize existing analytical expertise (U-series, Sr-Nd-Pb-Os isotopes,
major and trace elements) and instrumentation in the UH laboratories, but also
includes 231Pa methods development to be used in this and subsequent
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will contribute to
development of new US research capabilities for measuring 231Pa-235U radioactive
disequilibrium to study volcanic systems. It will also facilitate transition of
analytical methods to new instrumentation and development of an early career
post-doctoral researcher. Results of this project will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed literature, incorporated in university courses, made available to the
public via the award winning Hawaii Center for Volcanology website
(created/maintained by PI Rubin), and added to a visitors center display about
Koko Rift volcanism for the internationally renowned Hanauma Bay beach
park.&lt;br/&gt;