* 0838863
* CIG Workshop on Mathematical and Computational Issues in the Solid Earth Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Marc Spiegelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 49,786.00

The purpose of this workshop is to bring together solid-earth geoscientists,
mathematicians, computational and computer scientists to focus on specific
&lt;br/&gt;issues arising from a range of solid-Earth dynamics problems that
have proven both difficult and critical for progress in studying and modeling
the dynamics of the planet. These problems form the core activities for the
Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics (CIG) and provide new challenges
and opportunities in multi-scale/multiphysics modeling and inference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will focus on three related ?grand challenge
problems? and their attendant mathematical/computational issues:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Mantle Convection and Lithospheric Deformation (large
scale solid deformation with complex rheologies) &lt;br/&gt;2. Magma Dynamics
(multi-physics problems: Coupled fluid/solid flow in strongly deformable,
reactive media) &lt;br/&gt;3. Crustal Dynamics and the Earthquake Cycle (Multi-
scale brittle mechanics &lt;br/&gt;and fault evolution) The geophysical models
at the heart of this workshop are developed further below and provide a common
set of mathematical and computational problems that are essential for studying
coupled natural systems. These include linear and nonlinear solvers and pre-
conditioners for coupled problems, multi-scale methods for systems with space-
time localization, multi-scale material modeling, and data-assimilation and
inversion for integrating observations and dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
problems complement, but have significant differences from other application
areas such as subsurface flow or climate modeling. Thus a primary goal of this
workshop is to foster new collaborations between solid Earth scientists,
mathematicians, computer scientists, and computational scientists that can make
significant progress on these critical problems. The proposed meeting format is
two and a half days of talks and discussion that closely connect the Earth
science applications and mathematical/computational &lt;br/&gt;problems and
methods. In addition, the workshop will discuss critical issues in developing,
disseminating and supporting advanced, collaborative modeling software for the
general community, which is central to the CIG mission.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop provides new opportunities for collaborative
research &lt;br/&gt;for students, early career scientists and senior scientists
across a range of disciplines. The focus on developing advanced computational
methods and software for exploring coupled systems should be useful for a wide
range of related problems including subsurface fluid flow, earthquake
engineering and hazards.