* 0838026
* Evaluating the Trench Parallel Flow Hypothesis with Numerical Models of Convection
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Scott King, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 12/31/2012
* USD 250,253.00

EAR-0838026: Evaluating the Trench Parallel Flow Hypothesis with Numerical
Models of Convection&lt;br/&gt;Scott D. King&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When some
seismic waves (shear waves) propagate through the upper 200 km of the Earth?s
interior, they can be resolved into two orthogonal components that travel at
different velocities. This information can be used to predict the pattern of
flow in this part of the mantle and, is a key observation behind the hypothesis
that mantle material flows parallel to the subducting oceanic plate in the
vicinity of subduction zones. Using numerical models we will test recent
laboratory fluid tank experiments developed to model this flow and the seismic
observations from Earth. Our goal is to identify under what conditions trench
parallel flow is observed in the calculations and thus place constraints on the
strength and chemistry variations in the subducting slab and mantle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will test the hypothesis that shear wave
splitting observations in subduction zones, both above and below the subducting
slab, require that the dominant component of mantle flow that is parallel to the
strike of the trench and slab. First we will demonstrate that we can reproduce
laboratory tank experiments with a three dimensional numerical model. Next we
will test the slab parallel flow hypothesis by addressing the following
questions: 1) is slab parallel flow dependent on trench migration rate (i.e.,
whether or not slabs roll back)?; 2) to what extent does the pattern of mantle
flow in the vicinity of a subduction zone depend on slab rheology?; 3) are the
olivine to wadsleyite (410 km discontinuity) and the ringwoodite to perovskite
plus ferropericlase (660 km discontinuity) phase transformations necessary for
slab parallel flow?; and finally 4) is an increase in viscosity in the lower
mantle by a factor of 10-30 essential to be able to generate slab parallel flow?
We will calculate the finite strain from our numerical results to compare with
the seismic observations. We anticipate that strong slabs are more likely to
lead to slab parallel flow because strong slabs are more able to resist
deforming and hence the mantle will be forced to flow around the slab while
weaker slabs are more likely to deform in response to mantle flow and flow
around a the slab will not be necessary. We also anticipate that the ringwoodite
to perovskite plus ferropericlase phase transformation and an increase in
viscosity at the top of the lower mantle will both increase the component of
slab parallel flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;