* 0838748
* Opportunities and Challenges for the Emerging Field of Synthetic Biology
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Anne-Marie Mazza, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

The U.S. National Academies, in cooperation with the Royal Society, and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development will hold an international
symposium to bring together the scientific, engineering, legal, and social
policy communities with the public to explore the opportunities and challenges
posed by the emerging field of synthetic biology. This award will partially
support this symposium. Synthetic biology is a transformative innovation in
which engineering methods are applied to biological systems. This hybrid
discipline combines elements of both science and engineering into a highly
interdisciplinary and rapidly growing area of research that offers great
opportunities for the construction of bioengineered microorganisms that can
yield new drugs, detect and break-down toxic chemicals, and generate new energy
forms. Achieving the rewards offered by synthetic biology will require
confronting a range of social, economic, ethical, and legal issues as well as
scientific and technical challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Given the enormous promise of synthetic biology, it is
critical at this stage to develop a framework for the community of scientists,
engineers, and policy-makers to explore this field and to engage the public in
an informed dialogue. How synthetic biology may change current legal and
regulatory arrangements governing intellectual property, innovation, and use has
not been fully explored. The rules of engagement for the community of engineers
and scientists are not well defined. Biosafety and biosecurity challenges and
associated risk needs further study. And the underlying ethical dimensions of
this new field also need further discussion. This symposium, drawing on the
convening power of the three sponsoring organizations, will begin to identify
the outlines of the framework for policy and public engagement. The Academies'
Committee on Science, Technology, and Law will serve as the secretariat for the
symposium, drawing on the resources of the National Academy of Engineering, the
Board on Life Sciences, and the Board on Science, Technology, and Economic
Policy.