* 0838112
* Exploring the Early History of the South Tibetan Fault System in Bhutan
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Kip Hodges, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2013
* USD 279,717.00

This research focuses on the South Tibetan fault system, one of the most
enigmatic tectonic features of the Himalaya, and one that stirs much controversy
in the Tectonics community. The South Tibetan fault system appears to be unique
in that its kinematics are those of a low-angle, normal fault system while all
other Himalayan fault systems with comparable displacements (many 10s to 100s of
kilometers) have the more predictable kinematics of thrust fault systems
typically found in mountain belts. The very existence of a feature like the
South Tibetan fault system is indicating something fundamental about how the
Himalaya, and mountain ranges in general, evolve. The PI and his colleagues work
to clarify this message through their research. Unfortunately, in many parts of
the Himalaya, the early history of the South Tibetan fault system has been
obscured by late-stage deformation. This is not the case in Bhutan, where the PI
and others have identified erosional remnants of early faults of the system that
have been relatively undisturbed by younger deformation. This proposal describes
targeted studies of these remnants. A broad array of techniques will be used to
probe the early history of the fault system using these rare exposures. They
include geologic mapping and structural analysis; quantitative element-
partitioning thermobarometry; 40Ar/39Ar and (U-Th)/He thermochronology; and
laser-ablation (U-Th)/Pb geochronology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the
Himalaya and Tibetan Plateau are still evolving, studies of this natural
laboratory provide critical information regarding the role that mountainous
regions play in earth system function. For example, we know that the
physiography of the Tibetan Plateau defines the weather patterns of the Asian
monsoon climate, and this climate is the enabling mechanism for agriculture that
feeds roughly 60% of the people on Earth. By detailing the processes that led to
the establishment of the modern-day Himalaya and Tibetan Plateau, studies such
as the one proposed here inform more effective strategies for the co-evolution
of human societies and mountain landscapes.