* 0838119
* Collaborative Research: Timing and Controls on Plio-Pleistocene Erosion and Sedimentation in the Eastern Peninsular Ranges, Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Rebecca Dorsey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2013
* USD 127,991.00

A research team from the University of California at Davis, University of
Oregon, and Western Washington University is conducting a multi-disciplinary
examination of a remarkably complete and well-exposed archive of late Pliocene
to modern paleo-erosion rates preserved in the Fish Creek - Vallecito basin in
southern California. Erosion rates in the source are determined from cosmogenic
nuclide concentrations in detrital quartz, with corrections for minimal post-
depositional nuclide in-growth during rapid burial and exhumation of basinal
sediments. Relief production in the source areas are assessed by comparison of
(U-Th)/He cooling ages in modern bedrock exposures to detrital minerals in
basinal sediments. Depositional ages and sedimentation rates are calibrated with
high-precision magnetic reversal and paleointensity stratigraphy. These data
yield a high-resolution time series of cosmogenic nuclide in-growth of alluvial
sediments, which record important changes in catchment-averaged erosion rates
through time. Temporal changes in source-area erosion rate are compared to the
stratigraphic record of changes in facies architecture and sediment accumulation
rates in the basin, allowing assessment of the process-response functions that
link erosional forcing to stratigraphic outcomes. Using these approaches, the
team is testing three hypotheses for tectonic - versus climate driven changes in
erosion of the bedrock source and progradation of sediment derived from this
source into the adjacent basin: (1) a shift into cooler and more temporally
variable climate conditions at the onset of northern hemisphere glaciation
approximately 2.5 to 3.0 million years ago caused increased erosion and
production of locally derived sediment; (2) an increase in tectonically driven
uplift led to relief production and enhanced erosion; and (3) a reduction in
tectonic subsidence rate drove progradation of locally derived sediments
irrespective of changes in source-area erosion rate. Data collected during a
1-year pilot study show that erosion rates decreased by 40% since 2.8 Ma. This
preliminary result is most consistent with either a climatic or subsidence-rate
driver of progradation, though an uplift-driven model cannot be ruled out at
this time. This new study will further analyze this record and replicate this
signal from a second sediment source-area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well
documented that rates of bedrock erosion and sediment production are closely
linked to climate forcing and tectonic construction of topographic relief,
though the exact nature and feedback dynamics of those controls remain
incompletely understood. Detrital cosmogenic nuclide concentrations in modern
stream sediments are widely used for quantifying short-term catchment erosion
rates, and for assessing the role of tectonic forcing, lithology, and erosion
processes on sediment production rates. While this method is common in studies
of modern sediment-catchment systems, its application to ancient sediments is
relatively rare, and its use in continuous sedimentary sequences is rarer still.
This study is charting new ground through the application of these methods to
older sediments. If successful, geologists will have new tools to distinguish
the role of climate versus tectonics in landscape evolution.