* 0838541
* Field and Numerical Analyses of the Thermal, Mechanical, and Fluid Evolution of Extensional Detachment Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Martin Saar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2013
* USD 350,000.00

This project is a combined field-based and numerical modeling study of the
circulation of surface fluids in zones of orogenic collapse. The study focuses
on extensional detachment zones that define metamorphic core complexes and are
located between the brittle upper crust and the hot and commonly partially
molten lower crust. Surface fluids penetrate the crust down to the detachment
zones and likely play a major role in the heat transfer and deformation
localization that characterize detachments. Several detachment sections along
the North American Cordillera, from British Columbia to Arizona, are sampled and
analyzed for microstructures, oxygen isotopic ratios, and thermochronology.
These results are used as input to develop and test permeability models of the
upper crust and detachment zones. Models address fluid flow from the crustal
scale, where fluid circulation is a heat-transfer agent, to the grain scale
where fluids interact with ductile deformation processes. This study evaluates
the degree of fluid-rock interaction in detachment zones and the thermal and
mechanical role of fluids in orogenic collapse. In addition, knowing the
isotopic fluid composition of surface fluids promotes an evaluation of the
topographic and environmental changes that took place during the collapse of the
North American Cordillera in Cenozoic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Who would think
that rain water can descend 10 miles into the Earth?s crust? There is now ample
evidence this is the case in regions that meet two conditions: (1) the crust is
being pulled apart by the forces of tectonics, resulting in open cracks and
fractures that canalize fluids; and (2) the region has a high geothermal
gradient because it is heated from below by the rapid upward transfer of hot
rocks and magma. These conditions promote the convective circulation of surface
waters that remove heat from the crust as a radiator coolant fluid cools a car?s
engine. Convective water flow is active today in regions such as the Great Basin
in the southwestern United States where recharge of cool fluids and discharge of
hot fluids (hot springs, mineralized areas) define hydrothermal systems. This
project explores the deepest regions of fossil hydrothermal systems that formed
during Cenozoic time (last 50 million years) in the North American Cordillera
and that have been brought to the surface by tectonics and erosion. A combined
field and modeling study of these regions helps understand how fluid
circulations influence the thermal budget and the deformation of the crust. In
addition, retrieving the composition of water that originated at the Earth
surface at different times during the Cenozoic gives information on the
topographic evolution of the Cordillera that evolved from a majestic Andean-like
plateau to a dissected mountain range.