* 0838331
* Enhancing Holocene Ice Sheet and Ice Shelf Geochronology using Geomagnetic Paleointensity Variations
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Stefanie Brachfeld, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 06/30/2013
* USD 119,406.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The project aims on constructing a geomagnetic relative
paleointensity (RPI) and paleosecular variation (PSV) record from Maxwell Bay,
South Shetland Islands, using the Shallow Drilling (SHALDRIL) 108-m core that
was collected in 2005 during the cruise of the USAP research ship Nathaniel B.
Palmer. This core has the unique combination of a radiocarbon chronology
constructed entirely from biogenic calcite dates and a homogeneous silty-clay
lithology that is ideal for paleomagnetic studies. This combination is rarely
found in Antarctic continental shelf sediments. The RPI and PSV records from the
Maxwell Bay core will serve as regional reference curves for tuning and dating
records of ice sheet, ice shelf, and glacier history on both sides of the
northern Antarctic Peninsula that lack their own independent age control. The
use of paleointensity curves for millennial-scale correlation and dating via
tuning with a reference curve has been successfully applied around the globe,
and could provide a much-needed additional geochronology tool for the Antarctic.
As one of the very few independently dated RPI and PSV records from high
southern latitudes, this record will also be valuable for inclusion in
geomagnetic field models that seek to understand the time-varying behavior of
the geodynamo. The PSV and RPI datasets will be made publicly available through
the Magnetics Information Consortium (MagIC) paleomagnetic
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;