* 0838263
* Micromechanics-Based Modeling of Dynamic Earthquake Rupture in a Structurally Complex Fault Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Charles Sammis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2011
* USD 145,543.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although earthquakes are commonly
modeled as frictional instabilities on planar fault surfaces, most natural
faults have a more complex structure. Most displacement appears to be
concentrated in one or more relatively narrow (mm to cm scale) ?cores? of highly
strained granular rock which are bordered by&lt;br/&gt;wide layers (meters to
tens of meters) of fragmented and shattered rock. Termed gouge, breccia, or
pulverized rock, these layers share one important characteristic: they appear to
have accommodated little or no macroscopic shear strain. Such low-strain layers
of shattered rock raise two important questions:&lt;br/&gt;how were they formed
and do they affect the dynamics of individual earthquakes?&lt;br/&gt;It has long
been hypothesized that the gouge and breccia layers were formed to accommodate
geometrical barriers (bends and jogs) as total displacement accumulated on an
evolving fault, and were then abandoned when slip localized in the core.
However, recent theoretical, laboratory and seismological field studies have
found that the stress concentration at the tip of an earthquake rupture can
shatter rock to distances of tens of meters from the fault core. These studies
raise the possibility that gouge, breccia, and pulverized rock might form,
primarily, in the dynamic stress fields of a sequence of earthquakes, and that
the structure of a fault zone might therefore contain useful information about
past events. Laboratory based high-speed photographic observations of rupture
propagation in fracture damaged materials have also found that off-fault damage
can strongly affect the rupture velocity, even in&lt;br/&gt;cases where the
damage is not increased by the formation of new fractures. These results are
supported by 2D numerical models of dynamic rupture propagation where the
effects of the off-fault damage have been approximated by Mohr-Coulomb
plasticity. These models, however, do not take into account either&lt;br/&gt;the
size or density of fractures that constitute pre-existing damage surrounding the
fault-core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to develop a new
generation of numerical dynamic earthquake models in which the generation of
off-fault damage and its effect on rupture propagation are modeled using a
micromechanical damage mechanics model expanded and made suitable for numerical
modeling by Deshpande and Evans [2008]. This model represents a significant
improvement on previous models that use Mohr-Coulomb plasticity or even
continuum damage mechanics in that it takes into account pre-existing damage in
the medium, frictional loss on fractures in the fault zone, as well as the
nucleation and propagation of new fractures. Because it specifically accounts
for the evolution of the size and density of fractures, it makes predictions
that can be tested in the field, and verified in the laboratory. Moreover,
dynamic changes in fracture density at the tip of an earthquake rupture may have
a significant effect on thermal pressurization models currently used to
rationalize the low value of the coefficient of dynamic friction required to
satisfy heat flow and other&lt;br/&gt;petrological constraints on the mechanics
of earthquakes.