* 0838615
* Collaborative Research: Constraints on the last Ross Ice Sheet from Glacial Deposits in the Southern Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Brenda Hall, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2013
* USD 273,136.00

Stone/0838818 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to study the former
thickness and retreat history of Shackleton and Beardmore Glaciers which flow
through the Transantarctic Mountains (TAMs) into the southern Ross Sea. Lateral
moraine deposits along the lower reaches of these major outlet glaciers will be
mapped and dated and the results will help to date the LGM and constrain the
thickness of ice where it left the Transantarctic Mountains and flowed into the
Ross Sea. The intellectual merit of the project is that the results will allow
scientists to distinguish between models of ice retreat, which have important
implications for former ice configuration and dynamics, and to constrain the
contribution from Ross Sea deglaciation to global sea level through the late
Holocene. In addition, this will make a significant contribution to a better
understanding of the magnitude and timing of postglacial sea-level change and
the potential contribution of Antarctica to sea-level rise in future. The
broader impacts of the project are that the work will help quantify changes in
grounded ice volume since the LGM, improve understanding of the ice dynamics
responsible, and examine their implications for future sea level change. The
project will train future scientists through participation of two graduate
students and undergraduates who will develop self-contained research projects.
As in previous Antarctic projects, there will be interaction with K-12 students
through classroom visits, web-based expedition journals, letters from the field,
and discussions with teachers and will allow the project to be shared with a
wide audience. This award has field work in Antarctica.