* 0838244
* Collaborative Research: Solution Thermodynamics  of Igneous Pyroxenes and Garnets
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2011
* USD 388,215.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volcanoes are places where molten rock
erupts on the surface of the Earth; they are both major natural hazards and
fascinating targets for scientific study because they are messengers from the
interior of our planet, where melting of rocks takes place. Their message,
however, is encoded in the chemistry of lavas and in order to read that code we
need tools that relate the chemical and physical make-up of the source region to
the quantity and composition of magma generated. Computational thermodynamics
(CT) has proven to be an essential tool for predicting these connections and has
become a necessary component of modern petrologic modeling of melting and magma
transport. Previous work by the lead investigators in CT (the MELTS, pMELTS, and
phMELTS software packages and a substantial body of work on mineral and melt
thermodynamics) is utilized by thousands of researchers and students whose
interests range from volcanic eruptions, to the transport of volatiles from the
Earth's interior to its atmosphere and oceans, to the formation of ore
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds collaboration between
researchers at Caltech and OFM Research to improve and extend thermodynamic
models of the minerals garnet and pyroxene, both of which occur in the mantles
of terrestrial planets. The motivation for this effort is the desire to complete
the xMELTS software package, a CT tool that will permit modeling of partial
melting of terrestrial planets to pressures of ~40 GPa. Once completed, this
tool will allow scientists to quantitatively assess the chemistry of magma
production in the upper 1200 km of the Earth and throughout other terrestrial
bodies like the Moon, Mars and Europa. This assessment will help us understand
how these planets have evolved chemically since their formation to the present
day. The thermodynamic models and software tools developed under this grant will
be rapidly disseminated to the research community; they will be incorporated
into xMELTS and phMELTS, they will be programmed into web services for
distributed computing access from the OFM website, and they will be made
available for use in Excel-based applications. There is every expectation that
the proposed work will result in thermodynamic models that contribute to a
computational infrastructure that is well utilized in the classroom at both the
undergraduate and graduate level, and will support the research efforts of a
broad community of scientists. In addition, the proposed work will support
graduate education and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporation of both the
garnet and pyroxene models into xMELTS is essential for realistic forward
modeling of partial melting in peridotite and pyroxenite bulk compositions. The
proposed garnet solid solutions model will apply to compositions in the system
(Ca,Mg,Fe2+)3Al2Si3O12-(Mg,Fe2+)4Si4O12 containing minor amounts of Cr3+, Na,
Fe3+, and Ti4+, which is inclusive of majorite. The pyroxene model will extend
the Sack and Ghiorso model [with general formula
(Na,Ca,Mg,Fe2+)(Mg,Fe2+,Ti4+,Fe3+)(Si,Al,Fe3+)2O6] to include the components
CaCrAlSiO6 and KAlSi2O6. The garnet model will be based on previously pub-lished
low-pressure models of pyralspite garnet thermodynamics and will be ex-tended to
higher-pressures principally by evaluation of exchange equilibria be-tween
garnet and spinel, garnet-olivine, and garnet-pyroxene. The pyroxene model
extension will be calibrated mainly from exchange equilibria involving pyroxene-
spinel. In both cases, literature data will be supplemented with new experiments
as required.