* 0838043
* Modes of Extension, Magmatism and Crustal Scale Fluid Pathways in the Great Basin province, USA, from a Magnetotelluric Transect
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 382,604.00

Phil Wannamaker from the University of Utah is producing and interpreting a
high-quality section view of electrical resistivity structure through the
central and western Great Basin, and the southeastern Modoc Plateau. This is
being achieved by the addition of 55 wideband magnetotelluric soundings to an
existing transect of 179 sites, plus installation of 35 long-period
magnetotelluric soundings, to create a transect some 650 km in length span-ning
Nevada and northeastern California into westernmost Utah. The magnetotelluric
station data will span the range of 0.005 to 10,000 second wave periods, with
corresponding imag-ing depths from a few hundred meters to about 300 km, and
perhaps greater. The profiling covers fully 100 kilometers of the Modoc Plateau,
the actively extending northwestern Great Basin, the Central Nevada Seismic
Belt, the relatively quiescent east-central Great Basin of higher elevation, and
onlaps the active eastern Great Basin of western Utah. These data are undergoing
modern methods of processing, trend analysis, and regularized inversion to pro-
duce a well-resolved model with minimal artifacts. The overall goal of the
project is to im-prove our understanding of the process of distributed
continental rifting. The consequences of rifting can be profound, including the
potential for large earthquakes, development of sedimentary basins and,
ultimately, breakup of continents to form new ocean basins. Many important
hydrocarbon, geothermal and mineral resource occurrences can arise from the
structural, magmatic and hydrothermal processes involved in extension. The
project specifi-cally is addressing first-order problems regarding vertical
strain distribution, magmatic crustal growth, domains of crustal scale fluid
flow, and coupling between the lithosphere and asthenosphere remain unsolved.
These include the prevalence of crustal scale fault zones which host the largest
earthquakes; under what circumstances upper and lower-crustal thin-ning are
decoupled; where mantle lithosphere is weak or strong during rifting; whether
volumetrically significant magmatic input occurs during the early to middle
stages of conti-nental rifting; and how mantle-sourced fluids make their way to
the shallow ground water regime. The project also addresses societal benefits
including broader understanding of the controls on fault strength, crustal scale
hydrology, and the ability to build up damaging stresses. The link between deep
geothermal systems and epithermal gold deposits is being illuminated as well. A
graduate student is being supported for education into state of the art
geophysical instrumentation, parameters of field survey design, practical
logistical matters in remote settings, modern methods of inversion, and the
relationship between electrical resis-tivity and physico-chemical state in the
Earth. Linked companion projects have the potential to provide the first results
approaching regional to national scales, and public interest is ex-pected in
section views through diverse regions provided by a potential megatransect from
near the California Pacific coast to the Colorado Plateau interior at Utah?s
eastern border. In addition to the research, the project is supporting the
graduate training of a Ph.D. student from an underrepresented group in the earth
sciences in magnetotelluric methods. Funding for the research is being provided
by the NSF Geophysics and Tectonics programs.