* 0838464
* Three-dimensional spontaneous dynamic rupture models on geometrically complex faults with state-of-the-art frictional parameterization
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2012
* David Oglesby, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2012
* USD 171,850.00

Dynamic spontaneous earthquake rupture models have proven themselves to be
valuable tools to investigate the physics of earthquakes and to help predict
ground motion. These numerical models start from basic assumptions about
material structure, frictional behavior, and fault geometry, and calculate the
spatiotemporal evolution of fault slip (and often the resultant near-source
ground motion). Such dynamic models typically use either laboratory-derived
friction laws or realistically complex fault geometry, but not both. The
researchers propose to bring dynamic earthquake modeling an important step
forward by combining these two separate tracks: they will use laboratory-derived
friction laws to model spontaneous rupture propagation and slip on faults with
realistically complex geometry. They expect to obtain first-order effects in
rupture propagation, slip, and ground motion that will differ from previous
modeling efforts, leading to both a better understanding of the earthquake
process and better predictions of faulting behavior and ground motion. Dynamic
earthquake models have historically followed two tracks: 1) investigations of
the effect of frictional parameterization and stress pattern on simple planar
faults, and 2) investigations of the effects of fault geometry on the earthquake
process, using simple frictional parameterizations. the PIs will combine these
two tracks to produce a new generation of dynamic earthquake models. Data from
laboratory experiments at high slip rates and theoretical models imply that at
the high slip rates observed during earthquakes, the typical rate-and-state
frictional formulation must be modified to incorporate a greater degree of
weakening over a larger length scale. Additionally, research on faults with
complex, asymmetrical geometry shows that temporal variation of normal stress,
which is inevitable on non-planar faults, can have a significant effect on
rupture dynamics. To correctly model both these aspects of faulting behavior,
they will develop a modern frictional parameterization and use it to model the
behavior of geometrically complex faults, such as systems with stepovers and
branches. The new 3D finite element method that will incorporate a new,
realistic method for off-fault stress relaxation, which is necessary to avoid
pathological stress buildup on such fault systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
important ingredients of earthquake physics have never before been combined in a
single modeling method, and the result of such a combination will be a state-of-
the art tool to model the physics of earthquakes. The researchers will address
important questions about the behavior of faults at stepovers and branches,
including determining if there are general rules for how to predict rupture path
at branches, and the ability of rupture to span
stepovers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have important
implications for both earthquake science and the broader scientific and
educational community. A key use of the modeling method will be to gain insight
into the potential size of earthquakes on geometrically complex fault systems,
such as those in the Los Angeles region. Many fault systems are bounded by
geometrical features such as fault gaps and changes in segment orientation; the
proposed numerical models will help determine the circumstances under which
earthquake rupture may propagate across these segment boundaries, and generate
larger earthquakes with larger ground motion. In addition, the proposed research
will lead to better estimates of the slip distribution and rupture front
evolution, which also strongly affect ground motion. The resulting improved
earthquake source models can help in the probabilistic assessment of earthquake
size and ground motion pattern, with subsequent potential impacts on seismic
hazard and building code and design. &lt;br/&gt;