* 0838021
* Collaborative Research: Linking Fluid-rock Interaction and Strain Accumulation in a Naturally Deformed Diamictite, Implications for Hydrolytic Weakening and Reaction Softening
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2013
* W.A. Yonkee, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 26,493.00

Understanding the strength and mechanical behavior of the continental
lithosphere is a first-order issue in tectonics. Mechanical behavior of the
lithosphere depends mostly on the development of weak and strong layers. In the
laboratory, insight into this process can be gained through the study of
reactions and deformation mechanisms in minerals, fluid flow, and fabric
evolution. The wide range of temporal and spatial scales at work in deforming
lithosphere presents challenges in extrapolating results from laboratory studies
to natural mountain belts. Through a study of deformed diamictites, rocks
composed of mainly mud and cobbles, these researchers will evaluate processes
that reduced the rock strength and resulted in concentrated deformation. The
deformation will be addressed through measurements of the shape changes that the
cobbles have undergone. These studies will improve our understanding of how
strong and weak parts of the crust evolve during mountain building, and
processes that localize deformation into fault zones and partly control
nucleation of large earthquakes.

The investigators will integrate field, microtextural, and microchemical
analyses of variably deformed and altered granitic gneiss and quartzite to
quantify relationships between progressive strain, deformation mechanisms, and
fluid-chemical processes. The diamictite displays a km-scale gradient in bulk
deformation intensity, providing a record of hydrolytic weakening and reaction
softening processes. Strain will be estimated for different clast types and
sizes using the Rf/?Ã– technique. Volume change will be estimated from
geochemical changes and microstructural relations. Deformation mechanisms will
be evaluated from petrographic studies of microstructures, combined with
electron backscatter diffraction analysis of lattice preferred orientation and
subgrain boundaries. Amounts and locations of water and related species, which
control hydrolytic weakening, will be evaluated using Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy and synchrotron infrared radiation. Cathodoluminescence will
provide data on locations of quartz neocrystallization and healed microcracks.
Changes in bulk chemical composition of clasts and matrix will be quantified
using X-ray fluorescence, X-ray spectral mapping and scanning electron
microscopy. This combination of techniques will provide new information on the
interactions between deformation, fluids, and chemical processes during
progressive strain.