* 0838813
* North-American School on Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Interventional Systems (NAS MR/CIIS)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Russell Taylor, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Preston
* 09/30/2011
* USD 49,958.00

A. PROJECT SUMMARY Vision - The goal of this proposal is to leverage and combine
our education and research strengths in biomedically oriented engineering,
robotics and clinical intervention to develop the North American School in
Medical Robotics and Computer Integrated Interventional System (NAS MR/CIIS).
MR/CIIS, as a field of study, requires unique cross-disciplinary training that
encompasses elements of engineering, physical, medical, and biological sciences.
We propose to develop an Winter School that will provide pre-doctoral students,
post-docs and senior new-comers to MR/CIIS the tools to understand and
contribute to the expanding field of computer integrated medical technologies
and clinical interventions. We will provide tutorials, projects and research
opportunities to conceptualize, design and develop computational sensing,
information processing and robotics systems for medical interventions. A
distinguishing feature of the NAS MR/CIIS is that it will provide exposure to
techniques for designing systems that include both computational models/data and
interventional technologies. From a broad perspective, the goal of the School is
to foster the growth the field of MR/CIIS by providing a short course that
marries engineering and clinical medicine. Intellectual Merit ? The intellectual
challenge in this proposal emerges from the near contradictory requirement to
deliver more effective, more precise and highly specialized medical care to a
large population, while containing its cost. In the past decade we have seen
computerization and automation of various manufacturing sectors producing higher
quality, and exquisitely precise products at much lower costs. MR/CIIS offer
similar benefits to medicine ? i.e. the computerization and (semi-)automation,
through robotics, of the performance of clinical tasks. This is not possible
without significant technological education, research and innovation in
computational imaging and sensing, information extraction and visualization,
automated guidance and assistance, efficient human-computer interaction and
accurate on-line assessment and feedback. Johns Hopkins University and its
partners in the NSF ERC on Computer Integrated Surgical Systems and Technology
(CISST) are ideally situated to make significant inroads on this problem because
of strong engineering teams already working on many of these systems, premiere
medical institutions and clinicians willing to collaborate and use these
technologies. Hence, the NAS MR/CIIS will capitalize on existing expertise and
facilities, to increase the number of individuals who can comfortably answer the
technical questions for the above systems, while fully understanding their
clinical implications. Broader Impact ? The NAS MR/CIIS is by definition an
educational program with far reaching implications. The goal of the School is to
promote the growth of the field of MR/CIIS. Participants will have an
accelerated path to research productivity. This acceleration is required to
address the expected increase demand for medical interventions by the aging
baby-boomers. Increasing the number of researchers in the field will increase
technological innovation and deployment society-wide. The diversity of the
participants in the program will benefit from our substantial experience in the
recruiting and retention of women and minorities into our ERC CISST. We have
relationships with LSAMPs and McNair programs in the area to recruit
participants. We will also target HBCUs and other minority serving institutions
by presenting MR/CIIS seminars at their institutions to generate interest in the
field. We already have ties with some HBCUs, such as Morgan State and Howard
Universities. We plan to also use our significant K ? 12 outreach contacts to
invite two teachers to the NAS MR/CIIS staged in the US. To maximize the benefit
of participation and to help transfer knowledge to their classrooms, each
teacher will be paired with one of the leaders of the School as a mentee. We
will develop a web portal, to be managed by the Computer Integrated Surgery
Student Research Society (CISSRS), to disseminate MR/CIIS material, for
discourse through Blogs, and to formally establish the community. Key Words ?
Winter School, Medical Robotics, Computer Integrated Surgery