* 0838300
* Preservation of Impact Evidence in the Sedimentary Record: Erosion of the Vredefort and Sudbury Craters as a Guide to Identifying Hadean Impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Aaron Cavosie, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2013
* USD 178,926.00

Little is known about how the young Earth transitioned from a planetary inferno
at 4.5 billion years ago to a water-covered, life-supporting world by 3.8
billion years ago. This project involves the study large impact craters in South
Africa and Canada to understand how evidence of giant, continental-scale
meteorite impacts is preserved in the geologic record after the craters erode.
This study will provide insights into planetary evolution, including the
earliest stages of Earth history that ultimately led to the development of
environments capable of supporting life. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Prevailing
geologic models suggest that the Hadean Earth was an utterly alien world
compared to today. It is envisioned as a fiery planet covered in oceans of hot
magma and subject to intense meteorite bombardments that created hostile surface
environments. In contrast, isotopic evidence from ancient zircon (ZrSiO4)
crystals up to 4.2 billion years old suggests that the Earth may have been much
cooler, enough to allow liquid water to stabilize and provide habitats for the
rise of life. Preserved materials from this time period are rare; direct
evidence of early meteorite impacts is preserved on the Moon, but has not been
found on Earth. This project seeks to establish new techniques for recognizing
how to identify evidence of large impact craters long after they are eroded and
reduced to sediments. To accomplish this, deformed minerals in sediments from
the partially eroded Vredefort (South Africa) and Sudbury (Canada) impact
craters will be studied. The results will be applied to the search for impact
evidence from the Hadean Earth. The results of this project will also provide
insight during analysis of materials from future sample return missions to both
the Moon and Mars, where early planetary crusts are preserved.&lt;br/&gt;