* 0838763
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Study of Marine Ice Sheet Stability &amp; Subglacial Life Habitats in W Antarctica - Lake &amp; Ice Stream Subglacial Access Research Drilling (
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sridhar Anandakrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 08/31/2014
* USD 391,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The LISSARD project (Lake and Ice Stream Subglacial Access
Research Drilling) is one of three research components of the WISSARD
integrative initiative (Whillans Ice Stream Subglacial Access Research Drilling)
that is being funded by the Antarctic Integrated System Science Program of NSF's
Office of Polar Programs, Antarctic Division. The overarching scientific
objective of WISSARD is to assess the role of water beneath a West Antarctic ice
stream in interlinked glaciological, geological, microbiological, geochemical,
and oceanographic systems. The LISSARD component of WISSARD focuses on the role
of active subglacial lakes in determining how fast the West Antarctic ice sheet
loses mass to the global ocean and influences global sea level changes. The
importance of Antarctic subglacial lakes has only been recently recognized, and
the lakes have been identified as high priority targets for scientific
investigations because of their unknown contributions to ice sheet stability
under future global warming scenarios. LISSARD has several primary science
goals: A) To provide an observational basis for improving treatments of
subglacial hydrological and mechanical processes in models of ice sheet mass
balance and stability; B) To reconstruct the past history of ice stream
stability by analyzing archives of past basal water and ice flow variability
contained in subglacial sediments, porewater, lake water, and basal accreted
ice; C) To provide background understanding of subglacial lake environments to
benefit RAGES and GBASE (the other two components of the WISSARD project); and
D) To synthesize data and concepts developed as part of this project to
determine whether subglacial lakes play an important role in (de)stabilizing
Antarctic ice sheets. We propose an unprecedented synthesis of approaches to
studying ice sheet processes, including: (1) satellite remote sensing, (2)
surface geophysics, (3) borehole observations and measurements and, (4) basal
and subglacial sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The latest
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change recognized that the
greatest uncertainties in assessing future global sea-level change stem from a
poor understanding of ice sheet dynamics and ice sheet vulnerability to oceanic
and atmospheric warming. Disintegration of the WAIS (West Antarctic Ice Sheet)
alone would contribute 3-5 m to global sea-level rise, making WAIS a focus of
scientific concern due to its potential susceptibility to internal or ocean-
driven instability. The overall WISSARD project will test the overarching
hypothesis that active water drainage connects various subglacial environments
and exerts major control on ice sheet flow, geochemistry, metabolic and
phylogenetic diversity, and biogeochemical transformations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Societal Relevance: Global warming,
melting of ice sheets and consequential sea-level rise are of high societal
relevance. Science Resource Development: After a 9-year hiatus WISSARD will
provide the US-science community with a renewed capability to access and study
sub-ice sheet environments. Developing this technological infrastructure will
benefit the broader science community and assets will be accessible for future
use through the NSF-OPP drilling contractor. Furthermore, these projects will
pioneer an approach implementing recommendations from the National Research
Council committee on Principles of Environmental Stewardship for the Exploration
and Study of Subglacial Environments (2007). Education and Outreach (E/O): These
activities are grouped into four categories: i) increasing student participation
in polar research by fully integrating them in our research programs; ii)
introducing new investigators to the polar sciences by incorporating promising
young investigators in our programs, iii) promotion of K-12 teaching and
learning programs by incorporating various teachers and NSTA programs, and iv)
reaching a larger public audience through such venues as popular science
magazines, museum based activities and videography and documentary films. In
summary, WISSARD will promote scientific exploration of Antarctica by conveying
to the public the excitement of accessing and studying what may be some of the
last unexplored aquatic environments on Earth, and which represent a potential
analogue for extraterrestrial life habitats on Europa and Mars.