* 0838098
* Perinatal Photoperiodic Programming of Adult Immune Function
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Randy Nelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2013
* USD 445,059.00

Life requires an energetic trade-off between survival and investments in
offspring. Being energetically-challenging, winter shifts the balance towards
survival. Individuals use day lengths to determine the time of year to shift
investment to immune function, a proxy for survival. This project will examine
the mechanisms that underlie how early environmental conditions organize or
program important physiological and behavioral survival responses later in
adulthood. Because traits result from the interaction between genes and
environment, these studies will use day length, a simple and precise
environmental factor, to probe gene expression to gain insight into the
interplay between environment and genetics in the development of the shift
towards enhanced immune function in winter. The hypothesis that differences in
day length or melatonin exposure during early development serve to program adult
immune responses will be tested. Both peripheral and central inflammation will
be examined, and the mechanisms through which day length programs adult immune
function will be examined through a combination of behavioral, physiological,
and gene expression studies. It is predicted that the early exposure to short
days or to chronic melatonin (the hormone that mediates day length regulated
processes) will improve inflammatory responses in adults. Taken together,
results of these studies will address the source of variation in immune
responses, provide a mechanistic basis for differential effects of season-of-
birth on health, and help explain seasonal phenomena such as flu seasons. The
results will also provide novel and important information about how animals may
respond to global climatic change, how emergent diseases arise, and provide
insights into how environmental regulatory mechanisms evolved. The broader
implications of the proposed project include training of high school,
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral trainees from diverse cultural and
historically-underrepresented backgrounds. All experimental results will be made
easily accessible to the general public through a variety of media.