* 0838445
* KUMUNU 2008, September 2008, Lincoln, NE
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Brian Harbourne, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 9,300.00

ABSTRACT: The 2008 KUMUNU conference will be held at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln, September 20--21. KUMUNU is an annual weekend conference anchored by
the Universities of Kansas (KU), Missouri- Columbia (MU) and Nebraska-Lincoln
(NU), promoting interaction among researchers, post docs and graduate students
in commutative algebra and related disciplines (such as algebraic geometry,
K-theory and coding theory) at regional schools (which in 2007 included 16
different institutions). Although the KUMUNU triad has significant strength in
these areas, geographic separation raises a hurdle to taking the most advantage
of this strength. Fortunately, the distances are small enough that regional
participants can fairly inexpensively gather at a central location for a weekend
conference. The goal of the KUMUNU conference series is to provide a cost-
effective annual venue for regional researchers at various stages of their
careers, including graduate students, recent PhD's and faculty at nonPhD
granting institutions, to interact with each other and with experienced
researchers based at KU, MU, NU and a limited number of invited experts from
outside the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel and lodging support to
facilitate participation, especially for graduate students, is a key element for
KUMUNU to achieve its main goals. These include: playing a strong regional
mentoring role at all levels by showcasing the research of post docs and young
faculty and by helping recent Ph.D.s and graduate students in commutative
algebra and related disciplines enrich their research programs by meeting senior
researchers based at KU, MU, NU and elsewhere; and promoting research in
commutative algebra by providing a venue for discussion of the latest
developments in the field, for exchanging ideas and for setting the basis for
future research collaborations. The conference design also furthers these goals:
KUMUNU comprises 6 or 7 plenary talks accessible to graduate students by
speakers representing a geographically diverse mix of senior researchers, young
faculty and post docs, with plenty of time reserved outside of talks for
additional interaction. The relatively small size of the meeting and its
geographic and disciplinary focus also encourage participants to establish
productive collaborative relationships. In addition to the stimulation and
enrichment of the research careers of the students and early career
participants, participants from nonPhD granting institutions will take ideas
from the conference back to their colleagues and students, stimulating further
research and mathematical enrichment at their home
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;