* 0838447
* Melt Geometry in Partially Molten Olivine: The Influence of Grain Size and Water
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Ulrich Faul, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2014
* USD 310,004.00

Small amounts of melt are continuously generated by dynamic processes in the
Earth's upper mantle, for example at mid-ocean ridges and subduction zones. The
melt is initially distributed between the crystalline grains of the partially
molten rock. Once melt is present, the physical properties of the rock, and with
them the continuing melting process, are influenced by the grain scale melt
geometry. In particular, this intergranular melt geometry is a key factor for
the strength of partially molten regions, for the eventual segregation of the
melt from the matrix by porous flow, and for our ability to detect partially
molten regions by seismic or electromagnetic imaging. Since the melt generated
at depth frequently leads to volcanic eruptions at the surface with consequences
for our environment, understanding the melting process is important for
recognizing and mitigating the attendant hazards.

In this project, the investigator proposes to determine the melt geometry in
partially molten rocks by simulating upper mantle conditions in the laboratory.
An important aspect of the experiments is that they will be conducted in a
piston cylinder apparatus, which has the advantage that relatively long
durations at high temperatures and pressures can be achieved. The experimental
samples will be examined by repeated high resolution imaging (by Field Emission
Scanning Electron Microscope) of a planar section and removal of a thin layer of
material in order to reconstruct the three-dimensional pore geometry at the sub-
micron scale. In particular, this procedure will address the question of whether
wetted two-grain boundaries exist and how numerous they are. At a fixed melt
fraction, wetted two-grain boundaries will have the largest effect on seismic
velocities and attenuation, and the rheology. The effects of small amounts of
water, as well as grain size effects on the melt distribution will also be
examined.