* 0838257
* Collaborative Research:   Geomagnetic Field as Recorded on Iceland and Jan Mayen: Key to Field Structure at High Northern Latitudes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 195,724.00

Some rocks as they form, act like magnetic tape, thus proving recordings of the
Earth's magnetic field through time. Data from such records play an important
role in a variety of geophysical studies of the Earth, including plate tectonic
reconstructions, magnetostratigraphy, and studies of the behavior of the ancient
geomagnetic field. Over the past four decades the fundamental assumption made in
many studies using the magnetic vectors coaxed from rocks has been that the
average direction of the Earth's magnetic field corresponds to one that would
have been produced by a bar magnetic centered in the Earth that is aligned with
the spin axis. This implies that the dip of the ancient magnetic field
directions vary from horizontal near the (paleo) equator to vertical near the
(paleo) poles. The assumption is that paleomagnetic data are of sufficient
accuracy to enable their use in reconstructing the positions of lithospheric
plates through time. Recently, researchers have begun to reexamine the
fundamental data underlying models of the ancient geomagnetic field and are
finding that the most glaring deficiency in the existing data base is a dearth
of high quality data, including information about the field strength, from high
northerly latitudes. It is possible that the solid inner core influences the
generation of the Earth's magnetic field, which takes place in the fluid outer
core. The convective regimes inside a cylinder parallel to the Earth's
rotational axis that is tangent to the inner core (the tangent cylinder) are
thought to be different. Therefore, data from north (or south) of the tangent
cylinder are of special interest in the theory of geomagnetism and are key to
testing the validity of one of the fundamental tenets of paleomagnetic study.
Opportunities to sample such high latitude volcanics are few and far between.
Researchers from Scripps Institute of Oceanography, in conjunction with their
Norwegian collaborators, are conducting paleomagnetic sampling and analysis of
suitable sites from Jan Mayen, a remote volcanic island in the Arctic along the
mid-Atlantic rift, northeast of Iceland. Samples from this study are producing
high quality paleomagnetic, paleointensity, and geochronological data from high
northern latitudes that are essential to an enhanced understanding of
paleosecular variation, the time averaged field and its long term variations.
Geochronologic work for this study, conducted by collaborators from Oregon State
University, is providing an enhanced understanding of the age and duration of
mafic magmatic activity at this isolated volcanic island. In addition to the
scientific objectives of this work, the project is contributing to the training
and support of doctoral researcher at Scripps who is a member of an
underrepresented group in the earth sciences, and results are being used in
outreach activities that benefit in the development of K-12 teaching materials
and web seminars for the National Science Teacher Association.