* 0838115
* SGER: Extent and Impact of Distal Ash Fallout From the May 2008 Eruption of Chaiten, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Charles Connor, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2009
* USD 26,241.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory research will support the travel of a team of
scientists from the University of South Florida (USF) to collaborate with an
international group of volcanologists in Argentina that are currently studying
the new volcanic deposits from the ongoing eruption of Chaitén volcano in Chile.
Chaitén volcano began erupting on May 2, 2008, apparently after approximately
9,500 years of quiescence. This ongoing eruption is already the largest in South
America since the 1991 eruption of Hudson volcano, and creates a unique
opportunity to sample tephra fallout from the eruption in detail, particularly
because the tephra fallout is distributed primarily eastward, across Argentina.
The team from USF, together with their international collaborators, plan a rapid
response to this event by sampling tephra fallout across southern Argentina, the
most distal and easily eroded parts of the deposit, in June and early July,
2008. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this excursion will be to
measure the variation of thickness, grain-size, and mass loading across a
widespread tephra fall deposit. Such data will allow the determination of the
volume of erupted material; and will provide a test of the current models of
tephra dispersal and deposition. In addition, they will work with colleagues to
determine the physical and chemical characteristics of the readily-soluble salts
associated with freshly-fallen tephra. Such data provide essential information
for determining the potential geochemical impact of ash fallout. It is also
planned to measure the grain-size characteristics of fine airborne-ash (both
freshly falling, and re-suspended), using actively-pumped filters, an essential
input for models of the potential health impacts of volcanic ashfall.
Ultimately, they plan to use the TEPHRA2 numerical model developed over the past
decade to model tephra fallout from the Chaitén eruption. Although this and
other fallout models have been widely used to forecast volcano hazards there has
not yet been an opportunity to validate these models for large explosive
volcanic eruptions that have been directly observed and sampled soon after
tephra deposition. Thus, the Chaitén eruption provides a rare opportunity to
collect data to validate and improve the TEPHRA 2 numerical model. For example,
the ability to forecast deposition of very fine ash hundreds of kilometers from
the erupting volcano has not yet been adequately tested yet represents a major
health and economic impact. With the data collected in the field, the team will
use TEPHRA2, coupled with nonlinear inversion techniques, to estimate eruption
parameters (column height, duration, mass flow), and compare with observations
of the eruption. All results will be available to the volcanology community via
the IAVCEI Tephra Working Group website.