* 0838637
* Dissertation Research: The Development of Social Complexity at El Dornajo: Conditions of Change in Southwestern Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Ms. Sarah Taylor will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavation at the
site of El Dornajo located on the Zarumilla River in southern Ecuador. El
Dornajo very likely emerged as a political center between 500 BC and 1200 AD and
provides a context within which to gain insight into the emergence of political
complexity in the Andean region. This process led to some of the most complex
prehistoric societies in the New World such as the Inka. El Dornajo is located
in an environmentally transitional region between the tropical forests of
southern Ecuador and the deserts of coastal Peru. It is also culturally
transitional between the complex chiefdoms of the northern Andes and the
expansive states of the central Andes. Traditionally the region has been seen as
one in which inter-regional interaction played a strong role in social change.
Interaction with adjacent more complexly developed polities and a position on a
trade route between them may have allowed an elite governing group to emerge
through control over the movement of products. However El Nino events which have
a major impact on the western coast of South America may also have played a
significant role. The prehistoric populations of the region would have been
largely reliant on marine and mangrove resources and while El Nino events would
have created conditions of subsistence stress for much of the population they
would also have opened the possibility of agriculture in a normally arid area.
As rainfall returned to normal low levels, farmers may have developed other
techniques such as irrigation which set them on the path to social complexity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine these alternatives Ms Taylor will conduct
archaeological research at the site. This will include a staged program of
surface survey, random sampling to recover artifact and ecofact assemblages, and
excavation of the largest mound to assess the sequence of its construction and
determination of the pace and timing with which this occurred. Finally small
horizontal excavations will be conducted to look for inter-household
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also further the training and
career of a promising young scientist. It will include students from both the US
and Ecuador and thus strengthen archaeological ties between these two
countries.&lt;br/&gt;