* 0838088
* Study of the Highest Energy Cosmic Rays with the Pierre Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Miguel Mostafa, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2012
* USD 528,000.00

The Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO) is a large International endeavor aimed at
the study of Ultra?High Energy Cosmic Rays (UHECRs). PAO is a hybrid experiment
with a large array of surface detectors measuring the footprint of an extensive
air shower when it reaches the Earth and with multiple fluorescence telescopes
measuring the shower in the space above. They have started deploying a low
energy extension to study the galactic to extra?galactic transition. The latest
PAO results have confirmed the long anticipated GZK suppression in the spectrum
due to interactions with the microwave background. However, the sources of the
highest energy particles and questions about how they are accelerated in the
first place are among the most important topics in particle astrophysics today.
One suspected source is Active Galactic Nuclei, which are among the most
energetic objects known in the Universe.

This award will fund the continued participation of this investigator in the
areas of detector calibration, maintenance and operation, and analysis of PAO
data. His group employs undergraduate students in detector construction,
operation, atmospheric monitoring, data analysis and software development. The
group participates in the well?established PAO outreach program in Argentina
with activities including the preparation of materials and presentations at the
Visitor?s Center, public talks, visits to schools, science fairs, and courses
for teachers and students.