* 0838492
* VOSS:   Developing a Comparative Meta-Analytical Model for Evaluating and Facilitating Accessible CI-Enabled Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Barry Davidson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 02/28/2010
* USD 199,927.00

Because of their social and technical complexity, virtual organizations can only
be understood fully through collaborative interdisciplinary approaches. The
purpose of this project is to contribute to an enhanced, interdisciplinary
understanding of the sociotechnical factors and dynamics influencing the
effectiveness of virtual organizations. The project uses a stratified purposeful
sample of ten virtual organizations, chosen to illustrate a variety of
organizational characteristics, including: membership composition, size,
boundary definition, function, duration, origin, and funding. The sample goes
beyond virtual organizations in science and engineering to include a diverse
group of distributed networks in a variety of sectors. The project has three
goals: (1) to conduct a comparative mixed-methods meta-analysis of five existing
virtual organizations leading to a consensual model for analyzing, categorizing,
and evaluating their effectiveness; (2) to validate the conceptual model using
data from five additional existing organizations, and retesting the model on the
entire sample to explore variability; and (3) to disseminate the results to a
broad, interdisciplinary research community. This project will have an
exceptionally broad societal impact. The majority of virtual organizational
knowledge has been generated from studying scientific collaboratories and
corporate virtual teams. The empirical sample in this study has substantial
representation from social and behavioral sciences, policy advocates,
transnational non-governmental organizations, and civil society networks. This
approach will encourage the broader diffusion of effective virtual organizations
beyond the physical sciences and could have a substantial socioeconomic impact
in society. The project participants and partners represent a deliberate attempt
to engage with diverse researchers and will collaborate with existing
initiatives designed to support underrepresented minority and disabled
participation in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
disciplines. The project also places in the foreground issues of participation
in virtual organizations by people with disabilities by focusing on
accessibility of the cyberinfrastructure and universal design.