* 0838159
* The Effect of Trace Amounts of H2O on the Rates and Mechanisms of Olivine and Enstatite Phase Transformations in Earth's Mantle Transition Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Thomas Sharp, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 09/30/2013
* USD 293,851.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through plate tectonics and
subduction, Earth recycles oceanic crust and lithosphere into its mantle. The
down going oceanic crust carries H2O, which, when released into the overlying
mantle wedge, causes melting that results in arc volcanism. If the mantle
component of the subducting oceanic plate is also hydrated, then some of the
subducted H2O is likely to be carried deep into Earth's mantle. High-pressure
experiments have shown that minerals from the upper mantle and especially the
transition zone (410 to 660 km depth) are capable of storing many oceans worth
of H2O. However, we do not yet know how much H2O is actually stored in Earth's
mantle or recycled through by subduction. Deep and dangerous earthquakes
associated with subduction (deep-focus earthquakes) occur from 400 km up to 700
km where conventional earthquake mechanisms are not possible. The mostly widely
accepted hypothesis for the origin of deep-focus earthquakes is that they are
triggered by the mineral olivine, which is subducted into the transition zone
and beyond where it is stable. This hypothesis requires very slow reaction rates
in the relatively cool interiors of subducting plates. The purpose of this
research is to determine how trace amounts of H2O enhance olivine and enstatite
transformation rates at high-pressure. These data will provide a test of the
transformational faulting model and constrain the maximum H2O content compatible
with deep focus earthquakes by transformational faulting. This research will
provide a better understanding of deep earthquakes and the potential deep-Earth
hydrologic cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies on the olivine-
wadsleyite and the olivine-ringwoodite phase transformations have shown that H2O
greatly increases transformation rates. Preliminary experimental studies have
also shown that 290 ppm D2O in olivine increases ringwoodite growth rates by two
orders of magnitude at 1100°C and reduces the activation enthalpy from around
392 kJ/mol for anhydrous olivine to 274 kJ/mol. Based on their kinetic data and
thermo-kinetic models of subduction zones, 290 ppm H2O is enough to eliminate
the survival of metastable olivine as a mechanism for deep focus earthquakes.
Additional results for 30 ppm H2O in olivine indicate similarly fast growth
rates and low activation enthalpy. It is proposed to continue these
investigation of the olivine-ringwoodite transformation with 30 ppm H2O, using
San Carlos olivine hydrated in the piston-cylinder apparatus. These samples will
be partially transformed at 18, 19, 20ad 21 GPa and 700, 900 and 1100 °C, using
a multi-anvil apparatus, to determine the pressure dependence of ringwoodite
growth for 30 ppm H2O. Transformation rates and mechanisms will also be
investigated for enstatite, the second most abundant mineral in the mantle,
hydrated under the same conditions as our olivine. The team will also use
scanning and transmission electron microcopy to characterize transformation
mechanisms in their samples. The results will be used in thermo-kinetic models
of subduction zones to determine the maximum H2O contents of olivine and
enstatite that are compatible with deep focus earthquakes by transformational
faulting.