* 0838218
* Hydrological feedbacks between phosphorous deposition and canopy cover in dry seasonal forests
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Paolo D'Odorico, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 282,579.00

Large areas of tropical forests are vulnerable to both anthropogenic and natural
disturbances, and important issues determining their sensitivity to disruption
must be addressed to gain improved management practices. One of these is how
changes in land-use or tropical storm patterns affect the resiliency of
phosphorus-limited Neotropical forests where vegetation is sustained in the long
term by atmospheric phosphorus inputs through rainfall, dust, or fog. Past
researchers have found that dust and fog deposition depend on canopy density
(leaf area). Canopy traps phosphorus enabling a positive feedback between
vegetation and phosphorus deposition. This study is investigating the
ecohydrological mechanism controlling the occurrence and strength of these
feedbacks and their susceptibility to changes in climate and land cover. The
principle objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;1. To quantify the total phosphorus input
from deposition to a dry neotropical forest and to investigate its fluctuations
between dry and wet seasons, associated with fires, and proximity to ?slash and
burn? management.&lt;br/&gt;2. To quantify the dependence of phosphorus
deposition on canopy properties and thus the strength of the canopy-phosphorus
deposition feedback.&lt;br/&gt;3. To determine the relative magnitudes and roles
of rainfall, dust, and canopy condensation in total phosphorus input. These
three processes are differently affected by changes in climate and land
cover.&lt;br/&gt;Students will be trained and teaching materials developed for
use in protecting these sensitive ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;