* 0838157
* Origin(s) and Significance of Arc-related, Brine-dominated Hydrothermal Alteration, Copiap√≥ Area, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Mark Barton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2011
* USD 209,479.00

Fluid flow is a natural and nearly ubiquitous process in the Earth's upper
crust. It can fundamentally change the composition of the crust and can create
many types of mineral deposits. This project will address the origin of alkali-
rich (Na-K-Ca) compositional changes (hydrothermal alteration) that were created
by high-temperature circulation of saline fluids. Several complementary
approaches will be applied to an exceptionally well exposed area in northern
Chile that contains widespread Na-K-Ca-rich alteration and has spatially
associated iron oxide-copper-gold-rich ("IOCG") ore deposits. Similar features,
though less well exposed, are globally widespread. In spite of the economic
importance of IOCG deposits and the likely contribution of alkali-rich
alteration to global geochemical cycles, these kinds of hydrothermal systems are
poorly documented and their origins are controversial. This project represents a
collaboration between academia and the mining industry (Freeport-Moran Copper
and Gold) to improve our basic understanding of the fundamental geologic and ore
genesis characteristics of these deposits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
project will test the hypotheses: (1) that large portions of the shallow crust
are altered to alkali-rich compositions as a result of the circulation of
brines, (2) that those brines derive from sedimentary or surficial sources and
not from crystallizing hydrous magmas, and (3) that there is a genetic link
between this style of alteration and the IOCG family of deposits. The work will
begin with geologic mapping of alteration across the Mesozoic magmatic arc of
northern Chile to establish the volumes, distribution, and relative timing of
hydrothermal features. If of external origin, these features should be
controlled by regional structures and stratigraphy rather than by an association
with particular igneous rocks (e.g., those that formed from magmas with high
water contents and are typically associated with other distinctive types of ore-
forming systems, notably the "porphyry copper" family). Geochemical analyses to
determine whole rock and isotopic (H, B, C, O, S, Sr) compositions, petrologic
studies of mineral assemblages, and U-Pb geochronology will supplement the field
work by providing key documentation of: (a) the extent of compositional changes,
(b) the source of fluids and dissolved components, (c) the depth, temperature,
and chemical conditions of alteration, and (d) the absolute timing and
correlation of magmatic events and hydrothermal features. From the anticipated
results combined with related work it should be possible to assess better the
types, extents, and origins of Na-Ca-K hydrothermal alteration and the
consequences for material fluxes in brine-dominated hydrothermal systems at
scales from individual intrusives centers to global arc magmatism. Inferences
regarding system-scale processes will be fundamental to building better deposit-
scale models useful in mineral exploration for IOCG deposits, and should help
distinguish these systems from the economically more productive porphyry Cu-Mo-
Au environment. This project will support two graduate students, it will
complement the PhD project of another who is supported by industry, and it will
engage in the research two continuing undergraduate geology students. Two of
these students are women and two belong to minority groups. Materials will be
archived in collections at the University of Arizona; these collections are
heavily used for continuing education courses for professionals, for regular
courses and for topical studies.&lt;br/&gt;