* 0838949
* Collaborative Research:  The Biogeochemical Evolution of Dissolved Organic Matter in a Fluvial System on the Cotton Glacier, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Yu-Ping Chin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2012
* USD 262,705.00

Dissolved organic matter (DOM) comprises a significant pool of Earth's organic
carbon that dwarfs the amount present in living aquatic organisms. The
properties and reactivity of DOM are not well defined, and the evolution of
autochthonous DOM from its precursor materials in freshwater has not been
observed. Recent sampling of a supraglacial stream formed on the Cotton Glacier
in the Transantarctic Mountains revealed DOM that more closely resembles an
assemblage of recognizable precursor organic compounds, based upon its UV-VIS
and fluorescence spectra. It is suggested that the DOM from this water evolved
over time to resemble materials present in marine and many inland surface
waters. The transient nature of the system i.e., it reforms seasonally, also
prevents any accumulation of the refractory DOM present in most surface waters.
Thus, the Cotton Glacier provides us with a unique environment to study the
formation of DOM from precursor materials. An interdisciplinary team will study
the biogeochemistry of this progenitor DOM and how microbes modify it. By
focusing on the chemical composition of the DOM as it shifts from precursor
material to the more humified fractions, the investigators will relate this
transition to bioavailability, enzymatic activity, community composition and
microbial growth efficiency. This project will support education at all levels,
K-12, high school, undergraduate, graduate and post-doc and will increase
participation by under-represented groups in science. Towards these goals, the
investigators have established relationships with girls' schools and Native
American programs. Additional outreach will be carried out in coordination with
PolarTREC, PolarPalooza, and if possible, an Antarctic Artist and Writer.