* 0838357
* Collaborative: WATERS: Evaluating Community Watershed Models and Observation Networks under Uncertainty within the Susquehanna River Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Patrick Reed, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Susquehanna River Basin (SRB) is the largest tributary to the Chesapeake Bay.
Without this flow the estuary could not sustain its extraordinary diversity and
productivity of aquatic life. Management of the SRB requires a balance between
the competing societal and environmental demands placed on its freshwater
resources. A long term goal of this research is to address the questions: ?How
do humans and climate impact the sustainability of the water resources within
large river basins? What role do large rivers play in the global climate
system??. We seek to transform our ability to detect and/or predict the impacts
of long-term changes on the hydrology of the SRB. We posit that our ability to
understand human-climate impacts on the SRB?s environmental systems will require
a paradigmatic shift towards community level evaluations of watershed models?
predictive power and adaptive design of the basin-scale observation networks
under uncertainty. This work will contribute time-evolving sensitivity maps for
a suite of models that will allow us to explore how hydrologic flow controls
change across a strong 3 year climatic gradient (i.e., drought in 2001 to wet
conditions in 2003). The sensitivity maps will then be used to identify the key
uncertainties to be incorporated into an ensemble-based data assimilation
framework that explicitly considers systematic sources of bias in observations
and model structures. The data assimilation framework will provide baselines for
judging the forecasting skills of models (i.e., their mean prediction errors) as
well as the value of observations (i.e., those observables that minimize the
time evolving covariance of predictions). This proposed project will initiate
the extension of WATERS cyberinfrastructure (CI) to facilitate the publication
of the ?uncertainty? in hydrologic observations and web-services for sharing
ensembles of model inputs/outputs to encourage scientific replication and
extension of our prediction experiments. Overall the modeling and CI components
of this work will help clarify the value of information provided by uncertain
measurements of precipitation, evapotranspiration, river flow, soil moisture,
and groundwater levels.&lt;br/&gt;