* 0838369
* Collaborative Research: Controls on Delivery and Fate of Water, Nitrogen and Calcium in a Spring-Fed Karst River
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Wendy Graham, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 325,668.00

Intellectual Merit: Hydrologic, geomorphic and biogeochemical dynamics of river
systems are coupled over time scales ranging from hours to millennia. Catchment
inputs and flowpath properties influence geomorphic and biogeochemical processes
through effects on water and solute delivery dynamics. Simultaneously, metabolic
processes of river biota can exert reciprocal control on hydrology, morphology,
and biogeochemistry. These coupled biotic-abiotic interactions lead to complex,
non-linear responses that require high spatiotemporal density of data to
understand. In spring-fed karst rivers, strong biotic-abiotic interactions are
expected due to high plant production and low flow velocity, and are
hypothesized to control both N and DO dynamics, with important ecosystem
consequences, and also river water pH with implications for mineral dissolution
and thus karst channel development. The magnitude of biotic controls on solute
delivery, and links to stream channel dissolution, are poorly understood.
Consequently, this proposal addresses 3 questions that link biotic and abiotic
processing of spring-fed karst channels: 1) How do sub-surface flow paths vary
with climate and flow regime, and how do they control the magnitude of spring
water delivery, and the solute chemistry of the water? 2) What are the
hydrologic and geomorphic controls on riverine N processing? 3) What are the
biotic and hydrologic controls on channel dissolution in low-relief karst
rivers?&lt;br/&gt;The study site is the Ichetucknee River in north Florida where
multiple gauged springs merge to form an 8-km long river, which is also gauged 5
km downstream of the springs. The work plan includes: 1) continuous measurements
of water chemistry, utilizing state-of-the-art sensors at strategically selected
spring vent and river sites, 2) synoptic water sampling for analytes not
continuously measured or at non-sensor sites, and 3) analysis of archival data
at Ichetucknee and other regionally important springs to test hypotheses more
generally. Continuously recording sensors, that measure DO concentrations, T,
stage, specific conductivity, and pH, will be deployed at two springs,
representing two hydrochemical groupings of the Ichetucknee complex. These,
along with continuous NO3 and turbidity sensors, will also be deployed at three
locations downstream. The continuously measured data will be used to assess
delivery variability and in-stream processing of N (e.g. assimilatory uptake
versus dissimilatory loss) at diel, episodic, seasonal, and inter-annual time
scales. Monthly synoptic sampling will link the biological processes to
carbonate saturation state and dissolution. Analyses of archival data from
springs across the region, will allow statistical analyses (auto/cross-
correlation) of discharge vs. chemistry relationships spanning a larger
population of springs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Florida?s springs are
significant regional cultural, economic, and ecological resources; observed
ecological declines have made springs the subject of current regulatory
consideration, with a focus on N pollution. As regulatory options are debated,
poor mechanistic understanding of how springs process N limits the ability to
make recommendations for how to manage them. Multiple local and state regulatory
agencies and stakeholder groups (e.g., Ichetucknee Springs Basin Working Group,
Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Florida Springs Task Force)
allow translation of scientific knowledge into policy and public education.
Results from this proposed work will be presented regularly to stakeholders at
public and agency meetings. A significant portion of the research will be
conducted at a minority serving institution (Florida International University);
under-represented groups will be recruited to work as students and post-doctoral
candidates. Co-locating this work with a WATERS test-bed location will expand
the expertise gained about sensor networks and data infrastructure during the
preliminary studies. This work will provide additional technological advances
toward building sensing platforms, allowing critical information about river
systems to be collected across process and management relevant time-
scales.&lt;br/&gt;