* 0838072
* Explore the Use of Social Networking Analysis as a Tool for MSP Research and Analyses: A Conference Proposal
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Joy Frechtling, Westat Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 06/30/2010
* USD 75,493.00

The Math and Science Partnership (MSP) program seeks to enhance student
achievement in STEM areas by creating new forms of leadership, enhancing teacher
quality, and creating more challenging courses and programs of study in STEM
areas. A special feature of the MSPs is drawing together new communities and
collaborations to dialogue around issues of STEM education and develop new
approaches for enhancing K-12 learning pathways. As MSP researchers have
examined the progress of the MSP projects, an emergent area of interest has been
the study of the new networks that comprise these evolving collaborations.

The purpose of the conference is to bring together members of the MSP community
and other researchers outside this community who have used Social Network
Analysis (SNA) to document results of social interventions. Participants will
discuss how they have used SNA and what has been learned through the approach,
and they will further explore the utility of SNA as a research tool for
enhancing what is being learned through NSF's investment in MSP projects. Of
particular interest is revealing the various types of research questions to
which the technique has been applied, how it has been combined with other
methodologies, what has been found, and what are the perceived strengths and
weaknesses. A portion of the conference is devoted to considerations of
different analytic approaches to summarizing the data and, relatedly, the kinds
of software packages that have been developed to carry out the analyses.

The conference brings together researchers and evaluators interested in the SNA
approach to learn more about applications of the methodology and available
analytic tools, and also challenges participants to think about concrete ways in
which SNA approaches can be applied to ongoing and new MSPs. A set of papers
documents the results of this conference and suggest areas of research that MSPs
might wish to pursue.