* 0838414
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Do CFCs and SF6 behave as reactive (sorbing) tracers in low carbon content sedimentary aquifers?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Amy Sheldon, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 105,557.00

Collaborative Research: Do CFCs and SF6 behave as reactive (sorbing) tracers in
low carbon content sedimentary aquifers? This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Intellectual Merit:
CFCs and SF6 are environmental tracers used to date recent groundwater (up to
~50 years). Because these compounds are relatively soluble, the current paradigm
expects conservative (no sorption or degradation) transport of these compounds
in aerobic, low carbon content (foc) aquifers. We posit that CFCs and SF6 act as
reactive (sorbing) tracers in many low foc sedimentary aquifers ? in particular
those that contain thermally altered carbonaceous matter (TACM). TACM examples
include char, coal and kerogen. TACM occurs commonly in sediments deposited
since the Devonian. Our preliminary experiments demonstrate that CFC sorption is
sufficient to significantly retard CFC transport in low foc aquifers. This
project will provide the first systematic assessment of the impact of different
forms of TACM on CFC and SF6 sorption. The experiments will be completed for
selected low foc sediments over an unprecedented concentration range of ~9
orders of magnitude. CM will be fractionated, quantified and classified using
established methods. The isotherm models and parameters deduced will be used to
evaluate the conditions in which significant retardation of these solutes are
expected in low foc aquifers. Broader Impacts: The proposed project will provide
support for a new collaboration between Drs. Allen-King and Sheldon, faculty
members at neighboring and complementary SUNY institutions: Geneseo, a primarily
undergraduate institution, and Buffalo, a PhD granting institution. This project
will enhance educational opportunities through direct support of four
undergraduate students and one PhD student. It will provide opportunities to
develop connections through student exchanges between the institutions. The PIs
will invite applications from qualified students with particular attention to
soliciting participation from members of underrepresented groups. Benefit to
society from this project will come through improved understanding of the
reactive transport of moderately hydrophobic chemicals in groundwater and
improved groundwater age estimates. This project will support economic stimulus
through providing well paid positions for research students and valuable
training that will enhance their technical contributions as they enter the
workforce.