* 0838601
* VOSS:   Leveraging Development Expertise Across Cyberinfrastructures
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,05/31/2010
* Paul Dourish, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 05/31/2010
* USD 125,749.00

Distributed collaborative science requires new and powerful technologies to
support communication, data sharing and aggregation, access to remote
instruments, and large-scale data analysis. The infrastructure necessary to
support this kind of science is called cyberinfrastructure. There has been
increasing recognition of the importance of the human infrastructure to
cyberinfrastructure, the arrangements of organizations and actors that must be
brought into alignment in order for work to be accomplished. Infrastructures are
complex systems that present challenges that cannot be addressed by either
technological or social development alone. A sociotechnical systems approach is
necessary to understand how to create long-term, sustainable
cyberinfrastructures in order to advance scientific knowledge and practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address these challenges by undertaking
a comparative ethnographic study of two large cyberinfrastructure building and
research and learning organizations. Each of these organizations hosts and
participates in multiple cyberinfrastructure projects of varying size and
complexity. Qualitative research methods will include participant-observation
and semi-structured interviews to understand how work practices change and
develop over time. The proposed research will: 1) describe how human and
technical resources are synergistically re-used across cyberinfrastructure
projects, groups, personal networks, and organizations; 2) describe how reuse is
encouraged or discouraged by particular social or technical arrangements; 3)
describe and analyze how these organizations manage their identities,
structures, and boundaries to support organizational learning and innovation;
and 4) develop new conceptual models that frame the relationships among
organizational-level structures, interpersonal networks, and the production of
cyberinfrastructure. Empirically this project will provide an understanding of
how cyberinfrastructure centers are approaching the challenges of designing for
the emergent, distributed, and long-term. Conceptually this project will develop
a framework for understanding: 1) the incremental alignment and realignment of
people, processes, and tools; and 2) how these alignments play out: within
cyberinfrastructure building organizations, between cyberinfrastructure building
organizations, and in collaborations between organizations (or organizational
sub-groups), specific projects and their domain communities. In regards to
broader impacts, by contributing to a more sophisticated understanding of
cyberinfrastructure development, this research will stimulate and support the
development of future cyberinfrastructure. Collaborations among institutions
conducting work on social aspects of cyberinfrastructure will be established to
more efficiently define common concerns. This project will provide opportunities
to train a new generation of interdisciplinary researchers by involving
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students. To make innovations more
broadly useful, findings will be presented at multi- and interdisciplinary
conferences and workshops and published in formats that will be useful to
policy-makers.