* 0838093
* Collaborative Research: Studies of the Structure of the Earth's Interior
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 70,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestiment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Abstract

During the last quarter of a century many 3-D models of the mantle, or its part,
have been derived. However, most of them describe only one parameter (for
example, S-velocity) and are based on a data set that is limited to a narrow
range of frequencies. This has limited the range of conclusions that could have
been drawn from these models. Here we request two-year support for investigation
of elastic and density structure of the Earth's interior using a wide variety of
seismic data, with resolution spanning depth range from the surface to the
Earth's center and frequencies from 1Hz to 0.3 MHz. In particular, we propose
to: start with Kustowski et al. (2008) data sets, programs, and models assemble
an additional data set of normal mode center frequencies assemble an additional
data set of normal mode splitting functions assemble an additional data set of
ISC travel times and other sets of travel time data, including a large set of
waveform derives travel times measured at Scripps Institution of Oceanography.
integrate the three new data sets with those used by Kustowski et al.(2008) to
invert for a 3-D mantle model that includes radically anisotropic elastic bulk
sound and shear velocities and the topographies of the 410 km, 650km and core-
mantle boundary.

The new database, covering a wide range of frequencies, will allow us to perform
joint inversion for elastic parameters and density, and investigate the
importance of large-scale isotropic and anisotropic variations within the
mantle. The simultaneous inversion will assure self-consistency. It will put
stronger constraint on density structure compared to mode-only inversion by
limiting leakage of power from elastic variations to density. The robustness of
the density heterogeneity will be established with this data set, and will
contribute to resolution of the controversy surrounding the elusive, and yet
important, density model. These new elastic and density models will play a major
role in addressing such questions as the dynamics of the mantle, its thermal and
chemical state, and distribution of partial melt.

Intellectual Merit. The proposed research will lead to a suite of models
describing the variations in elastic parameters (isotropic and anisotropic
seismic wave speed perturbations) and density within Earth's mantle. It will
address the controversy surrounding three-dimensional density model. The new
models will provide basis for testing relative importance of thermal and
chemical variations as well as partial melting and different scenarios for
mantle convection.

Broader Impacts. The new model will provide important information for
geodynamicists, geo-chemists, mineral physicists and, of course, seismologists.
Combination of the new models Provides essential constraint on the understanding
of the state of the mantle (i.e., heterogeneity in thermal and compositional
anomalies, and partial melt). They are also closely related to dynamics, and can
be used in studies such as those on mantle convection and large-scale gravity
modeling. This project will also be a part of a museum display on solid Earth
that is being planned for 2007-2009 at the Harvard Museum of Natural History.