* 0838650
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Dynamic Responses to Hurricane Warnings - Implications for Communication and Research
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Shuyi Chen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2013
* USD 369,856.00

Recent increases in losses of lives and property from hurricanes in the United
States have underscored the need to develop more effective ways to warn
residents of approaching storms. Though physical scientists have made great
advances in forecasting the movement and strength of storms, we know much less
about how residents utilize and interpret the range of forecasts products
provided to the public, and how these forecasts affect decisions to take
protective action. The goal of this research is to gain this knowledge using a
web-based computer simulation that allows residents to "live through" a
hypothetical storm event by watching hypothetical weather broadcasts, and
speaking with virtual friends and neighbors about the approaching
storm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new technique will allow the research team to
answer such basic questions as how residents make use of different media (such
as television, the web, and word-of-mouth) over time as a hurricane threat
evolves, and which media are most effective in triggering decisions to take
protective action. In addition, by varying the content of broadcasts and the
nature of the storm threat, the research will enable investigation of factors
that could potentially impair preparedness-such as repeated exposure to "false
alarms", or forecasts of storms that do not materialize. Armed with such
knowledge, the research will hopefully contribute to an understanding of the
best way to communicate warnings so as to maximize public preparedness.