* 0838231
* Collaborative Research:   Communication, Trust and Leadership in Virtual Organizations and Teams
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* M. Audrey Korsgaard, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 228,305.00

Collaboration and cooperation are essential to innovation and knowledge
creation, and virtual teams are a valuable tool for such collaborations.
Characteristic features of virtual teams, such as the dispersion and diversity
of team members and the reliance on information and communication technology
rather than direct interaction, are advantageous but also pose challenges. The
purpose of this project is to examine what enables teams to best meet these
challenges. We use the concept of trust as an organizing principle for
understanding how technostructural and social-psychological factors affect the
behavior in virtual teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The setting for this research
is a Massively Multiplayer Online Game (MMOG). Since skills required in such
games are similar to those required in work organizations, MMOGs are not only
useful for the study of virtual teams but is in itself a valuable education and
professional development tool. Travian Games, a designer of MMOGs, has provided
unique access to conduct experiments, collect behavioral data, and administer
surveys. The research team will pursue two empirical investigations: a series of
experiments and a large-scale correlational study involving multi-level,
longitudinal data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies should yield insight into
the development and role of social bonds in virtual teams and the interplay
between social dynamics and technostructural factors. Findings will inform
literatures on leadership and group dynamics, the management of virtual
organizations and information technology. Findings will also provide practical
insights into how to design virtual teams and organizations to better enable
collaboration and innovation. The methodology involving MMOGs is itself an
innovative contribution to both science and practice, as it demonstrates a new
platform for conducting social science research and provides insight into using
virtual games for leadership and team development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;