* 0838168
* Diffusive Isotopic Fractionation and the Structure of Silicate Liquids
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2011
* USD 180,465.00

This project is an investigation of the molecular structure of magma, also
referred to as "silicate liquid". Magma is produced by melting of rocks in the
Earth's interior, and also forms inside other planets. The objective of the
study is to use a new approach to determine whether silicate liquids are
chemically similar to organic polymers, or instead are more similar to liquid
metals. This information is needed to understand how volcanoes form and how
planets change over billions of years. The results also have applications in
ceramics and materials engineering, and will be a significant contribution to
both geology and high temperature materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach is to use diffusive isotopic fractionation of major chemical elements
(Ca, Mg, Fe, K) in silicate liquids to probe melt structure and the mechanisms
of diffusion. The thesis is that the degree of discrimination between isotopes
relates directly to the bonding of the elements to the alumino-silicate melt
structure, and that the fractionation behavior of the cations will vary with
liquid composition as melt structure changes. Previous work has demonstrated
that isotopic discrimination exists, and that it causes easily measurable
effects in diffusion experiments involving specific basalt and rhyolite
compositions. What has not been done is to systematically vary the liquid
compositions to elucidate the dependence of isotopic effects on composition, and
to evaluate diffusive coupling between components of the liquids. This can be
done both with natural liquid compositions, as well as on simpler systems where
it will be easier to relate the isotopic effects to specifics of the liquid
structure and thermodynamic properties. Diffusion-induced fractionation effects
need to be understood in order to interpret isotopic variations in magmatic
systems and to better understand the dynamic behavior of silicate liquids at the
molecular level. A second complementary aspect of the experimental approach will
be to use thermal diffusion effects to probe speciation in simple silicate
liquids, and to compare these results to models based on diffusion experiments.