* 0838854
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Study of Marine Ice Sheet Stability and Subglacial Life Habitats - Robotic Access to Grounding-zones for Exploration and Science (RAGES)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Robert Jacobel, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 08/31/2015
* USD 348,184.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The RAGES project (Robotic Access to Grounding zones for
Exploration and Science) is one of three research components of the WISSARD
(Whillans Ice Stream Subglacial Access Research Drilling) integrative initiative
that is being funded by the Antarctic Integrated System Science Program of NSF's
Office of Polar Programs, Antarctic Division. The overarching scientific
objective of WISSARD is to assess the role of water beneath a West Antarctic ice
stream in interlinked glaciological, geological, microbiological, geochemical,
and oceanographic systems. The RAGES component of WISSARD concentrates on the
stability of ice stream grounding zones (GZ), the area where the ice, ocean
waters and glacial and sea floor sediment interact. Based on our present limited
data and modeling efforts, GZs can be perturbed by (i) internal ice stream
dynamics, (ii) filling/draining cycles of subglacial lakes, (iii) increased
melting by warming ocean waters, and/or (iv) rates of subglacial sediment (till)
supply to the GZ. GZs are seen as high priority targets to investigate due to
their unknown contributions to ice sheet stability under future global warming
scenarios. The three main science goals for RAGES are to assess: (a) West
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) stability relative to the magnitudes of the four main
variables listed above; (b) the degree to which grounding-zone sedimentary
systems house important records of past WAIS dynamics; and (c) the importance of
microbial activity and subglacial geochemical weathering in supplying nutrients
to the WAIS grounding zone, the Ross Ice Shelf (RIS) cavity, and the highly
productive Southern Ocean that may ultimately influence global biogeochemical
cycles. The RAGES field sampling plan integrates surface geophysical surveys
with borehole and subglacial sampling and measurements. The boreholes provide:
(1) samples of subglacial water, sediments, and basal ice for biological,
geochemical, glaciological, sedimentological, and micropaleontological analyses;
(2) measures of subglacial and sub-ice-shelf cavity physical and chemical
conditions and their spatial variability; and (3) data on sediment types, state
and change of the subglacial water discharge, oceanography, and basal ice at the
grounding line and within the nearby sub-ice-shelf cavity. Unique tools to be
deployed include a multisensor Sub-Ice ROVer (Remotely Operated Vehicle) and
long-term, sub-ice oceanographic moorings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: The latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
recognized that the greatest uncertainties in assessing future global sea-level
change stem from a poor understanding of ice sheet dynamics and ice sheet
vulnerability to oceanic and atmospheric warming. Disintegration of the WAIS
(West Antarctic Ice Sheet) alone would contribute 3-5 m to global sea-level
rise, making WAIS a focus of scientific concern due to its potential
susceptibility to internal or ocean-driven instability. The overall WISSARD
project will test the overarching hypothesis that active water drainage connects
various subglacial environments and exerts major control on ice sheet flow,
geochemistry, metabolic and phylogenetic diversity, and biogeochemical
transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Societal Relevance:
Global warming, melting of ice sheets and consequential sea-level rise are of
high societal relevance. Science Resource Development: After a 9-year hiatus
WISSARD will provide the US-science community with a renewed capability to
access and study sub-ice sheet environments. Developing this technological
infrastructure will benefit the broader science community and assets will be
accessible for future use through the NSF-OPP drilling contractor. The RAGES
project represents a significant advance in polar technology by incorporating
the use of complex new instrumentation like the Sub-Ice ROVer and subglacial
ocean/lake mooring systems. Furthermore, these projects will pioneer an approach
implementing recommendations from the National Research Council committee on
Principles of Environmental Stewardship for the Exploration and Study of
Subglacial Environments (2007). Education and Outreach (E/O): These activities
are grouped into four categories: i) increasing student participation in polar
research by fully integrating them in our research programs; ii) introducing new
investigators to the polar sciences by incorporating promising young
investigators in our programs, iii) promotion of K-12 teaching and learning
programs by incorporating various teachers and NSTA programs, and iv) reaching a
larger public audience through such venues as popular science magazines, museum
based activities and videography and documentary films. In summary, WISSARD will
promote scientific exploration of Antarctica by conveying to the public the
excitement of accessing and studying what may be some of the last unexplored
aquatic environments on Earth, and which represent a potential analogue for
extraterrestrial life habitats on Europa and Mars.