* 0838016
* SGER:  Inelastic Electron Tunneling Spectroscopy and Nanogravimetry of New Transition Metal based Organometal DiHydrogen Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,02/29/2012
* Bellave Shivaram, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 02/29/2012
* USD 199,949.00

This SGER award to University of Virginia from the Solid State Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research is to carry out
gravimetric and spectroscopic investigations on new solid state thin films of
dihydrogen complexes based on transition metal organometallics. These
organometallic complexes will be synthesized by pulsed laser ablation under
conditions tailored to appropriately match the vaporized metal with carbon atoms
present in the gas plasma. Using both nanogravimetric and in-situ Inelastic
Electron Tunneling Spectroscopic measurements, the project will study these
dihydrogen complexes for the following: a) the attachment of hydrogen molecules
in the organometallic complexes and their binding strength; b) the effect of
transition metal atoms clusters on hydrogen uptake; and c) the conditions for
optimum rate and degree of hydrogen release from the complexes. Other transition
metal complexes synthesized with other carbon sources from alkane and cyclic
groups will also be studied to elucidate the mechanism for the dihydrogen
complex formation. The outcome from the proposed research is expected to have a
direct impact on future hydrogen storage technologies. Results from the studies
will be disseminated through publications, talks and presentations with the
involvement of graduate students and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular hydrogen binding mechanism on transition metal
organometallic complexes will be studied by this project. This hydrogen binding
appear to be neither ?physical? nor ?chemical? but of an intermediate type. The
stronger than ?physical? binding means that large numbers of hydrogen molecules
can be adsorbed without cooling to cryogenic temperatures and weaker than
?chemical? binding means that the hydrogen can be desorbed at convenient not too
high temperatures. The strength of this intermediate type of binding is expected
to strongly influence the vibration frequencies of the hydrogen molecule
adsorbed on to organometallic complexes. The project will carry out gravimetric
and spectroscopic studies using an electronic method that could determine the
amount of hydrogen absorbed and its binding affinities. The proposed
experimental studies will be correlated with available theoretical predictions
based on accurate quantum mechanical calculations. The outcome from the proposed
research is expected to have a direct impact on future hydrogen storage
technologies. Plans are in place to integrate the proposed research into a
chapter on ?Nanomaterials for Energy? that will form part of a new course called
?Introduction to Nanophysics? that was started recently at University of
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;