* 0838239
* Investigating Pesticide Contamination in Small Lakes in Khorezm, Uzbekistan
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Eric Marchand, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2014
* USD 139,995.00

Investigating Pesticide Contamination in Small Lakes in Khorezm, Uzbekistan PI:
Laurel Saito, University of Nevada Reno Co-PI: Eric Marchand, University of
Nevada Reno Diversion of Amu Darya River water to feed irrigation canals has
resulted in greatly diminished flows as the river approaches the Aral Sea. One
of the most poorly supplied provinces in Uzbekistan in terms of drinking water
is Khorezm, which is also one of the most agriculturally productive regions of
Uzbekistan. A potential water resource in the Khorezm province that remains
largely unstudied is a series of lakes that receive agricultural runoff in
natural depressions in the landscape. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) has funded a project with an overall study objective of enhancing
knowledge about the potential utility (or detriment) of irrigation lakes in the
Khorezm region, and the impacts of anthropogenic activities on the
sustainability of the aquatic ecosystems of these lakes under its Science for
Peace program. Results of organic contaminant sampling from that study indicate
very low concentrations of organochlorine pesticides despite a history of heavy
pesticide usage prior to 1991. We will perform lake coring and microbial
experiments to address hypotheses regarding processes of pesticide degradation
in the lakes, and the ecological sustainability of the lakes. Furthermore, the
NATO project funding does not include coverage of salaries or stipends for
participants based in NATO countries (the United States in this case). Thus,
this project supports a U.S.-based graduate student and a part-time statistical
technician to collaborate with young Uzbek scientists working on the NATO
project. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes the new
scientific knowledge gained by understanding the fate of organic chemicals in
these previously-unstudied small lakes impacted by irrigation runoff, which
could lead to implications for lakes in other parts of the world. Although the
project is focused on a small number of the lakes in Khorezm, the study has
implications for similar lakes in areas of heavy agricultural use. Past and
present use of pesticides can result in detrimental impacts on aquatic ecosystem
sustainability, but these lakes may provide an example of lakes that have passed
a threshold so they can once again become productive ecosystems both
ecologically and economically. This could provide guidance for similar lakes in
other parts of the world. Because these are shallow lakes that have variable
sediment compositions, and there are limited coring resources in this remote
environment, we will develop low-cost effective methods for recovering lake
cores that will be useful for others who wish to do lake coring in shallow lakes
in developing countries. Additional broader impacts include the excellent and
unique opportunity provided by the project to train students for international
collaboration and research. The NATO project already involves excellent, bright
young scientists in Uzbekistan, and the inclusion of a young counterpart in the
United States will enable the interaction of a new generation of young
scientists. Thus, this research will enhance international linkages between
Uzbekistan and the United States for water resources and ecosystem management.