* 0838514
* Collaborative Research: Testing Burial/Exhumation Models for the Evolution of a (U)HP Terrane in an Orogenic Upper Plate, Liverpool Land, East Greenland
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Hannes Brueckner, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 112,149.00

A fundamental difficulty faced by geologists studying the evolution of large
mountain ranges is the inability to directly observe the types of rock and
deformation patterns that are found at deep crustal levels beneath active
mountains. One way to overcome this difficulty is to study ancient mountain
ranges that have since been inverted or eroded, and currently expose the deepest
structural levels of a mountain range at the surface. The rocks of Liverpool
Land (LL), East Greenland, expose the roots to the Caledonides, a mountain range
that spanned the length of Greenland, and formed as Scandinavia collided with
North America in the time span from about 440 to 360 million years ago. This
collaborative effort between faculty and graduate and undergraduate students at
Queens College and Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, with assistance from Norwegian
geologists, will determine the origin and subsequent deformation history of
rocks from the roots of the Caledonides, to better understand the processes of
mountain building during continental collision. The results of this project will
be of particular interest to researchers studying deformation in actively
deforming mountain belts like the Himalaya.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field and
laboratory analysis of high pressure and ultra-high-pressure (UHP) gneisses from
Liverpool Land will be used to test models for the subduction and exhumation of
UHP terranes in the overriding plates of collisional orogens. Liverpool Land has
been correlated with Laurentia, implying it was situated in the upper plate
during the Caledonian Orogeny as Baltica subducted beneath. Previous work by
these investigators in LL has identified eclogites and mantle-derived garnet
peridotites possibly correlated with Baltica in addition to a
tectonostratigraphic suture between a younger UHP terrane and an older mid-
crustal gneiss terrane. These discoveries challenge generally accepted models
for the formation of UHP terranes where continental lithosphere is pulled to
mantle depths by negatively buoyant oceanic lithosphere, as well as models for
their exhumation in the footwalls of lithospheric-scale normal faults. We
propose a structural, geochemical, and geo-thermo-chronologic study of the LL
gneiss complexes to 1) define the tectonic setting and metasomatic history of
the mantle wedge incorporated into the LL terrane, 2) determine Laurentian
versus Baltic provenance of the LL gneiss complexes, and 3) characterize the
kinematics and timing of tectonostratigraphic sutures responsible for exhumation
in LL. The proposed work promises to shed light on geodynamic processes
including the possibility of multiple UHP events during the closure of ocean
basins, crust-mantle interaction and exchange during orogeny, and lower to
midcrustal melting.