* 0838193
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The intersection of vegetation organization and watershed topology: Ecohydrologic imprints in runoff generation and stream discharge
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ryan Emanuel, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 145,935.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The intersection of vegetation organization and
watershed topology: Ecohydrologic imprints in runoff generation and stream
discharge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ryan E. Emanuel, Appalachian State
University&lt;br/&gt;Brian L. McGlynn, Montana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vegetation plays a key, though complex role in the
water balances of terrestrial landscapes. One aspect contributing to this
complexity is the spatial heterogeneity of vegetation. In particular, the
effects of the spatial distribution of vegetation on runoff processes at
hillslope and watershed scales remain poorly understood, due in large part to
the variety of spatial relationships between landforms and vegetation within and
among terrestrial landscapes combined with spatially and temporally variable
evaporation and transpiration. This research project will develop a conceptual
framework that considers vegetation as a temporally dynamic and spatially
heterogeneous control on runoff generation and stream discharge within hillslope
and watershed networks. The framework will be tested using a combination of
intensive field-based measurements, airborne light detection and ranging (LIDAR)
measurements, and numerical simulations of coupled hydrological and
ecophysiological processes. Small (approximately 500 ha) watersheds in the
northern Rocky Mountains of Montana and the southern Appalachian Mountains of
North Carolina will serve as field sites instrumented with stream gages,
piezometers, and weather stations to detect shallow groundwater and stream
discharge responses to vegetation activity (i.e. transpiration in response to
meteorological conditions) and vegetation heterogeneity (i.e. different
vegetation distributions and characteristics among hillslopes and watersheds).
LIDAR will be used to assess the distribution of vegetation within hillslopes
and watershed networks, providing empirical evidence for the sensitivity of
hydrological processes to the spatial arrangement of vegetation at these scales.
Numerical modeling will provide understanding of the roles of biological and
physical processes, within the constraints of the algorithms coded into the
model, in the observed hydrological responses, both within and among watersheds.
By comparing hillslopes and watersheds from two different biogeographical and
climatological regions, this project will result in a more generalized
understanding of how vegetation affects hydrological processes at these scales,
addressing an area of critical research need at the interdisciplinary interface
of watershed hydrology and vegetation ecophysiology. Broader impacts of this
project include promoting research in a predominantly undergraduate institution,
training future scientists, strengthening collaborations between research
intensive and predominantly undergraduate institutions, advancing research for
an early-career scientist and diversifying participation in the earth sciences.
During the course of this project, the PIs will also develop and teach a
collaborative, field-based course for students from both Appalachian State
University (ASU) and Montana State University (MSU). Additionally, the research
project will increase participation of underrepresented populations in the
sciences. Both PIs are directly involved in programs to provide research
opportunities and mentoring to underrepresented populations, including the
American Indian Research Opportunities program at MSU and the Faculty Fellows
program at ASU. The project will directly involve two faculty members, one Ph.D.
student, two undergraduate researchers, and approximately twenty course
enrollees from both institutions.&lt;br/&gt;