* 0838866
* WAPflux - New Tools to Study the Fate of Phytoplankton Production in the West Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* James Valdes, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2011
* USD 605,008.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using a tool-box of particle flux
and characterization techniques appropriate to the study of particulate organic
carbon fluxes out of the upper sunlit zone, WHOI researchers will attempt to
evaluate the so called 'biological pump' term at the Palmer Long Term Ecological
Research (PAL) site in the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP). The goal of these
measurements is to describe the seasonal dynamics of production, export
(sinking) and at-depth remineralization rates of organic matter produced in the
Antarctic photic zone. This should lead to a better understanding of the
biogeochemical controls on the carbon cycle in this difficult to access region.
Additionally, how much of the newly fixed organic carbon is exported off the
shelf, effectively driving an influx of atmospheric (including anthropogenic)
CO2 to be sequestered into the deep ocean is not presently known. Comparison of
prior time series sediment traps in the WAP seem to indicate smaller sinking C
fluxes than other, as equally as productive Antarctic coastal regions, e.g. the
Ross Sea. New observations and modeling activities will attempt to explain this
discrepancy, and to account for the apparently inefficient particle export.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."