* 0838196
* Forecasting Critical Weather Events:  Determining Worst Case Scenarios and Associated Probabilities
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* John Henderson, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2012
* USD 416,251.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Severe thunderstorms and associated
local extreme weather events (e.g., tornadoes, floods and lightning)
significantly threaten life and property but remain difficult to forecast with
precision. If sufficiently reliable, detailed forecasts and advance warnings of
these threats could trigger defensive actions and mitigate resultant losses.
However, at lead times sufficient to allow adequate preparations by those in the
path of an intense developing storm (or more particularly, a storm that has yet
to develop), deterministic forecasts currently in broad use are generally not
accurate enough to provide useful guidance, and may even miss critical events
altogether. By contrast, probabilistic approaches that rely upon ensembles of
multiple computer-based forecast model runs, offer a promising alternative, but
such output must be properly interpreted to have optimal
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigative team will develop methods to
optimize probabilistic forecasts by identifying the smallest required changes of
initial atmospheric conditions (which are in-turn used to set computer-based
weather simulations into motion) that consequently lead to the most extreme
-simulated severe weather outcomes. Solving this problem also provides a measure
of the probability of a given severe weather event. Forecasts so derived are
termed "exigent" because of the tandem need for extreme precision in their
formulation and urgent lead-time requirements to allow lifesaving societal
responses. This solution will be pursued through application of modified forms
of a technique termed four-dimensional variational data assimilation (4d-VAR)
techniques, which make optimal use of observations collected in the environment
encompassing developing storms, as developed in conjunction with the Weather
Research and Forecasting Model (WRF). The short-term technical objective of this
study is to demonstrate successful exigent forecasting of severe thunderstorm
precursors and thereby characterize the probability of worst-case scenarios on a
location- and time-specific basis. Investigators will apply these techniques to
identify conditions that maximize the potential for tornadogenesis and delineate
these probabilities as a function of time and place via evolving county-scale
maps of a maximum significant tornado parameter (STP). The STP has been
subjectively shown to discriminate convective events that involve discrete
supercells and produce disproportionally large, damaging
tornadoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this approach is
embodied by a new approach to refinement of ensemble forecasting techniques that
could overcome limitations of current deterministic forecast methods, one which
might have applications as diverse as improved forecasts for landfalling
tropical cyclones and wintertime cold-air outbreaks impacting citrus crops.
Broader impacts could ultimately include reduced loss of life and property, and
will more immediately support training of graduate and undergraduate students
assisting with this research.