* 0838495
* Spatio-temporal variations of seismicity and coupling in the Himalaya
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Jean-Philippe Avouac, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2012
* USD 321,923.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geodetic deformation across the
Himalaya reflects primarily locking of the Main Himalayan Thrust (MHT) fault
from the surface to a depth of about 15-20km. Local seismic monitoring has
revealed clustered seismicity that is probably driven by stress accumulation
near the downdip edge of the locked fault zone. The pattern of geodetic strain
and the distribution of seismicity show however lateral variations which could
reveal heterogeneous stress build up on the Also both geodetic strain and
seismicity show strong seasonal variations. These may be induced by landwater
storage variations, mostly in the Gangetic plain, but other causes may also be
advocated. We therefore offer to analyze the spatial pattern and temporal
evolution of geodetic strain and seismicity in the Nepal Himalaya using data
from Continuous GPS (CGPS) from Nepal and southern Tibet, and seismicity
recorded by the National Seismic Network of Nepal. The main objectives of this
project are to&lt;br/&gt;(1) determine the pattern of locking on the Main
Himalayan Thrust (MHT),&lt;br/&gt;(2) assess the relationship between
interseismic strain build up and seismicity,&lt;br/&gt;(3) determine the cause
of temporal changes of strain,&lt;br/&gt;(4) analyze the relationship between
seismicity and strain rates and derive implications for earthquake
nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;The project will help constrain the spatio-temporal
pattern of stress build up that is preparing future earthquakes in the Nepal
Himalaya. It will advance our understanding of the physical parameters that
determine whether a fault creeps steadily or has a stick-slip motion producing
repeating seismic slip events. It will also advance our understanding of
earthquake nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute
important information regarding seismic hazard in Nepal and northern India.
Indeed, the frequency of large earthquakes in the Himalaya depends critically on
the rate at which deficit of slip accumulates in the interseismic period. Also
the spatial pattern of deficit of slip is probably heterogeneous and might
influence large earthquake ruptures as has been inferred for a number of
subduction zones.This project will address most challenging questions in
seismotectonics: why does a particular fault portion creeps or produces
earthquakes? How does seismicity rate relates to interseismic strain buildup and
to other sources of stress fluctuations (earth tides, snow loading, landwater
storage.) Finally, the project will foster international scientific
collaboration and will constitute the core of a PhD research project.