* 0838509
* Collaborative Research:  High-resolution receiver function imaging of crustal structure in the Southern Great Basin, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Anne Sheehan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2012
* USD 75,564.00

The western United States is continuously being deformed by plate
tectonic&lt;br/&gt;forces. In this study area centered on the southern half of
Nevada, the&lt;br/&gt;characteristic alternating ranges and valleys of Nevada
were formed in&lt;br/&gt;the past by stretching of the Earth's crust, and more
recently, the&lt;br/&gt;northwestward motion of the western US coastal regions
relative to the&lt;br/&gt;core of the continent. Northwestward plate motion
responsible for the San&lt;br/&gt;Andreas Fault is partly also accommodated by a
fault system in the&lt;br/&gt;California/Nevada border area. At 15 to 30 km
depth, lower crustal&lt;br/&gt;rocks are under high enough temperature and
pressure to deform without&lt;br/&gt;brittle failure. How faulting and surface
motions relate to lower crustal&lt;br/&gt;deformation is largely unknown. Our
study will use seismic recordings from the University of Nevada, Reno Southern
Great Basin Digital Seismic Network to study this process. This network detects
signals from worldwide earthquakes after they are modified by the structure of
the crust&lt;br/&gt;under the study area. By looking at the differences
between&lt;br/&gt;earthquake signals arriving from different directions, the
researchers can find signs of the deformation processes occuring in the lower
crust. There are&lt;br/&gt;several ways in which the lower crust could behave
during stretching and&lt;br/&gt;shearing of the crust. mong methods to estimate
Moho depth and to detect&lt;br/&gt;and measure crustal anisotropy, receiver
functions offer one of the best&lt;br/&gt;options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
data set collected by the University of Nevada, Reno's&lt;br/&gt;short-period,
dense, long-running Southern Great Basin Digital Seismic&lt;br/&gt;Network, they
performed a pilot study showing that high-quality receiver functions can be
obtained from the data. The receiver functions show arrivals from the Moho as
well as from crustal structure, and indicate the presence of anisotropy,
scattering, and 3-dimensional structure. The project plan is to apply
multichannel stacking techniques, including ones specific to anisotropy
detection, a new bootstrap windowing technique for receiver function
calculation, and numerical forward modeling in order to distinguish scattering
from anisotropic conversions and to detect crustal structures associated with
tectonic processes. Receiver functions will be calibrated against permanent and
temporary broadband stations in the area, including a handful of broadband
stations colocated with the short-period sensors in the same network. Crustal
structure and anisotropy findings will be interpreted in the context of the
tectonic history and development of southwest Nevada and eastern California in
particular, and lower crustal deformation in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distinguishing which processes are operating in
this&lt;br/&gt;study area may help other geoscientists who look at deforming
continental&lt;br/&gt;crust understand similar activity in their field areas.
Understanding&lt;br/&gt;crustal deformation, including what happens in the lower
crust, is&lt;br/&gt;foundational for studies of faulting and earthquakes in the
US and&lt;br/&gt;elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;