* 0838328
* Collaborative Research: Assessment of Sulfur Recycling in Arc Magmatism through Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry Study of Sulfur Isotopes in Experimental and Natural Mafic Glasses
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Katherine Kelley, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2014
* USD 87,568.00

Intellectual merit. This proposal requests funding for acollaborative
experimental and analytical study of global recycling of sulfur based on the
isotopic fractionation between S-bearing gases, silicate melt, and condensed S
phases (sulfate and sulfide). Scientists from three institutions are involved
(American Museum of Natural History (C. Mandeville, lead PI), Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (N. Shimizu, PI), and University of Rhode Island (K.
Kelley, PI). The proposed research comprises two separate aspects. First,
laboratory experiments will be carried out to determine mechanisms and
magnitudes of S isotopic fractionations between coexisting phases as a function
of pressure, temperature, chemical composition of silicate melt, fugacity of
oxygen, and speciation of S in silicate melt and gas phase. S isotopic analysis
will be made using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) techniques with the
IMS 1280 ion microprobe at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. This new SIMS
technique for sulfur isotopic measurements can now be applied to silicate
glasses at the melt inclusion (10's of microns) scale thus allowing analysis of
sulfur isotopes in trapped magma inclusions, evaluation of volcanic degassing,
and assessment of the ultimate source of sulfur in arc magmas. In a second
phase, S isotopic compositions will be determined for natural primitive magmas
trapped as glass inclusions hosted by olivine, orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene;
complementary volatile, lithophile and high field strength trace element
abundances will be determined on the same glasses via laser ablation ICP-MS
analysis at Rhode Island. This will be carried out for samples from Galunggung
(Indonesia), Etna (Italy), and Augustine (Alaska), volcanoes so as to
investigate S isotopic compositions of source mantle, effects of water and
oxygen fugacity on S isotopic fractionation between silicate melt and S-bearing
phases, and effects of degassing processes on S isotopic composition of silicate
melts. Together, these research paths are expected to establish routine
measurement of S isotope geochemistry as a powerful tracer for chemical fluxes
across subduction zones and for assessment of sulfur recycling among Earth's
major reservoirs (mantle, lithosphere (including crust), and coupled
hydrosphere-atmosphere). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Understanding of
volatile degassing is central to monitoring and forecasting volcanic eruptions.
Also. improved understanding of sulfur isotope geochemistry is vital to volcanic
hazard mitigation. The PIs will incorporate the scientific results into
educational and outreach programs at their respective institutions. PI Kelley is
an early-career female scientist, supported by the University of Rhode Island's
NSF-funded ADVANCE program, which is aimed at nurturing the careers of female
scientists. She will advise a Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship in
Oceanography (SURFO) student (Univ. of Rhode Island, Graduate School of
Oceanography's NSF-funded REU program) under the umbrella of this project. PI
Mandeville will advise two American Museum of Natural History REU students in
years 2 and 3 of this project. The PI will participate as a lecturer in the
Training Renewal for Urban Science Teaching (TRUST) program at AMNH which
provides professional development opportunities for greater New York City high
school Earth science teachers. A TRUST session will be administered by AMNH in
each year of the project.