* 0838697
* EMSW21-RTG in Algebra and related fields at UCLA: innovations in a successful program
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Paul Balmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2014
* USD 2,469,746.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This RTG will support and train, for research and educational careers, 20-25
highly gifted PhD students, and at least 4 talented post-docs. Additionally, in
an expanded vision of UCLA's successful summer Boot Camp for incoming grads, it
will engage up to 60 top undergraduates over 5 summers in grad school
preparatory activities and in research in mathematics (REU). Transferring to
Algebra a model used successfully by UCLA Analysis group, four intense week-long
Summer Research Retreats, run by faculty highly active in training and research,
will engage chosen research-ready grad students in key areas of current
research. The horizon-expanding VIGRE II Summer Research Internship Program,
which provides students with an intensely mentored applied research experience
in area related to their interest, will be expanded to include more applications
of algebra and number theory, e.g. from cryptography to coding theory, to areas
of physics where algebra and number theory play emerging roles. Three focused
Instructional Workshops serving 35-50 grads and post-docs each will expose
students to key areas of current research, such as p-adic modular forms,
motives, and current research in combinatorics. The RTG plan emphasizes the
training of teachers and mentors, as well as researchers. Hence, post-docs will
play key roles in the activities above.

This RTG will enable UCLA Algebra to continue its positive faculty-student
synergy. UCLA has been greatly fortunate to make a large number of wonderful
hires in the last few years. Our ability to continue to attract students and
post-docs with sufficient talent to become real mathematicians is very important
to faculty satisfaction with UCLA as a work environment. The Boot Camp/REU for
undergraduates should significantly improve the strength and graduate prospects
for its participants. Since it will be open to talented students from local
institutions, such as the California State University campuses, and the
Claremont Colleges (e.g. Harvey Mudd College), the program may help serve a
regional/state need as well as help us to find suitable diversity candidates for
graduate school. Related undergraduate programs which will involve RTG personnel
will enhance recruitment and retention of students to mathematics. The Research
Internship program will enable UCLA to serve the national interest by continuing
a pipeline from number theory to cryptography. At the national level, the RTG
will serve the key EMSW21 goal of enhancing the workforce for research and
teaching, in both pure and applied areas, and in industry (as with
cryptography). With so many talented young faculty in algebra, number theory and
combinatorics, UCLA can produce at least 8 to 10 PhD?s per year in the areas of
this grant. Finally, this RTG and the other efforts of the UCLA program,
especially those inspired by EMSW21, emphasize strongly teamwork in training and
research, in a way that could become, or provide elements to, a national model
for graduate training.