* 0838375
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Chronology of Deformation and Earthquakes at La Rinconada, Argentina: Testing Segmentation and Recurrence Patterns of Blind Thrust Regimes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Thomas Rockwell, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2010
* USD 35,658.00

Understanding the earthquake potential of blind thrust faults (faults that do
not reach the Earth?s surface) has major seismic hazard implications for heavily
populated areas such as Los Angeles and Seattle in the United States as well as
other population centers within seismically active regions around the World. Key
questions regarding the long-term behavior of destructive earthquake faults
include what are the size and frequency of earthquakes and how do those vary in
time and space. Better knowledge of the timing and sizes of past earthquakes is
essential information used to forecast future events, to characterize local and
regional seismic hazards, and to inform the public and emergency planners.
Heavily populated areas, however, are difficult to study because concrete,
buildings, and development obscure the expression of active faults. In this
study, an active fault system near San Juan Argentina, which bears structural
similarities to blind faults within metropolitan regions in the United States,
but has the advantage that the area is largely undisturbed, is being
investigated to better understand the surficial expression and earthquake
history of several active blind thrust faults. This project is focused on dating
of a large suite of samples collected from river terraces and alluvium deformed
and faulted by the earthquake faults. From these new data, the timing of the
past five large earthquakes on the blind fault system will be established. The
new age data will allow comparison with the earthquake history of nearby fault
systems documented in earlier work, faults that were responsible for damaging
earthquakes in 1944 and 1977 in the region. This project will test whether
earthquake frequency on individual faults is quasi-periodic (and therefore
predictable), whether these fault systems produce earthquakes that cluster in
time, and test whether some past earthquake may have ruptured a larger source
region or have been confined to the same source dimensions as the historical
events. Like the results from an earlier phase of this project, the Argentinean
collaborators and others will use the new results from this project to constrain
seismic hazard, inform earthquake engineers, and educate the public about
earthquake hazards.