* 0838729
* Collaborative Research: Erosion History and Sediment Provenance of East Antarctica from Multi-method Detrital Geo- and Thermochronology
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Sidney Hemming, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2011
* USD 69,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Much of the inventory of East Antarctic bedrock
geochronology, as well as a record of its erosional history, is preserved in
Cenozoic sediments around its margin. This project is to use these sediments to
understand their sub-ice provenance and the erosional history of the shield by
measuring ages of multiple geo- and thermochronometers on single detrital
crystals and on multiple crystals in detrital clasts (U/Pb, fission-track, and
(U-Th)/He dating of zircon and apatite, and 40Ar/39Ar dating of hornblende,
mica, and feldspar). The combination of multi-chronometer ages in single grains
and clasts provides a powerful fingerprint of bedrock sources, allowing us to
trace provenance in Eocene fluvial sandstones through Quaternary diamicts around
the margin. Multiple thermochronometric (cooling) ages in the same grains and
clasts also allows us to interpret the timing and rates of erosion from these
bedrock sources. Delineating a distribution of bedrock age units, their sediment
transport connections, and their erosional histories over the Cenozoic, will in
turn allow us to test tectonic models bearing on: (1) the origin of the
Gamburtsev Subglacial Mountains, (2) fluvial and topographic evolution, and (3)
the history of glacial growth and erosion.&lt;br/&gt;