* 0838212
* EMSW21-RTG: Research Training Group on Inverse Problems and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Tatiana Toro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2014
* USD 2,070,940.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RTG grant at the University of
Washington (UW) supports an array of activities that will enhance the education
and training of undergraduate students, graduate students, and early career
postdoctoral researchers in the field of inverse problems and partial
differential equations (IPDE). A highlight of the project is a summer school for
advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate students. The school will consist
of two three-week courses that introduce students to current research techniques
in IPDE. Topics will include both theoretical models and numerical tools. These
courses will be supplemented by week-long guest lecturers, who will give talks
that complement the main topics. The summer school will be coordinated with the
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at UW that is run by co-PI
James Morrow. The budget includes funding for three UW students to attend the
REU program, and for a teaching assistant to offset the increased workload. The
IPDE group will additionally institute a Visiting Academic and Industrial
Internship Program for its graduate students. Advanced graduate students will be
offered the opportunity to work with senior researchers at institutions in the
US and abroad. Past IPDE students have profited from such visits to other
universities, as well as to research laboratories at Chevron and Lawrence
Livermore. RTG funding will allow the IPDE group to systematize this practice
and make it available to all IPDE students. A significant portion of the grant
is to provide for the support of graduate students and postdoctoral assistants.
Funding is included for a total of eight years of postdoctoral fellows at 50%
support and for an average of seven graduate students in graduate traineeships
each year of the grant. Graduate students will be supported for two quarters of
the academic year, as well as for the summer quarter. Postdoctoral fellows will
receive their remaining salary through teaching a 50% normal load. Travel funds
are included for both graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Undergraduate
stipends are also provided to fund undergraduate research projects and
internships in local laboratories. The IPDE seminar series will be enhanced
through a preseminar series of lectures, and funding is provided for extended
visits to the department by seminar
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IPDE is an active field that
encompasses research in seismic exploration, medical imaging, and models arising
in physical theories. The RTG grant provides significant support for graduate
education in this area during a period of reduced local funding for teaching
assistant positions. The average of fourteen quarters per year of graduate
traineeship support in the budget will allow the department to sustain a vital
graduate student population, and provide US citizen and permanent resident IPDE
students with release time from teaching duties to devote to research. These
graduate students will receive funding under the budgeted Academic and
Industrial Internship Program for extended visits to other universities and
research laboratories. They will establish contacts with potential employers and
build relations with additional academic mentors. These contacts will be created
at stages in their careers before they have the responsibilities of academic
positions and will assist them throughout their early careers. The funding for
postdoctoral associate positions will allow IPDE members to leverage department
and college funds to form a viable group of postdoctoral researchers. The 50%
teaching load will provide additional time for postdoctoral associates to devote
to research; travel funds will allow for visits to other institutions. The
summer school will attract advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate
students from across the country and introduce them to current research topics
in the field of IPDE. The department will be able to identify potential students
to recruit to its graduate program, and the graduate support funds will allow us
to attract top candidates. Support for the REU program will sponsor the
participation of three students each year from UW. This program attracts
applications nationwide, and there are many more qualified applicants than can
be currently funded. A number of strong applicants come through the honors
undergraduate courses at UW and will be recruited for the REU program. Funding
for an additional TA position to assist with running the REU will benefit all
participants and provide an advanced undergraduate or graduate student with
support during the summer. The collective activities of the RTG grant will
strengthen the IPDE program at UW at all career levels, and introduce students
nationwide to this important area of research.