* 0838817
* Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory III (MEVO III): Conduit Processes and Surveillance
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Clive Oppenheimer, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 07/31/2013
* USD 499,991.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Mount Erebus is Antarctica?s most active volcano that has
been in a persistent state of activity for at least the last 35 years. It has a
unique geochemistry among the Earth's active volcanoes and is also unique in
hosting a persistent convecting lake(s) of anorthclase phonolite magma in its
summit crater. The relative simplicity of the magmatic system, consistency of
activity, and accessibility of close-range observation make Erebus attractive as
a target for extensive studies. Although the Erebus' seismicity and eruptive
activity and processes are becoming increasingly well understood over years of
research, there is a near total lack of understanding its deeper magmatic
system. The primary goal of this proposal is to continue supporting the Mt.
Erebus Volcano Observatory (MEVO III) improving our current understanding of the
Erebus eruptive and non-eruptive magmatic system using an integrated approach
from geophysical, geochemical and remote sensing observations. This goal can be
grouped into the following fundamental research objectives: (a) to sustain year-
round surveillance of on-going volcanic activity primarily using geophysical
observatories; (b) to understand processes within the convecting conduit which
feeds the persistent lava lakes; and (c) to understand the impact of Erebus
eruptive activity upon the Antarctic environment. Continued reliance on students
provides a broader impact to this proposed research and firmly grounds this
effort in its educational mission.