* 0838137
* An Investigation of Elementary Teachers' Learning, Understanding and Use of Research-based Knowledge about Students' Mathematical Thinking
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Michael Battista, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2012
* USD 826,226.00

This is a Full Scale Research TPC Project that is using classroom and individual
teaching experiments, along with numerous and extensive interviews, to
investigate how pre- and in-service elementary school teachers construct meaning
and pedagogical relevance for research on students' mathematical thinking
before, during and after instruction that presents teacher-friendly syntheses of
that research. The project is investigating: (a) the nature of teachers'
understandings of students' mathematical thinking before and after instruction
on that thinking, (b) the processes by which teachers learn about students'
mathematical thinking while participating in instruction, (c) factors affecting
teachers' learning of this material and (d) effects of learning this material on
teachers' conceptualizations of mathematics learning, teaching and assessment
(including annual state mathematics assessments).

Such research is crucial for designing, implementing and assessing mathematics
education programs throughout the teacher professional continuum. It is helping
educate teachers to deal with two major forces: teaching mathematics in ways
that produce deep conceptual understanding and achieving success in annual state
mathematics assessments. Project results are being disseminated through two
other grant projects, a "Teachers for a New Era" project and a "PROM/SE NSF MSP"
project.