* 0838320
* Discover Corps Fellowship:  Nanomaterials: Bridging the Achievement Gap
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2007,10/31/2009
* Christina Bauer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 10/31/2009
* USD 172,425.00

Christina Bauer of the Georgia Institute of Technology is a Discovery Corps
Postdoctoral Fellow for 2007-2009. The research is targeted at the preparation
and study of silica encapsulated metal nanoparticle clusters with well-
characterized structures. Bauer also will investigate the fluorescence
properties of dyes bound to these composites. This work could contribute towards
understanding the parameters important for achieving metal-enhanced fluorescence
and lead to the development of highly fluorescent nanoprobes for use in
biological labeling and sensing. The service component of this DCF project is
aimed at the education and mentoring of undergraduates from underrepresented
groups. The goal of the work is to prepare and encourage these students for
advanced education and careers in chemistry, particularly in the nanomaterials
field. Bauer will give demonstrations and lectures at community colleges and
HBCUs in the Atlanta area, including Georgia Perimeter College and Clayton State
University, where she will also advise students in planning their scientific
careers. Bauer also will supervise students from these institutions in
undergraduate research at Georgia Tech and facilitate their recruitment into
summer internships at Sandia National Laboratories to work on collaborative
projects.

This Discovery Corps Fellowship is supported by the Division of Chemistry and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. The Discovery Corps Fellowship
Program seeks new postdoctoral and professional development models that combine
research expertise with professional service. Discovery Corps Fellows leverage
their research expertise through projects that address areas of national need.
Their projects enhance research capacity and infrastructure and contribute to
workforce development and job creation. The Discovery Corps Program supports
both Postdoctoral Fellows and Senior Fellows.