* 0838141
* Experimental Investigations of Chemical Interaction at the Core-Mantle Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* James Van Orman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2012
* USD 270,980.00

A fundamental event in Earth's history was its early differentiation into a
silicate mantle and dense metallic core. Whether there has been significant
chemical exchange between the core and mantle subsequently is a long-standing
question that has broad implications for geochemistry and geophysics. It is
possible that complex seismic structures observed at the base of the mantle, and
possibly also near the top of the core, relate to chemical reactions at the
core-mantle boundary. Geochemical signatures observed in ocean island basalts,
based primarily on osmium isotopes, also have been interpreted to reflect
material contributions from the outer core. This study will address the
importance of chemical exchange between the core and mantle through two
different lines of experimental investigation, one aimed toward resolving
whether the outer core is a plausible source of the radiogenic osmium isotope
signature in ocean island basalts, and the other at constraining the kinetics of
chemical exchange across the core-mantle boundary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis that the outer core is a source of radiogenic osmium is based on the
idea that Pt/Os and Re/Os ratios in the outer core are raised significantly by
crystallization of the inner core. The proposed study will expand on previous
experimental work that has cast doubt on this notion, because the differences in
solid-metal/liquid-metal partition coefficients among Os, Re and Pt are too
small and decrease with pressure. The new study will investigate partitioning of
these elements in the Fe-FeO and Ni-NiO systems at high pressures, to determine
whether oxygen-bearing systems may be capable of producing the appropriate
partition coefficients. Experimental studies of reactions at the core-mantle
boundary have focused primarily on equilibrium phase relations and element
partitioning. The kinetics of the reactions are equally important for evaluating
their relevance to the Earth. It is planned to pursue experiments to determine
the mechanisms and rates of reactions between lower-mantle analog materials and
liquid metals, and to determine the diffusion rates of transition metals through
periclase. The proposed study will further test the results of recent
experimental work by this group that indicates that the crystal field effect has
a strong influence on the diffusion rates of transition metals with partially
filled d orbitals, and it is a central goal of the project to investigate this
effect in detail.