* 0838461
* Collaborative Research: An integrated seismic-geodetic study of active magmatic processes at Sierra Negra volcano, Galapagos Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Dennis Geist, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 12/31/2012
* USD 75,038.00

Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;Ocean island volcanoes initiate and grow over time
periods of 105 to 106 years, requiring a long-lived magmatic plumbing system to
transport magma from the mantle to the surface. Only a fraction of the magma,
however, is erupted; magma is stored in crustal magma chambers, or trapped near
the crust-mantle boundary. These magma intrusions grow the crust, and change the
state of stress. The increase in pressure accompanying magma intrusion inflates
the volcanic edifice, triggering earthquakes and eruptions. The geometry of the
magma chambers and conduits, therefore, is fundamental to the development of
predictive models of volcano deformation and eruption.&lt;br/&gt;Our integrated
seismic and geodetic data acquisition and modelling project aims to image the
magma plumbing system beneath the most rapidly deforming hotspot volcano system
in the world: Sierra Negra volcano in the Galapagos Archipelago. Existing SAR
data provide high-resolution images of surface deformation over broad regions,
and GPS provides continuous time series of vertical and horizontal deformation.
We cannot, however, differentiate between the basaltic volcano growth models
without complementary seismic information on the distribution and mechanisms of
seismic strain, as well as the crust and upper mantle structure. We will deploy
and maintain 16 broadband seismometers for two years, recording seismic waves
from local and distant earthquakes to illuminate the magmatic plumbing system
and state of stress within the lithosphere beneath Sierra Negra volcano to
understand the stress interaction between shallow magma intrusion, extrusion,
and intra-caldera faulting processes. &lt;br/&gt;The anticipated results are a
new 4D model of Sierra Negra?s shallow and deep magmatic system that satisfies
seismic and geodetic observations, and is constrained by earthquake locations,
focal mechanisms, wavespeed and ambient noise tomography, seismic anisotropy,
receiver function estimates of sill and Moho depths, and existing petrological
data. We will determine the time-varying state of stress within and around the
volcano in response to magma intrusion and withdrawal, including the dynamic
relationship between trapdoor faulting and magma intrusion&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Significance and Importance&lt;br/&gt;Ocean island volcanoes initiate and grow
over time periods of 105 to 106 years, requiring a long-lived magmatic plumbing
system to transport magma from the mantle to the surface. Only a fraction of the
magma, however, is erupted; magma is stored in crustal magma chambers, or
trapped near the crust-mantle boundary. These magma intrusions grow the crust,
and change the state of stress. The increase in pressure accompanying magma
intrusion inflates the volcanic edifice, triggering earthquakes and eruptions.
&lt;br/&gt;Sierra Negra volcano in the Galapagos Archipelago is the most rapidly
deforming of these ocean island volcanoes. Continuous monitoring of earthquake
and surface deformation is vital to deduce the geometry of the magma chambers
and conduits, and the physical changes to the volcano edifice itself. These
data, in turn, inform predictive models of volcano deformation and eruption
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;Our continuous seismic, satellite, GPS monitoring and
modeling project has been designed to maximize the broader impacts, which fall
into 3 areas: volcanic hazards, education, and international collaboration.
Nearly a million people live on active basaltic volcanoes; understanding the
relationship between magma supply, state of stress and eruptions is vital for
hazard assessment, including the potential for tsunami-generating flank
instabilities. The baseline provided by the geodetic and seismic monitoring is
essential to development of a volcanic hazard mitigation program in the
Gal√°pagos Archipelago, and other basaltic volcanoes worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide a collaborative opportunity for US undergraduate, graduate,
and Ecuadorian students. Students from both countries will benefit from
experience with the realities of field-based geophysics, gaining valuable skills
in seismology and geodesy that can be translated to the workplace or advanced
degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is co-funded by the Geophysics
and Geochemistry Programs and the Americas Program of the Office of
International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;