* 0838267
* Dilatant Stabilization as a Mechanism for  Slow Slip Events
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 209,156.00

"Slow slip events" have been discovered in subduction zones, including the
Cascadia subduction zone in western North America, with precise Global
Positioning System (GPS) networks. These slip events displace the earth?s
surface in a similar fashion to earthquakes, however instead of lasting seconds
to minutes, they last days to weeks, and even years. Because they occur so
slowly, slow slip events do not radiate damaging seismic waves. They appear to
be located beneath the megathrust faults that generate magnitude 8 to 9
earthquakes. Slow slip events in Cascadia occur fairly regularly every 10 to 16
months, and incrementally increase the stress on the locked fault zones. It
seems likely that slow slip events occur in a frictional transition zone between
the locked and steadily creeping faults. Therefore, understanding the occurrence
of slow slip may lead to improved forecasting of damaging subduction zone
earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics of slow slip have remained poorly
understood. Theh investigators suggest that rate-state friction nucleates slip
under drained (constant pore-pressure) conditions, but as slip accelerates and
becomes effectively undrained (no flow), dilatancy induced pore-pressure
reductions quench the instability. Theystudy this, employing a simplified
isothermal, membrane diffusion model and the Segall-Rice [1995] constitutive law
for dilatancy. Numerical simulations exhibit either slow or fast (dynamic) slip
depending on dilatancy and friction parameters, as well as effective normal
stress. Stable slip is favored by low effective stress (high pore-pressure),
consistent with seismically inferred vp/vs ratios in some slow-slip zones. They
will extend this work by developing finite difference calculations of fluid
transport that will be coupled to the friction/elasticity simulations. Slow slip
modeling must ultimately consider thermal, as well as frictional, weakening. The
researchers have shown that thermal pressurization becomes important at quasi-
static slip speeds, before seismic radiation; the precise rates depend on
permeability. This suggests that whether slip is fast or slow depends on whether
or not dilatancy limits slip-rates below thermal pressurization limits. To
investigate this requires coupling thermal and pore-fluid diffusion, with
friction, elasticity, and dilatancy. For slip that becomes fast compared to the
characteristic diffusion time across the actively shearing layer, they must
explicitly consider the finite thickness of the shear zone in the computations.
This work should shed significant light on the physics of slow slip, and the
factors that ultimately control whether slip accelerates to inertially limited
speeds characteristic of damaging earthquakes.