* 0838867
* Lightning Initiation by Streamer Emission from Thundercloud Hydrometeors
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Hamid Rassoul, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 12/31/2012
* USD 235,912.00

The exact mechanisms responsible for initiation of lightning within
thunderstorms is a longstanding and fundamental problem in the field of
atmospheric electricity. Conventional theory rests on the as-yet unproven
hypothesis that electron avalanches lead to the formation and growth (through
branching) of "streamers," which are comparatively low-temperature filamentary
ionization channels. Existing observational evidence nonetheless indicates that
electric fields within thunderstorms rarely exceed 10% of the threshold
breakdown field value needed to trigger such avalanches. It has thus been
suggested that streamers may originate in the vicinity of individual
hydrometeors (precipitation particles) near which the electric field is locally
amplified. This process has been demonstrated through controlled laboratory
experiments. In pursuit of better understanding of how this process may work in
the free atmosphere, the PIs will employ numerical modeling of relevant
processes using simplified representations of cloud properties and evaluate
their results against available observations. Some specific questions for which
answers will be pursued include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1) What are the
perturbations of the thundercloud electric field caused by different types of
hydrometeors?&lt;br/&gt; 2) How does a streamer initiate and develop in the
vicinity of the hydrometeors? What is the onset condition of the streamer
emission from the hydrometeors? What are the characteristics of the streamer
thus formed?&lt;br/&gt; 3) What are the electrical interactions between
streamers and hydrometeors? What are the effects of the joule heating on the
streamer stem? What is the leader inception condition in the vicinity of
hydrometeors?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work rests on
improved understanding of the processes through which lightning is triggered
within electrically charged clouds, as well as further critical evaluation of
the ability of existing observations to accurately capture the upper-limit of
electric field strength achievable within thunderstorms. Broader impacts will be
primarily through graduate and undergraduate student education, dissemination of
results via peer-reviewed journals, and the long-term potential for reduced risk
to life and property that would come with a better understanding (and hence
ability to predict) key processes that initiate lightning within thunderstorms.