* 0838330
* VOSS - Supporting Virtual Organizations In The Social Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Barry Brown, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 399,653.00

Despite the diversity of social science research, most cyberinfrastructure work
has focused on social science research that is similar in approach to the
natural sciences. Yet all the social sciences, be they theoretical or empirical,
qualitative or quantitative have potential to be transformed with collaborative
technology. Meeting this potential will rely upon understanding the diverse
forms of intellectual and collaborative work that make up the social sciences in
ways distinct from work in the natural sciences. Transforming research on
culture, language, philosophy or practice will depend not just on data grids or
online archives, but on appropriate technologies that fit with the diverse
intellectual and collaborative practice involved in social science research. To
meet these opportunities, this project focuses on studying ethnographically the
diverse intellectual practices of social science research, using these findings
to build new transformative social science cyberinfrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on science and technology studies as well as
computer supported collaborative work, the project will investigate the distinct
challenges that social science research faces by exploring the role of
theoretical debate and discussion around conceptual questions alongside the
diversity in approach, definitions, and methods of research. The research will
take a threefold approach: questioning intellectual practice, conducting
empirical investigations, and building and testing technological interventions
in three ?social science virtual organizations.? Each of the three sites was
chosen to represent a distinct form of virtual organization: Vl2 is a major NSF
funded multi-site project studying language use; UC Links is a UC wide
organization that brings together research and practice around after school
clubs; and, XMCA is an organization that brings together an intellectual
community around journals and a long lived (25 years) and heavily used email
discussion list. The results of this research will be used to develop new
collaborative mobile and online systems that assist collaboration. These tools
will advance our understanding of how collaboration can be better supported
amongst researchers. By improving the productivity of the social sciences
through the findings and resulting tools, this project will bring a range of
benefits to an important aspect of academic work currently underserved by
cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;