* 0838127
* CO2 Diffusion in Dry and Hydrous Haplobasaltic Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2012
* USD 330,160.00

Degassing during basalt eruption is the major pathway for mantle gases to enter
the atmosphere and was also the major source for the formation and evolution of
the early atmosphere. Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the second most abundant gas
component in basaltic magmas at mid-ocean ridges and ocean islands, after water
(H2O). Moreover, due to the low solubility of CO2 in melts compared to H2O, CO2
is the most major component in the gas phase during degassing of submarine
basalts. Hence, bubble growth and degassing in submarine basaltic melts are
largely controlled by CO2. Direct measurement of CO2 concentrations in submarine
basaltic glasses often show oversaturation of CO2, meaning that basalt degassing
is not an equilibrium process, but also controlled by CO2 diffusion and
transport. Therefore, understanding CO2 diffusion in basaltic melt is essential
to quantifying CO2 bubble growth and degassing, as well as the volatile budget
of the mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion couple experiments will be carried
out to investigate CO2 diffusion in dry and wet haplobasaltic melts. For the two
halves in each couple, the chemical compositions (including H2O content) will be
similar, but CO2 concentration will be zero in one half and about 1000 parts per
million in the other half. The experimental procedures will be similar to our
previous diffusion couple experiments on H2O and Ar diffusion. The experimental
conditions will be 1300-1700Â°C, 0.5-1.5 GPa, and 0-7 weight% H2O. After the
experiments, CO2 concentration profiles will be measured using a microscope
Fourier transform infrared spectrometer. The profiles will be fit by the
theoretical solution to obtain diffusivity. The new data will be combined with
previous data to assess the dependence of CO2 diffusivity on temperature,
pressure, and H2O content. From diffusion data obtained from this grant, bubble
growth in basaltic melts will be modeled using recently developed models.
Furthermore, multicomponent bubble growth will be tackled. Hence, this work will
provide a fundamental understanding to CO2 diffusion, bubble growth, degassing,
and kinetic fractionation of gas components of basaltic magma at mid-ocean
ridge, ocean islands and island arc settings.&lt;br/&gt;