* 0838662
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Hurricane Warning System: Content, Channels, and Comprehension
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Henry O'Hair, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates the processes involved in communicating hurricane
forecast advisories and warnings. Through a multi-method approach, a
multidisciplinary team will examine: 1) the process through which advisories and
warnings are developed, and the resulting content; 2) the communication channels
used by participants in this process; and 3) how at-risk coastal residents,
including more vulnerable populations, comprehend and react to specific
components of advisories and warnings. The ultimate goal is to improve
communication of hurricane information in order to promote more effective
public-protective decision making, thereby saving lives and property.
&lt;br/&gt;A collaboration of researchers from the social and physical sciences
(communication, sociology, economics, management information systems, and
meteorology) will, in conjunction with key stakeholders, implement six research
components in the greater Miami and Houston/Galveston areas. The first three
components consist of semi-structured interviews and observations investigating
message content development and communication channels with (a) National Weather
Service forecasters, (b) broadcast meteorologists, and (c) emergency managers.
The National Hurricane Center will produce forecasts for hypothetical storms
that broadcast meteorologists and emergency managers will use to produce
communication products. In the fourth component, the research team will
synthesize findings from the first three components and create sample messages
(text, graphics and video) for testing with the public. The fifth component
examines how members of the public comprehend and react to these messages and
their channel preferences, using (a) a household survey, (b) focus groups with
vulnerable populations, and (d) a laboratory test including direct physiological
observation. The project addresses the needs of vulnerable populations through
focused research with non-English-speaking populations, the elderly, and new
area residents. The sixth project component connects the findings back to
meteorologists, emergency managers and other communities with the goal of
helping improve hurricane warning messages and communication processes.
&lt;br/&gt;