* 0838705
* EMSW21-MCTP Mentorship through Research: A Model for an Emerging Urban American University
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2014
* Carlos Castillo-Chavez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2014
* USD 817,836.00

Abstract: EMSW21-MCTP Mathematical &amp; Theoretical Biology Institute
Undergraduate Research Program &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mathematical and
Theoretical Biology Institute (MTBI) for undergraduate research was established
in 1996. The objectives of the Mathematical &amp; Theoretical Biology Institute
(MTBI) Undergraduate Research Program are to encourage and facilitate the access
to and the successful completion of graduate studies by mostly under-represented
minority students in mathematics and science. The MTBI Summer Program at Arizona
State University exposes undergraduates to scientific research by letting them
address relevant questions in theoretical biology. The consecutive summer
research experiences take place at Arizona State University and lasts 8 weeks.
Students receive four weeks of intensive training in mathematical and
computational techniques in order to develop and carry out their own research
projects during the remainder of the program. The research experience ends with
the completion of a formal research paper and public oral and poster
presentations of students? findings.&lt;br/&gt;Supporting an environment in
which high quality undergraduate research is recognized and expected (MTBI
technical reports provide the best examples. Since 1996 MTBI students have
produced 120 papers some of which have been published in peer reviewed journals
(abstracts and last five years of papers available through our website -
http://mtbi.asu.edu/Research.html). MTBI students typically present their work
at national conferences. MTBI provides its alumni continued academic
encouragement and support throughout their graduate studies and afterwards.
Since the program?s inception 153 US alumni have pursued advanced degrees, and
110 (87 URM) have or are pursuing PhDs; 79 (68 URM) have received advanced
degrees and 25 (21 URM) have received PhD?s. MTBI?s summer research activities
have been supported with grants from the National Science Foundation and from
grants from the National Security Agency. Substantial additional support comes
from Arizona State University and from the Sloan Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;