* 0838301
* Implications of Vegetation Dynamics for Semi-Arid Hydrology: A Basis for Predicting Climate Impacts on Water Resources
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* John Albertson, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2012
* USD 397,034.00

Implications of Vegetation Dynamics for Semi-Arid Hydrology: &lt;br/&gt; A Basis
for Predicting Climate Impacts on Water Resources&lt;br/&gt;PI: John D.
Albertson, Duke University&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Nicola Montaldo, University
of Cagliari, Italy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the coupled eco-hydrologic dynamics of semi-arid Mediterranean
watersheds, where the surface drinking-water reservoirs depend almost
exclusively on overland flow in the rainy season and where the vegetation growth
is water limited. The motivation centers on the observed and projected decreases
in winter rainfall, stemming from shifts in large-scale atmospheric circulation
patterns. Presently, the ability to predict future hydrologic behavior of these
systems is limited by gaps in understanding of how changes in the vegetation
cover interact with precipitation dynamics to control the hydrological response.
The proposed research will test a set of five focused hypotheses in a Sardinian
study basin that is already instrumented and broadly representative of semi-arid
Mediterranean watersheds. This project builds on experimental and modeling
studies that the PI and Italian collaborator have been conducting for the past
several years on Sardinia, the second largest island in the Mediterranean. This
project would add overland flow experiments to capture the effect of variable
grass cover and rainfall intensity on infiltration and runoff generation.
Analysis will be conducted over three overlapping time periods, representing: 1)
the intensive field experiment record (~ 5+ years), 2) the satellite record (~
20+ years), and 3) the streamflow and precipitation record (~ 80 years).
Analysis will include possible tradeoffs between infiltration and
evapotranspiration. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is designed to
reveal how change and variability in seasonal precipitation patterns excite
vegetation dynamics and how these changes in turn impact the hydrological budget
of semi-arid watersheds. The tools developed will enable rigorous prediction of
the response of eco-hydrological systems to climate forcing. The connection of
the results to the large-scale circulation indices is expected to lead to
improved predictability at the seasonal time scale. Furthermore, the broad
prevalence of Mediterranean climates (e.g. California) simplifies the
transferability of the approach and findings.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results of the proposed activity will provide direct support for planning water
resources needs in the face of systematic changes in Mediterranean precipitation
regimes. The undergraduate and Ph.D. students trained on this project will
experience broad and meaningful interdisciplinary research experience, including
collaborative periods abroad. Preliminary efforts were funded by Duke start-up
support to the PI. Duke will provide funding (Pratt Fellowship) for summer
support of the undergraduate student researcher. &lt;br/&gt;