* 0839817
* SBIR Phase I: Do-It-Yourself database-driven web applications from high level specifications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Mary Zoeller, app2you
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 128,986.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will lead to a
Do-It-Yourself hosted database-driven web application platform that will enable
non-programmer business process owners to rapidly build simple custom structured
data exchange and workflow applications for their business processes. If
successful, the project will lead to the development of a web application
specification method and a corresponding system that is: (i) high level, i.e.
business process owners only choose options and specify aspects of the
application they can easily understand from a business point of view and (ii)
sufficiently expressive to allow the specification of the applications needed by
the organizations. The project combines the following innovations to achieve (i)
and (ii): First, a page-driven/workflow-driven specification method, where the
owner specifies only easily understood aspects of the pages of workflow
applications. Inference algorithms inspect the evolving application, propose to
the user semantically meaningful options and automatically create database
schema, queries and pages.

The applications thus enabled by the effort would afford developers the
opportunity to quickly and inexpensively develop a host of applications for the
small-to-medium sized businesses that otherwise would be unable to afford custom
web-enabled applications. If successful, a significant market opportunity
exists.