* 0839222
* SGER: Designing and Understanding Intergenerational Mobile Learning Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Allison Druin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This project develops and explores the use of mobile technologies to support
intergenerational literacy experiences as a way to educate disadvantaged
children. The project explores shared reading experiences on mobile phone
platforms with local disadvantaged youths in order to develop principles and
guidelines for a worldwide effort in distributing reading experiences on
inexpensive and pervasive mobile technologies. This research has the potential
to transform the use of mobile phones in the direction of literacy development
as a complement to their current use for communication. The intellectual merit
of this research comprises: an understanding of the design of image, text, and
audio content on small screens to support literacy development in children; an
understanding of effective collaborative literacy experiences when usability
factors of mobile phones are considered in impoverished contexts; and an
exploration of the opportunities provided by intergenerational learning when
traditional classroom instruction is either not possible or has failed to reach
learners with given resources. The broader impact of this project is the
potential to focus researchers in other disciplines towards developing literacy,
and the availability of the designs and content developed in this project to
disadvantaged youths in other cities and countries.