* 0839180
* SGER  Building SPEED: Science Partnerships: Education, Engagement and Diversity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Diandra Leslie-Pelecky, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2010
* USD 125,000.00

This award supports the project Building SPEED, which addresses challenges to US
global competitiveness by linking math, science and engineering to motorsports
and, in particular, NASCAR. NASCAR has 75 million fans from a surprisingly broad
range of demographic backgrounds, including a large group of people underserved
by traditional STEM outreach. &lt;br/&gt;Three types of materials will be
developed: 1) student worksheets and hands-on activities that reinforce the
content knowledge mandated by state and national Science and Math Education
Standards; 2) career information about how STEM is used in motorsports featuring
people from a broad range of educational levels and companies, and demonstrating
the full diversity of people involved in STEM and 3) hands-on materials to
enhance the public's understanding of the math and science behind motorsports.
Dissemination is accomplished by partnerships with industrial sponsors, informal
science venues and other academic institutions. Dissemination mechanisms include
teacher workshops, public science events at race tracks, street festivals and
science museums, and visits to schools. Dissemination will occur in three
locations (Dover, DE; Dallas/Fort Worth, TX and Charlotte, NC), with each
dissemination consisting of a week of events prior to races in fall 2008 and
spring 2009.