* 0839667
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Real-time High-data-rate Multicarrier Underwater Acoustic Modem
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Jun-Hong (June) Cui, Aquatic Sensor Network Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 124,856.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project proposes to
develop a real-time high-data-rate multi-carrier modem for underwater acoustic
communications and networking. It will lead to a data rate increase by one order
of magnitude over existing commercial acoustic modems. Furthermore, this modem
will be equipped with modules that can facilitate advanced networking
functionalities. The development of high-data-rate acoustic modems for
underwater applications is hindered by the unique characteristics of underwater
channels. Based on recent success in making Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing (OFDM) work in underwater environments with fast-moving platforms,
this project will develop a real-time high-data rate OFDM modem. This will solve
a long-standing problem in the underwater acoustic communication community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing a real-time high-data-rate multi-carrier
acoustic modem, this project will make significant contributions to the acoustic
communication community and will be a significant step towards the
commercialization of high-data-rate underwater modems. It will directly benefit
the development of emerging underwater wireless sensor networks for a variety of
aquatic applications such as oceanographic data collection, pollution
monitoring, offshore exploration, disaster prevention, and tactical surveillance
applications.&lt;br/&gt;