* 0839969
* Arizona State University affiliation with the Center for Engineering Logistics and Distribution (CELDi)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Esma Gel, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 08/31/2013
* USD 207,695.00

Full center proposal to join the I/UCRC in Logistics and Distribution (CELDi)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0839969 Arizona State University; Jesus Villalobos
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University (ASU) seeks to join
as an additional site the I/UCRC in Engineering Logistics and Distribution
(CELDi). ASU should complement CELDi research by focusing on two major areas of
research: (i) supporting the development and implementation of efficient and
effective International Logistics practices, and (ii) enabling further
productivity improvements as well as state-of-art supply chain and logistics
practices in the regional industry. Research housed by the ASU site will
contribute to improvements in the cost, quality, and responsiveness of a
regional industrial base that is increasingly global. This effort will focus on
increasing the relative and absolute competitiveness of this industry, by
providing access to leading-edge knowledge, tools, systems, and benchmarking
opportunities. The initial activities at ASU will focus on efficient
international logistics practices, as well as productivity and cost improvements
in production and supply chain operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
center will be a catalyst for the regional economic development and also for
increasing the number of students who decide to pursue advanced degrees in
logistics and productivity related fields. Students will not only have direct
access to research initiatives at ASU, but will also have the opportunity to
interact with students and researchers from other institutions, listen to
visiting speakers, and become involved in a variety of projects directly
sponsored by CELDi. The center plans to include undergraduate, women and
minority students in research teams. It is anticipated that every project will
have at least one undergraduate student participating in it. ASU has a clear
commitment to diversity.