* 0839615
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantitative Analysis for Trace Levels of Toxic Elements in Consumer Products Using High Definition X-ray Fluorescence
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Zewu Chen, X-RAY OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 141,477.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to demonstrate
the feasibility of rapidly and quantitatively detecting ten different toxic
elements found in consumer products with a portable high definition x-ray
fluorescence (HDXRF) analyzer. The objective is to develop a new innovative
analyzer with a new small spot x-ray source, tri-chromatic beam, and energy
dispersive XRF detection that will provide a definitive pass-fail for products
tested on the factory floor. In Phase I, the team will demonstrate the
feasibility of measuring these toxic elements in a benchtop setup. The analyzer
will have detection limits at sub parts per million levels.

The broader impacts of this research are that American manufacturers,
distributors, and retailers will be able to preserve their competitive position
by becoming compliant in a cost-effective way to the new regulations such as the
Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act regulating lead and other toxic elements
in consumer products. Currently, there is no measurement technique available
outside the laboratory with sufficient accuracy, spatial resolution, and speed
to use as a definitive pass-fail method on the factory floor. There is a major
public health benefit. The public can be certain the products they buy are safe
and free from toxic element contaminations that have been linked to serious
health issues such a neurological disorders and kidney damage.