* 0839804
* SBIR Phase I:  Connecting Interactive Projections to Online Social Communities with Personalized Media
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Scott Snibbe, Snibbe Interactive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop the
technologies to connect interactive projections to online social networks via
personalized media for advertising, entertainment, branding and other uses.
Entertainment and advertising companies have not yet fully leveraged the impact
of Web 2.0 communities because these communities are inherently personal. The
innovation ties the linearly scalable technology of interactive projection to
the exponentially scalable technology of online Web 2.0 social communities in
order to exploit these communities for advertising, entertainment and education.
This is done by creating a standardized technological framework to share
personalized videos created with experiences from interactive projections via
online social communities and an open API to allow enthusiastic public
extensions to the platform.

The broader impact of the project will be to create a scalable business for
creating personalized media with interactive projections, developing an
irresistible value proposition for advertising agencies, entertainment firms,
museums and other customers with access to public space. By rapidly and
skillfully developing the online product, the effort has the potential to create
a new niche within the rapidly growing alternative media advertising market of
$73Billion. The anticipated market size of this niche is $1.4Billion for this
new sector within five years.