* 0839818
* SBIR Phase I: High Dynamic, Alignment Free Metrological Method for 3D Shape Measurement of Optical Surfaces Based on Polarization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Sebastien Breugnot, BOSSA NOVA TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This SBIR Phase I research proposal aims at developing a new alignment-free
metrological method for optical surfaces with high measurement speed and high
dynamic range. Next generation optical surfaces will need to be mass-produced
with high departure from spherical shapes, and high numerical aperture.
Manufacturing these optical components is challenging because of today?s limited
metrology methods: contact sensors are too slow to be used in-process whereas
interferometers and wave front sensors have a small limited dynamic range and
require careful alignment. The research objective is to demonstrate the
feasibility of a polarization based method and to evaluate its speed, dynamic
range, accuracy, and insensitivity to alignment. The proposed approach combines
an innovative polarization camera, a specific illumination, and a novel
algorithm for automatic 3D shape extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
metrology approach will have a major impact on the manufacturing of aspheric
optical components used for various applications: concentrating photovoltaics
(CPV) for solar power generation, optical instruments, ophthalmic lenses and
consumer electronics (cameras, phones). The system would allow mass production
of high quality aspheric lenses with individual inspection of each manufactured
component. High numerical aperture lenses would also be measured easily in-
process which will drastically increase productivity. This will translate into
the faster deployment of cheaper, more efficient solar power production, lighter
optical systems, and better corrected contact lenses.&lt;br/&gt;