* 0839659
* SBIR Phase I:  Bidirectional Power Converter Control for Vehicle-to-Grid Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Glenn Skutt, Power Hub Ventures, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 149,778.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I research project addresses
system-level research into the control of grid-interactive power electronics
converters in widely distributed energy storage and delivery applications. One
such application of particular interest is the proposed use of vehicle-to-grid
(V2G) applications wherein bidirectional inverter/rectifiers are used to store
energy from the utility grid at times of light load and to deliver energy back
to the grid during peak load periods. This project investigates novel power
conversion control methods necessary to maximize the economic and electrical
benefits of such distributed energy storage and delivery systems. The end goal
of this research is the development of fundamental control algorithms for safe,
reliable, cost-effective, and standards-compliant energy transfer within the
interactive Smart Grid of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The device proposed
here can be programmed to operate with specific values of power amplitude,
direction, and phase angle, and can be connected to the grid through a variety
of standard interfaces. It can also operate either in grid-interactive or stand-
alone (emergency backup) modes, and includes the communication and control
capabilities required to make plug-connected vehicles suitable for widespread
use and acceptance. Enabling this multiuse use of plug-connected vehicles with
bidirectional power flow capability will greatly enhance the opportunity to use
electricity as the fuel of choice for transportation, will help make alternative
energy systems more cost effective, and can help extend utility assets both
through load shifting and through distributed delivery of ancillary services
such as spinning reserve, regulation and reactive power sourcing.&lt;br/&gt;