* 0839129
* Predator-Prey Interactions in the Krill-centric Southern Ocean Marine Ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* George Watters, NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service
* Interagency Agreement
* Peter Milne
* 01/31/2011
* USD 160,300.00



Variability in ecosystems is hypothesized to be a major constraint in the
evolution of life history tactics of organisms. Marine polar ecosystems exhibit
pronounced seasonal and interannual variability; these fluctuations are known to
affect all levels of the trophic web, especially top predators. Few long-term
studies recording reproduction and survival of individually marked animals
exist, however, and studies that monitor several species simultaneously are even
rarer. The proposed research will examine how reproductive, foraging and
demography parameters of Pygoscelis penguins are affected by environmental
variability. Adélie, chinstrap, and gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae, P.
antarctica and P. papua) have been studied at Admiralty Bay, in the Antarctic
Peninsula region, since 1976. These three species exhibited different population
trends over the last 3 decades: Adélie and chinstrap penguin populations
declined by over 70% in numbers while gentoo penguin populations remained
stable. This study will continue to collect long-term life history data on these
penguin species and will expand recent work on the distribution and trophic
interactions among the three species during the critical winter period. A
combination of multivariate statistical techniques and population dynamics
models will be used to evaluate hypotheses relating environmental variation to
changes in breeding biology and foraging ecology and to examine how variations
in these parameters affect populations. Further, this research will assist in
the validation of models for fisheries management that are ecosystem based,
incorporating predator data with krill and climate data, and that take into
account long-term temporal variability in these parameters.

As members of a working group to the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) the PIs for this project have direct
scientific input regarding recommendations on fisheries policy in the Southern
Ocean. This research will be used to parameterize and test models that will be
used in management decisions regarding the krill fishery around the Antarctic
Peninsula. The study will also provide professional training to young
researchers and will support a PhD candidate at Scripps Institute of
Oceanography.