* 0839140
* SBIR Phase I: Cell Targeting Tools
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Bruce Oberhardt, NanoVector, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 125,174.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
need to develop cell targeting agents for more effective study of
internalization in cells. In the field of targeted therapeutics, especially in
nanoparticle drug delivery systems, it is becoming increasingly important to
select the best targeting molecules to enable cell targeting and cell entry.
There does not appear to be a good way to do this now nor have products emerged
to address this particular problem. The proposed research develops a method that
can be used with a plate reader and is adaptable to high-throughput screening.
This method would be an important research tool for many companies and academic
researchers developing targeted therapeutics. A small natural protein shell
filled with a fluorescent dye is used. Targeting peptides can be attached to
this protein shell via chemical crosslinking to the surface. Peptide binding
efficiency to the protein shell can be ascertained by fluorescent reporter
molecules that do not overlap with the internalized dye. Ultimate targeting and
cell entry can be determined from release of the internalized dye.

The broader impacts of this research are in developing novel methods for
diagnosis and treatment of disease. A rapid method for discovering new targeting
agents in a controlled platform has widespread potential applications as a basic
research tool and as an advanced technology for discovery of novel drug delivery
platforms.