* 0839108
* ANDRILL Coulman High Project -- Investigating Antarctica's Role in Cenozoic Global Environmental Change - Coulman High Project
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bruce Luyendyk, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,684,370.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). ANDRILL (ANtarctic geological DRILLing) is an international,
multidisciplinary program that aims on investigating the role of Antarctic
continent in Cenozoic global environmental change. After two successful drilling
projects, ANDRILL proposes to move northeastward and outside the well-understood
Victoria Land Basin to target a Cretaceous to middle Miocene geological sequence
on the Coulman High (CH) at two potential drilling sites that will address
fundamental questions of global climate evolution and regional tectonics,
determining fundamental shifts as well as transient excursions in the Antarctic
cryosphere that impacted global ocean and climate reorganization. This proposal
requests funds to initiate Phase I of the international ANDRILL CH Drilling
Project, focusing on site selection and extensive surveys, including evaluating
existing seismic reflection and airborne radar data, conducting over-ice radar
mapping of to locate any sub-ice crevassing along the traverse route, and
conducting hot water drilling to provide access holes through the 300 meter-
thick ice shelf and thereby enable the deployment/recovery of current meters and
other sensors (e.g. remotely operated underwater vehicles) to measure tidal and
ocean currents, assess sub-ice conditions, and evaluate potential drilling
strategies at the proposed sites. All of these data and modeling results will be
used to finalize site selection and determine the most robust drilling strategy.
In addition, the ANDRILL Science Management Office will continue a diverse and
highly visible education and outreach program, and provide project management
and institutional support for the U.S. research community's involvement in the
CH Drilling Project.