* 0839225
* SBIR Phase I:High Performance Zero-Crossing Based A/D Converter Architectures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Kush Gulati, Cambridge Analog Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,750.00

This SBIR Phase I research proposal will investigate new circuit architectures
for high performance Analog-to-Digital (A/D) converters with potentially more
than an order of magnitude lower power consumption and much smaller silicon area
than conventional architectures. The new architectures are based on zero-
crossing detectors. The zero-crossing based circuits utilize the virtual-ground
based signal processing as in traditional op-amp based circuits. Therefore, they
provide the same functionality and robustness and are compatible with most op-
amp based circuit architectures. The zero-crossing detectors replace the virtual
ground forcing function of the op-amp with virtual ground detection by a zero-
crossing detector. The zero-crossing detector based circuits provide high speed
operation at extremely low power consumption, are tiny in size, and are
compatible with standard deep submicron Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductors
(CMOS) technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, if successful,
can have far reaching impact, because A/D converters are ubiquitous in
electronics systems. The power consumption represents approximately thirty (30)
fold reduction from the state-of-the art. It will provide high performance A/D
converters built in deep submicron CMOS technologies thereby exploiting their
very low cost, high-speed capability, tiny size, high level of integration, and
low power digital circuits. These may include software-defined and cognitive
radios, and portable phased array radios among many other possibilities. For
military applications, Portable phased-array radars, battery-operated smart
sensors (e.g. smart dust), micro-robots, and small unmanned aircrafts can
benefit from the low power and tiny size/weight/volume of the proposed
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;