* 0839741
* SBIR Phase I:  Catalysis of Exothermic Solid-State Reaction for Safe Heating of Consumer Products
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Brendan Coffey, Ironbridge Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project, led by Ironbridge
Technologies, Inc. is directed at harnessing the energy release from a
kinetically modulated solid-state reaction for use in novel food heating
products for consumers. The research will build on recent findings on "super-
thermites", and be conducted by a highly qualified team comprising an industrial
partner experienced in technology commercialization and university experts on
nano-energetic materials. Using various combinations of reaction rate modifiers
we will prepare catalyzed thermite fuels, assess kinetic, energetic and safety
characteristics and then analyze physical and chemical properties to establish
correlations between structural properties and thermal performance. Through this
effort we will develop greater insight into factors that govern solid state
chemical reactions. The scientific challenges are extremely high; for the
intended end-use we must discover a combination of solid fuels, oxidizers, and
additives to yield a system that is energy efficient, inherently self-regulating
at bounded temperature, uses food-safe materials, and is low cost. At the end of
Phase I we will complete a system analysis to objectively gauge the technology
capability to fully address application requirements defined by potential
commercialization partners from the packaged food industry.

The intended consumer application for this technology is self-heating food
packaging (SHFP) intended to heat prepared foods in their containers to serving
temperature in minutes, simply, safely and efficiently. Major producers of
prepared foods have indicated hundreds of millions of units potential for a SHFP
system that can deliver on challenging performance, safety, and cost
characteristics. The only SHFP technology currently in the consumer market uses
an onboard system for mixing quicklime and water. These products are bulky,
complex, unreliable, costly, and have thus achieved very low market penetration.
The proposed technical approach is superior in that will use a dry, energy-dense
material to heat foods in their containers with a flameless, smokeless reaction.
These advantages may enable significant market penetration. In addition to
significant commercial potential, there will be many tangible broader impacts of
the proposed research effort. University subawards will provide support for
student education and training to gain cross-disciplinary knowledge in
nanoscience and chemical analysis. From an applied standpoint the information
developed will be invaluable for the design and optimization of superior
chemical technologies for energy storage.