* 0839042
* Collaborative Research: Cosmogenic Radionuclides in the Deep WAIS Divide Core
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Marc Caffee, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2013
* USD 526,883.00

Caffee/0839042

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award supports a project to measure the concentration of the cosmogenic
radionuclide, Beryllium-10 in the deep WAIS divide ice core. Since cosmogenic
radionuclides are one of the key parameters used for absolute dating of the ice
core and deriving paleoaccumulation rates, it is essential that these
measurements be made quickly and efficiently, and that the information is
disseminated as soon as the results are available. The intellectual merit of the
project is that it will allow a comparison to be made between the core from WAIS
Divide and previously measured cosmogenic radionuclide records from Arctic ice
cores, particularly GISP2 and GRIP This project will enable scientists to
delineate those processes acting at a local level from those that produce global
effects and will provide independent chronological markers to aid in the
reconstruction of the WAIS Divide ice core chronology. The cosmogenic 10Be
profile can also be used to investigate the possible role of solar activity on
climate. The direct comparison of radionuclide concentrations with paleoclimate
records in ice cores from different sites will provide more insight in the
timing and magnitude of solar forcing of climate. The broader impacts of this
project include: (i) the formation of a multi-disciplinary team of collaborators
for the interpretation of future analyses of cosmogenic radionuclide data from
the WAIS divide and other ice cores. (ii) the involvement and training of
graduate and undergraduate students in the large scale project of climate
research through detailed studies of ice samples. (iii) the opportunity to
highlight to a wide range of lab visitors and students from local K-12 schools
the importance of ice core and climate change studies.

This award does not involve field work in Antarctica.

