* 0839955
* SGER: Adiabatic Magnetization Transport in Metals at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Tito Huber, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 08/31/2010
* USD 160,921.00

TECHNICAL: This is an SGER project focused on energy/entropy transport in
nanostructured conductors. PI plans to investigate electronic transmission
through constrictions, under ballistic conditions and with an applied non-
homogeneous magnetic field, of charge carriers that have orbital and spin
degrees of freedom. Heat removed at contacts that can potentially be used for
cooling/power generation, would be evaluated by measuring the Seebeck
coefficient. The project is inspired by the thermodynamic process of adiabatic
demagnetization that is the basis of a successful cooling technology and the
process that PI aims to demonstrate can be denominated 'adiabatic
demagnetization in a wire'. The project is experimental. The nanostructures are
made of bismuth, antimony, and their alloys because these semimetals exhibit low
intrinsic dissipation. To fabricate the samples, PI will employ a high pressure,
high-temperature injection technique that uses nanochannel dielectrics as a
template structure to fabricate dense and massive composites consisting of
arrays or networks of bismuth constrictions with controllable diameters in the
range of 100 nm to 1 um. These materials are organized in devices, featuring a
source of inhomogeneous field, which will also be fabricated. Measurements of
the energy/entropy transport will be performed in these devices. Estimates show
great prospects. PI's theoretical model of energy/entropy transport, that
considers both phonon and electron mean-free-paths, show that transfer peaks for
nanostructure characteristic sizes of around 500 nm. The estimated efficiency is
close to the Carnot efficiency at low temperatures (4 kelvin). By using
materials that have extraordinarily long electronic mean free paths (namely
bismuth) shaped into nanosize structures of characteristic sizes smaller than
the mean free path the project explores, in solid state materials, electronic
phenomena traditionally observed in vacuum electronics. The project also aims to
impact the field of magnetism in nanostructures, that is closely related to the
field of spintronics because the mechanisms of transfer of magnetic polarization
will be explored. NON-TECHNICAL: The research impacts the field of solid-state
thermal-to-electric conversion, thermoelectrics and thermoionics. These
processes involve neither mechanical parts that wear down nor fluorocarbons that
damage the environment and solid state coolers and generators can be
miniaturized for use in miniature sensors and actuators. This project includes a
strong educational component, emphasizing the participation of undergraduate
students in the research program. Howard University, graduates more African-
American students than any other college in the nation. Howard is noted for
excellence in undergraduate and graduate education. The research program will
offer both undergraduate and graduate students opportunities to participate in a
diverse range of scientific activities.