* 0839113
* Research Starter Grant: Three-Dimensional Polarization Second-Harmonic Generation Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Kimani Toussaint, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cort L. Anderson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 58,800.00

A grant is awarded to Dr. Toussaint of the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign to develop a three-dimensional polarization second harmonic generation
microscope. This approach is an alternative approach to traditional fluorescence
microscopy using nonlinear optical scattering to completely obviate any reliance
on exogenous probes, and rather uses the chemical properties of the specimen
under study as the contrast agent, thereby allowing for truly noninvasive
imaging. The caveat here is that SHG microscopy works for a special, but
extremely relevant, class of biological systems?those that exhibit an ordered
spatial arrangement of molecules (noncentrosymmetry). In this case, such systems
upon interacting with an intense laser pulse naturally produce light at twice
the frequency of the original laser pulse. This SHG light is what is used to
image specimens in much the same way as fluorescence is used in two-photon
fluorescence microscopy. However, utilization of this technique has been limited
to exploiting only two degrees-of-freedom of the electric field vector
(polarization) of the original light generating the SHG. In this case, the
polarization is used to yield information on the molecular symmetries of
specimens. The proposed technique will utilize the full 3D state of polarization
of the light in order to generate, for the first time, three-dimensional
polarization SHG. Three-dimensional polarization SHG microscopy will be created
by integrating vector beams with standard polarization optics. Specifically, a
radially polarized vector beam produces an enhanced polarization at a
microscope?s focus, while the transverse polarization components are obtained
from manipulation of commercial polarization optics.

This new instrument will allow for advances in biological discovery as well as
provide unique training and educational opportunities to undergraduate and
graduate students in the biological sciences as well as engineering. Through
interdisciplinary research and development students across these disciplines
will gain insights into the fundamentals of design and development as well as
cell biology.