* 0839020
* Stream Ecosystem "Harshness" and Microbial Endemism in the McMurdo Dry Valleys
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Diana Nemergut, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 495,308.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will examine the
relationship between physical drivers, biogeochemical processes, and microbial
community composition in streams in the McMurdo Dry Valleys. The investigators
will use molecular phylogenetic techniques, genomic network modeling, and
culture-based approaches, and will further develop the Antarctic Freshwater
Diatoms database. The central research questions are (1) How do the diatom
communities found in microbial mats experiencing harsher flow conditions differ
phylogenetically from those found in less harsh streams? (2) How does the
structure and genomic potential of the overall microbial community vary among
mat communities? (3) Are endemic diatom species more tolerant of conditions
occurring during low moisture availability than 'cosmopolitan' (geographically
widespread) diatoms? The development of new techniques to explore the
relationships between microbial community structure and function will be broadly
applicable to diverse environments. The award will promote the career of a
junior scientist, fund two graduate students and further develop well-
established outreach activities targeted to the general public and at-risk high
school students.