* 0839332
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Electrospray Atomization and Space Charge Modeling for Electrohydrodynamic Wind Energy Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Dawn White, Accio Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 147,793.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will support
development of a commercially viable electro-hydrodynamic wind energy conversion
system by developing the science base for design of a high-efficiency charged
droplet generator. Electro-hydrodynamic wind energy conversion (EHD-WEC) is a
non-turbine based means of producing electricity from wind employing charged
particles driven against a voltage gradient. A minimum of moving parts and
fundamental simplicity gives EHD-WEC the potential to be disruptively lighter
and cheaper than its mechanical counterparts. The opportunity exists to apply
recently developed efficient droplet generation means, such as advanced
electrospray and MEMS-based microfabrication of electrospray nozzles, as well as
real-time system controls, to craft a system with significantly positive net
energy balance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renewable, non-fossil fuel based
approaches to electrical generation are of interest worldwide. Demand for
electricity is projected to rise steadily due to population growth and
development in emerging economies. Simultaneously the price of oil and other
fossil fuels is projected to rise as pressure is put on existing supplies. In
addition, there is widespread interest in carbon neutral energy sources. If EHD-
WEC's potential to significantly lower the cost of generating electricity from
wind can be realized, the broader impacts will be global in nature; providing
the world with a renewable source of energy, and creating many new ?green? jobs
in the US, as well as reducing national dependence on foreign fossil fuel
providers. &lt;br/&gt;