* 0839321
* Collaborative Research:    Investigating the Thunderstorm Climatology of a Rapidly Urbanizing Arid Region, the Las Vegas Valley, Nevada
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Beth Hall, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2010
* USD 17,599.00

Urban modification of thermal conditions in the planetary boundary layer has
been well documented in both humid and arid regions of North America. Among the
manifestations of these modifications is the urban heat island. Urban
modification of processes modulating convection in and around urban areas also
has been established in humid regions like the southeastern U.S. The
relationship between urbanization and changes in regional convective parameters
is less well understood in arid regions. This collaborative research project
will examine modification of parameters related to convection in the arid Las
Vegas Valley of Nevada. The Las Vegas Valley has been rapidly urbanizing over
the past three decades and produces an extensive urban heat island during the
summer season. The investigators initially will analyze the intensity and extent
of the urban heat island for the period from 1990 to 2006 following procedures
established in arid regions, such as those developed in Phoenix, Arizona. The
objective of the project then will shift to collecting, formatting, and
integrating surface, upper-air, and remotely sensed meteorological data sets.
The data-integration procedure will pair data sets based on temporal and spatial
resolution and develop appropriate interpolation procedures for point data sets
so that these data can be interpreted within a common grid structure. Sources of
data to be integrated include the Clark County Regional Flood Control District
surface meso-network observations (temperature, wind speed/direction, and
rainfall), NEXRAD volume scans (composite reflectivity, storm-relative velocity,
and rainfall rate), National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) point data
(cloud-to-ground lightning flashes), Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite (GOES) imagery (visible and thermal infrared), and regional radiosonde
observation (RAOB) network soundings (thermodynamic parameters). Following the
data-integration phase, the investigators will test a number of methodologies to
identify the most efficient techniques for extracting information related to the
intensity, duration, and location of the Las Vegas Convergence Zone (LVCZ) and
the intensity, duration, and extent of the North American Monsoon (NAM)
circulation. The integrated data set developed in the prior research phase will
be used in sensitivity studies to test the feasibility of detecting a urban heat
island impact signal on convection in the presence of strong/weak LVCZ scenarios
and during strong and weak NAM circulations. A primary objective of this proof-
of-concept study will be the compilation of a number of case-studies that
illustrate the spatial and temporal interactions of multi-scale atmospheric
processes during summer season convection episodes in the Las Vegas Valley. The
case studies will include parameters describing convective cloud development, CG
lightning flashes, and convective rainfall in the
valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design experiments and conduct
case studies to assess the feasibility of identifying a measurable urban heat
island influence on summer season convection in an urban region in the arid
southwestern U.S. The project will analyze meso-scale and synoptic scale
circulations like as the Las Vegas Convergence Zone (LVCZ) and the North
American Monsoon (NAM), how those circulations can produce a complicated and
interrelated convective environment in the Las Vegas Valley. It also will yield
case studies illustrating variability in both processes. Parameters describing
regional development of convective clouds, cloud-to-ground lightning flashes,
and rainfall patterns will be include in case studies for weak and strong NAM
circulations and for weak and strong LVCZ development. The research will be
carried out with the assistance of graduate students from the University of
Nevada and with high school senior interns from Monogue High School in Reno,
Nevada as part of a previously established student internship program. The case
studies produced by the research will be made available to the Geographic
Alliance in Nevada, for distribution to science teachers statewide as part of a
curriculum enhancement project. This project will advance fundamental scientific
understanding in urban climatology in arid regions. It will provide new insights
regarding North American Monsoon influence on meso-scale processes, and the use
of cloud-to-ground lightning flash data in the study of convection. The project
also will provide the planning community in the Las Vegas Valley with data sets
and case-studies that provide context for decisions related to flood control,
public safety, and residential development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;