* 0839243
* SBIR Phase I: Non-invasive Pulse Waveform Analysis for Measuring Intracranial Pressure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,01/31/2009
* Marek Swoboda, Neuro Diagnostic Devices
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 01/31/2009
* USD 99,968.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in
the first hand-held, non-invasive device for measuring pressure within the head
and brain. The proposed device will be a simple sensor that can be placed
against the skin and that will determine brain pressure from the ?pulse? within
blood vessels traveling to and from the head. Pulse wave analysis is an
established technique for monitoring cardiovascular health, but this is the
first time such a technique will be developed for monitoring pressure within the
skull and brain. Preliminary studies by NeuroDx suggest that the technique may
be useful as a way of rapidly screening patients for potentially harmful
elevated head and brain pressure.

The broader impacts of this research will be to provide a new method for
measuring an important determinant of brain health following serious head injury
(235,000 non-military cases in the U.S. annually) and in patients with brain
tumors and other neurological disorders (110,000 cases in the U.S. annually).
Existing methods for measuring pressure within the head use a probe that must be
placed within the skull, requiring surgery and special facilities. The proposed
device will enable head and brain pressure to be monitored without risk to the
patient, and in field situations (such as by first-responders). The proposed
study is expected to significantly improve our understanding of the dynamics of
head and brain injury. It will have a strong educational component through
Drexel University?s Co-op Educational Program.