* 0839984
* SGER: THE EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE AND CONDUCTIVITY ON AQUEOUS PHASE ELECTRICAL DISCHARGE
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Bruce Locke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 02/28/2010
* USD 56,942.00

CBET-0839984&lt;br/&gt;Locke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A one-year exploratory
research project builds on preliminary work studying electrical discharges in
water. Such discharges are of fundamental and practical interest for various
chemical, biomedical, and environmental applications. The key preliminary
observation was that H2O2 is formed more slowly near the boiling point of low-
conductivity water, where the discharge occurs in small water-vapor bubbles, and
in higher-conductivity water, where the discharge appears to form and propagate
on the inside of large water-vapor bubbles. H2O2 is used as an indirect
indicator of the formation of the active OH radicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central hypothesis of the present work is that the much smaller density of water
molecules in the bubble phase than in the condensed liquid phase causes the
reduced H2O2. In the research, H2, O2, H2O2, and OH formation will first be
measured as functions of solution conductivity (up to 2000 Ã¬S/cm), of
temperature to 100 C, of the exposed area of the needle electrode, and of
addition of various other gases (argon and oxygen) bubbled into the solution.
The measurements of formation rates and stoichiometry will then used to test the
mathematical model of electrical discharge channels in water previously reported
by the group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A basic understanding of electrical discharge
in water near the boiling point should provide insight into the fundamental
processes occurring in electrical discharge in water and in gas-liquid
environments and can lead to insight into how to develop such discharges for
practical use. Previous work has provided key information on the formation of
electrical discharges in liquid water under ambient temperature and pressure
conditions. However, while the effects of elevated pressure on liquid-phase
water discharges have been reported, no previous work has been reported on
electrical discharge in high-temperature water; that is, near boiling.