* 0839635
* SBIR Phase I:  Surveyor Endonuclease Adaptor-Ligated Libraries for Genomic Mutation Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Gary Gerard, Transgenomic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,353.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a novel
process allowing rapid and cost-effective analysis of genetic variation between
test and known, control genomes. The method, known as SEAL, will allow
researchers to construct DNA libraries containing only these variations. This
would be a breakthrough in technology as whole genome sequencing produces vast
amounts of redundant data representing the test genome?s regions that are
identical to the control genome. Using current sequencing technologies this
redundant data imposes high generation and analysis costs without contributing
any new information. This project will demonstrate the method?s feasibility by
developing robust bacterial genome analysis applications. Each step of the
multi-staged method will be tested to find optimal conditions. Phase II aims
will be developing more complex human genomic applications.

The broader impacts of this research are on how DNA sequencing is performed and
DNA variation is assessed. Research areas impacted include: pharmacogenomic
assessment for personalized medicine diagnostics, notably in cancer treatment;
simpler, less data-intensive methods to collect the genetic variation
information required for understanding complex diseases, such as diabetes and
cardiovascular disease, and tools for discovery of new antibiotics for drug-
resistant pathogens. The commercial value will be a dramatic decrease in the
cost and time of genome sequencing, identification of biomarkers associated with
appropriate treatments and decreased requirements for very high cost sequencing
equipment.