* 0839061
* Volatiles in Tonga Arc Magmas
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Terry Plank, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2010
* USD 94,324.00

ABSTRACT (0526450) Plank&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;One
of the most important chemical species in magmas, H2O, affects a host of
scientific and societal problems related to volcanism at subduction zones. Water
is critical not only to the physics of subduction and eruption, but also to the
processes that lead to melting and magma production in the mantle. This project
seeks to develop the first comprehensive study of the volatile content (H2O,
CO2, SO2, Cl, F) of Tonga arc magmas, or order to test the hypotheses regarding:
(1) the composition of slab fluids, (2) their distribution in the mantle, and
(3) their effect on melting. The Tonga arc provides several well-defined tests
of hypotheses relating to the highest tectonic plate convergence rate in the
world, anomalously high mantle temperatures, and cross-strike compositional
variations along more than 200 km, which includes volcanism in the Lau Basin.
This project addresses questions of melting and mantle composition by measuring
volatile concentrations in melt inclusions using both ion and electron
microprobes. These data will be combined with major and trace element
compositions from electron microprobe and laser-ICPMS. Data will be used to
develop quantitative relationships between slab fluid compositions and mantle
melting progress. Samples are currently in-hand from recent research cruises
supported by Australian organizations, with continuous coverage of the 1000 km
long, largely submarine Tonga arc.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project complements the science plans of other major
initiatives in NSF-GEO, including RIDGE 2000 in the Lau Basin, and the MARGINS
Subduction Factory experiment. One important outcome will be a comprehensive
phenocryst dataset from the Tonga arc area, which is poorly represented in
current on-line databases. This project leverages infrastructure and ship-time
costs contributed from Australian sources. Results from this project will be
incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate classrooms at Boston
University, and will support the Ph.D. thesis of a female graduate student and a
new research direction for a senior female faculty members at Boston University
in Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;