* 0839005
* Collaborative Research: Atmosphere-Ice-Ocean Interactions in the Eastern Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Alejandro Orsi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2013
* USD 388,477.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
postulated key factor in controlling the future fate of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet, for instance in the area of the Amundsen Sea embayment, is the extent to
which warm Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW) intrusions may flow up onto the
continental shelf and towards the base of the region's large floating ice
shelves. Scenarios for a warming global climate, and a warmer Southern Ocean,
indicate an increased shelfward heat transport resulting in aggressive basal
melting of these large buttressing ice shelves. This possibly could lead to
subsequent rapid acceleration of grounded, continental glacial flow into the
ocean. &lt;br/&gt;As of yet, such CDW intrusions have not been observed directly
adjacent to the massive Ross Ice Shelf to the west of the Amundsen. This project
seeks an accounting of circulation features leading to increased (or not) net
poleward intrusion of CDW into the Eastern Ross Sea region (Cape Colbeck, Edward
VII peninsula) and under the Ross Ice Shelf, the largest ice shelf on the
continent. By using standard current moorings, along with CTD and XBT casts made
from aboard the RVIB Oden, observation of the occurrence of this water mass will
be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;