* 0839872
* SGER: VOCALS--The Influence of Continental Aerosols on Stratocumulus Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Glenn Shaw, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2010
* USD 120,000.00

In the framework of the Variability of the American Monsoon Systems (VAMOS)
Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land Study Regional Experiment (VOCALS-REx), this project
will study the changes in the microphysical characteristics of the Stratocumulus
(Sc) cloud layer off the coast of Chile in the Southeast Pacific, which is under
the influence of polluted continental air. A complete set of tropospheric
aerosol instruments at the land-ocean boundary will be deployed at the remote
village of Paposo in Chile during October 2008. This exploratory research aims
to connect the in-situ chemical composition of aerosols, the total column
aerosol optical properties, and in situ aerosol microphysical characteristics
measured on land with the MBL (Marine Boundary Layer) dynamical structure and
the microphysical and structural changes of the Sc layer during the interaction
of the Sc with the polluted air flowing off the coast. A suite of measurements
will be made to determine how the off-shore continental aerosols are entrained
in the MBL, and how microphysical-structural changes induced in the Sc cloud
layer can be determined using polarimetric lidar measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the capabilities of polarimetric
lidar in determining aerosol properties. It must be carried out in October 2008,
as it is only during the VOCALS field campaign that the remote field site will
be available. Moreover, the value of the measurement attempted under this
project will be greatly enhanced by their coincidence with the measurements to
be made by other investigators at the field site as well as those made offshore
during VOCALS REx.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project are in
its contributions to the overall VOCALS-REx dataset. The project will provide
training for undergraduate students in aerosol physics, environmental chemistry,
and optical remote sensing via the Research Experience for Undergraduates and
the Arctic Region Supercomputing Center summer internship programs at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks.