* 0839007
* Genomic Approaches to Resolving Phylogenies of Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Thomas Near, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 06/30/2013
* USD 491,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teleost fish fauna in the
waters surrounding Antarctica are completely dominated by a single clade of
closely related species, the Notothenioidei. This clade offers an unprecedented
opportunity to investigate the effects of deep time paleogeographic
transformations and periods of global climate change on lineage diversification
and facilitation of adaptive radiation. With over 100 species, the Antarctic
notothenioid radiation has been the subject of intensive investigation of
biochemical, physiological, and morphological adaptations associated with
freezing avoidance in the subzero Southern Ocean marine habitats. However,
broadly sampled time-calibrated phylogenetic hypotheses of notothenioids have
not been used to examine patterns of adaptive radiation in this clade. The goals
of this project are to develop an intensive phylogenomic scale dataset for 90 of
the 124 recognized notothenioid species, and use this genomic resource to
generate time-calibrated molecular phylogenetic trees. The results of pilot
phylogenetic studies indicate a very exciting correlation of the initial
diversification of notothenioids with the fragmentation of East Gondwana
approximately 80 million years ago, and the origin of the Antarctic Clade
adaptive radiation at a time of global cooling and formation of polar conditions
in the Southern Ocean, approximately 35 million years ago. This project will
provide research experiences for undergraduates, training for a graduate
student, and support a post doctoral researcher. In addition the project will
include three high school students from New Haven Public Schools for summer
research internships.