* 0839216
* Operation and Application of High-Resolution Full-Disk Global Halpha Network
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Haimin Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/28/2015
* USD 606,752.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) has assembled an international collaboration to
operate a high resolution, full-disk, global H-alpha telescope network (GHN), to
monitor solar activity round-the-clock. A prior NSF award in 2000 allowed the
network to include three stations in the United States, China, and Austria. This
effort will continue that collaboration and extend the network to seven stations
without additional cost. These seven stations are at Big Bear Solar Observatory
(BBSO) in the United States, Kanzelhöhe Solar Observatory (KSO) in Austria,
Meudon Observatory and Pic-du-Midi Observatory in France, Yunnan Astronomical
Observatory (YNAO) and Huairou Solar Observing Station (HSOS) in China, and
Catania Astrophysical Observatory (CAO) in Italy.

The PI's team will continue to operate GHN in order to provide valuable data to
the solar-terrestrial community and to carry out research programs on solar
filaments, flares, and coronal mass ejections (CMEs). GHN will be complementary
to the operation of a number of NASA missions, such as Hinode (Solar-B), STEREO
(Solar TErrestrial RElations Observatory), and SDO (Solar Dynamics Observatory).
The PI will also investigate the important role of magnetic reconnection in
large scale solar eruptions that travel through the corona and into
interplanetary space.

The international aspect of GHN is important for improving global space weather
observations and forecasts. This project will support a number of Ph.D. students
who are using GHN data for their thesis work. An undergraduate student will
participate in BBSO observations during the summer and carry out research during
the academic year. GHN data processing uses artificial intelligence techniques
developed within a multidisciplinary collaboration among students and faculty
working in solar physics, computer sciences, and mathematics.