* 0839951
* SGER: DESIGN AND OPTIMIZATION OF HIGH FREQUENCY SILICON CAPACITIVE RESONATORS FOR HIGH-Q OPERATION IN LIQUID MEDIA
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Siavash Pourkamali Anaraki, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 01/31/2010
* USD 51,782.00

DESIGN AND OPTIMIZATION OF HIGH FREQUENCY SILICON CAPACITIVE RESONATORS FOR
HIGH-Q OPERATION IN LIQUID MEDIA ABSTRACT 1. Objectives This proposal is aimed
at the design, fabrication, and characterization of bulk-mode capacitive silicon
resonators capable of high-Q operation in liquid for high-resolution label-free
biochemical detection and analysis. The goal is to demonstrate quality factors
as high as 1000 in DI water for resonators in the 10-200MHz frequency range. 2.
Intellectual Merit: Despite recent developments in the silicon resonator
technologies and speculations on the suitability of such devices as high-
precision mass sensors, no viable design or architecture for practical sensory
applications has been demonstrated for such devices. In particular, operation of
capacitive micro-resonators in liquid with an acceptably high quality factor
remains an open problem. This effort will develop and demonstrate new design
concepts and fabrication approaches for minimization of viscous damping caused
by the surrounding liquid. The proposed partially encapsulated resonators will
be designed, fabricated and characterized in aqueous liquid media. 3. Broader
Impact Successful development of the proposed resonators will pave the way
towards implementation of highly sensitive label-free biochemical sensor arrays
with numerous applications in biology, medicine and health sciences. The
expected outcomes of the proposed activities will fuel the PI?s ongoing lecture
and lab course development activities under the NSF NUE grant. The PI will have
research assistantship openings for undergraduate students under this project.
The financial support for the undergraduate students will be provided by the
University of Denver through the Partners in Scholarship (PINS) program. In
selection of the undergraduate research assistants priority will be given to
students from the minority and under-represented groups