* 0839498
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Ordered Membranes for Molecular Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Susan MacKay, Zeomatrix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 119,161.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project investigates the
viability of a new method for manufacturing ceramic membranes with highly
uniform pores oriented perpendicularly to the membrane surface. These membranes
will be designed and optimized to perform molecular separation and purification
of chemicals from wood extracts. The ideal membrane for molecular separation
must be very thin, have uniform pores which are oriented perpendicularly to the
surface of the membrane, have very few defects, and be thermally and chemically
stable. There are no commercially available membranes that provide all of these
features. The research objectives of this project are to create the first DNA
templated ceramic thin film and provide evidence of its structural
characteristics. High throughput experimentation will be used to determine the
optimum conditions to form the monolayer of uniformly oriented DNA in the
presence of sol-gel. The conditions for the polymerization of the sol-gel to
form the silica encapsulated DNA on a surface will also be determined. It is
anticipated that analytical techniques such as X-ray diffraction, atomic force
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy
will confirm the existence of a highly oriented monolayer of silica encapsulated
DNA on a surface.

These new membranes have significant advantages over existing organic polymer-
based membranes. Zeomatrix is targeting the ceramic nanofiltration membrane
market. It is estimated that the inorganic membrane market is approximately $375
million per year. The nanofiltration market segment, while smaller than the
microfiltration segment, is growing at a rate of roughly 8% per year. The rapid
growth of oil costs is expected to dramatically increase the potential market
for viable alternatives such as biomass. Potential customers for the first
inorganic membrane Zeomatrix will produce are biorefineries which convert woody
biomass to sugars, organic acids, and alcohols. Current membrane technologies
can separate the sugars from acetic acid and furfurals. However, a new membrane
technology is needed which will separate furfural compounds from acetic acid. A
great advantage of molecular separation by membranes rather than distillation is
lower cost primarily in energy savings. This Phase I project could lead to a new
class of membranes that will have applications to other industrial sectors.
Specific industries include oil and petrochemical, coal gasification, pulp and
paper, and natural gas producers. In each of these industries, membranes which
are resistant to corrosion, tolerate high temperatures, and are capable of
separations in the 10 to 20 angstrom range are needed.