* 0839512
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercial Development of a Novel Microbial System for Producing Hydrogen Directly from Plant Feedstocks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* John Kilbane II, SunEthanol Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2009
* USD 98,360.00

This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) research utilizes the
anaerobic digestion by Clostridium phytofermentans (C-phy), which has an
unusually broad substrate range and is capable of fermenting all major
carbohydrate components of the plant cell wall directly to hydrogen without
prior decomposition to simple sugars, to develop a system for hydrogen
production. This research will: 1) Quantify the production of hydrogen by C-phy
from plant-derived sugars and biomass; 2) Maximize the rate and efficiency of
cellulose to hydrogen conversion, using a model feedstock. 3) Select an
available significant commercial biomass feedstock for use in fermentation
experiments. 4) Demonstrate the biomass to hydrogen conversion process using the
selected commercial feedstock. 5) Identify targets for strain improvement.
Broader impact.

The broader impact of this research will be to enable biofuels production from
ecologically and economically sustainable plant feedstocks to significantly
offset fossil fuel use. Outcomes of this project will include: (1) an assessment
of the commercial feasibility of producing hydrogen as a primary and secondary
product of a novel biomass conversion process, 2) the training of the next
generation of scientists for the sustainable production of biofuels from plant
feedstocks. These results are expected to inspire new strategies for evolving
and engineering microorganisms to enable biomass to be used as a sustainable and
commercially significant source for hydrogen production. Potential customers
such as oil companies, commercial gas suppliers, and venture capitalists will
value the versatility of C-phy in producing hydrogen from a wide array of
renewable feedstocks.