* 0839457
* SBIR Phase I: Nanostructured Sorbent for Hg Removal from Scrubber Water to Below 10 ppt
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Anna Casasus, Sol-Gel Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,103.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
evaluation and optimization of a promising sorbent, Silica-Titania Composites
(STC), for mercury removal from coal-fired power plant scrubber water to below
10 ppt. Coal-fired power plants are a predominant mercury emitter in gases and
liquids. There are no commercial technologies for mercury removal from scrubber
water to levels anticipated under future regulations (i.e., 1 to 10 ppt). Sol-
gel Solutions, LLC (Sol-gel) has obtained mercury concentrations below 1.3 ppt
when evaluating the STC for mercury removal from a mixed wastewater from a coal-
fired power plant. These levels would comply with the Great Lakes Initiative, a
strict criterion that will be enforced in parts of the U.S. in 2010. The
objective for the proposed project is to optimize the technology for mercury
removal from scrubber water from several coal-fired power plants, with the
ultimate goal of designing a commercial system. It is expected that the STC will
effectively remove mercury to below 10 ppt, with the potential of being
recovered and reused.

The broader impacts of this research are the protection of humans and wildlife
from exposure to mercury. In humans, this exposure may impair neurological
development, particularly in fetuses and during early childhood. A key element
of the proposed work will be the promotion of interest in science and
engineering via dissemination of the learnings from the proposed work and
related fundamental science to high school and community college students, among
others, via a targeted "webinar" and newsletter.