* 0839752
* SBIR Phase I:  Conversion of Biodiesel Glycerol to Xylitol Co-Product
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Ryan Woodyer, zuChem, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 148,864.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
production of xylitol from glycerol, a byproduct of biodiesel production. By
converting crude glycerol to a value-added coproduct there will be significant
improvement in biodiesel production economics. Xylitol has health benefits as a
low calorie sweetener and anticariogenic agent, but its use is limited by high
cost due to limited availability of d-xylose, the feedstock for current
manufacturing methods. Phase I will assess the feasibility of engineering E.
coli to produce xylitol from glycerol. By starting with a strain capable of
converting glycerol to d-xylulose-5-phosphate and d-xylulose to xylitol, the
ability to convert glycerol to xylitol hinges on a single enzyme a phosphatase
to bridge the gap. Phosphatases will be tested and identified, and the ability
to engineer the system will be demonstrated. Phase II will focus on developing
an optimized commercial process.

The broader impacts of this research will be to enchance the viability of
biodiesel production processes while enhancing the supply of a critical
sweetener. First, creating better economics for the production of biodiesel will
result in a more competitive process, thus reducing our reliance on foreign oil,
creating new market opportunities for the US agricultural industry, and reducing
pollution and carbon footprint. Second, such a process would relieve the
production bottleneck for xylitol which is beneficial to oral health, allowing
the US market for xylitol to expand. Finally, the process will provide a
springboard for conversion of glycerol to generally more valuable 5-carbon
sugar-based molecules.



