* 0839014
* SGER:  High Carbon Dioxide Habitats of Yellowstone as a Long-Term Complement to Face Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Julie Whitbeck, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2010
* USD 49,983.00

The increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide that has occurred over the past
century is well documented, however the long term consequences of this change
are not well understood. Experimental manipulations of CO2 concentration have
examined individual, population, and ecosystem level responses, however these
experiments are limited in size and duration. Long term studies of ecological
responses to elevated atmospheric CO2 are needed to understand how changes in
ecological processes and feedbacks will drive ecosystem change in the coming
decades. This project will test the suitability of two forested sites in
Yellowstone National Park for use as long term CO2 enrichment sites. Initial
measurements revealed elevated atmospheric CO2 at sites downhill from geothermal
sources. Sites are 1-2 km away from the sources, and show no evidence of
geothermally altered soils. Tree cores will be analyzed to test how long these
sites have been exposed to elevated CO2, soils will be analyzed for cations and
compared to potential control sites, and gas samples will be collected
throughout the growing season to test for the presence of gases other than CO2
(e.g., hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, methane, gases commonly associated with
geothermal activity) that could confound comparison of these sites with adjacent
control sites. The intellectual merit of this project is that it has the
potential to demonstrate that these sites can serve as long term (50 - 100 year)
analogs of existing CO2 enrichment experiments, providing a view much farther
into the future than is now possible. The primary broader impact of this
project, if it successfully demonstrates the suitability of these sites, will be
the identification of a resource that is likely to be used by scientists who are
interested in long term consequences of increased atmospheric CO2 on many
aspects of terrestrial ecosystems.