* 0839784
* SBIR Phase I: Improving Business-Consumer Commerce Via Mobile Social Networking Services
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Richard Han, TechoShark, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to investigate
an approach towards solving key problems experienced commonly in in-store
business-consumer transactions, namely a lack of a priori information about the
consumer's identity, and a lack of insight into the consumer's personal
interests, which influence buying decisions. The feasibility of an innovative
solution that combines the power of social networks with mobile computing will
be explored. Achieving this unique mobile social networking solution will
require challenging research innovations in three areas: (1) developing the
appropriate wireless software and systems infrastructure to seamlessly integrate
mobile phones with online social networks, and (2) realizing practical data
mining solutions to link consumer preferences with business products/services;
(3) ensuring that consumer and business privacy concerns are met. An outcome of
the research will be a novel mobile social networking data service for cell
phones and online servers that could fundamentally transform the quality and
portability of business-consumer commerce.

The broader societal impacts of the mobile social networking technology
resulting from this proposal's Phase I research have the potential to be
substantial, as there are strong incentives to adopt the technology and
accelerate its implementation into the marketplace. Businesses will have a
strong incentive to adopt this proposal's unique mobile social networking
technology so that more can be learned about the prospective customer that just
walked into the store, and instant targeted discounts can be delivered on
merchandise that matches the consumer's interests, thereby driving up consumer
loyalty and enabling transactions that may not otherwise occur. Conversely,
consumers have an incentive to adopt the technology in order to obtain those
discounts, thereby saving their money and time while also enhancing the quality
of their business-consumer transaction.