* 0839518
* SBIR Phase I:  High Performance Directional MEMS Microphones for Communication Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Gustavo Roman, Silicon Audio, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
a novel MEMS based microphone based on entirely new design principles. By
abandoning the traditional 100 year-old microphone architecture common to both
full-scale microphones as well as recently commercialized MEMS microphones, this
project will explore a vastly superior acoustical design that will result in
substantial improvements in fidelity and SNR (20 dB SNR improvement over
existing MEMS microphones). Furthermore, the microphone will have an inherently
directional response with the benefit of focusing on a speaker or event of
interest while rejecting ambient background noise. These attributes make this
innovation ideal for addressing an emerging need of high volume consumer
communication device manufactures that are looking for acoustic sensing
innovations with the unique combination of high performance and low
manufacturing cost.

If successful the proposed innovation will enable, for the first time, the
introduction of performance-audio quality into a suite of consumer communication
devices. The primary customer focus for this innovation is high volume consumer
communication device manufacturers with applications on their horizon that
demand substantial improvements in microphone component performance. Presently,
commercial suppliers of MEMS microphones all use variations of a traditional
microphone architecture which has proven incapable of addressing high
performance applications, in particular those that require high fidelity and
directionality. Additional markets and applications for this innovation include
acoustic instrumentation, performance audio, military and defense, intelligence
gathering, speech recognition (ex. in laptop computers), and hearing aids.
Addressing hearing aid markets will have a societal impact as well, as patient
satisfaction with hearing aid devices is presently very low. The innovation is
also expected to have other audiological applications including use in hearing
health monitoring systems based on otoacoustic principles. Clinical tools and
instruments based on this innovation will serve to enhance scientific and
technological understanding in many fields of acoustics.