* 0839191
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast-Response, High Sensitivity MEMS based NOx Emission Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Richard Mlcak, BOSTON MICROSYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project demonstrates the
technical feasibility of a Fast-Response, High Sensitivity MEMS based NOx
Emission Sensor for Diesel and Other Lean Burn Engines. The innovation combines
the company?s SiC-based MEMS piezoelectric bimorph microresonator chemical
detection technology with a NOx sensor materials technology patented by MIT, to
develop a NOx sensor needed for emissions control and capable of operation in
harsh engine emissions environments. This will be accomplished by 1) formulating
NOx-sensitive material compositions optimized for sensitivity, reversibility and
long term stability, 2) developing deposition processes for integrating the NOx
sensitive materials onto its MEMS resonators, and 3) developing high temperature
compatible electrodes and packaging compatible with hot engine emissions.

If successful the proposed NOx sensor will fill a strategic and unmet need
allowing diesel engines to conform to new diesel engine emissions standards
being implemented by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), European
Union and Japan. The proposed program will develop and demonstrate highly
innovative, sensitive and stable MEMS-based resonator sensor suitable for
detecting NOx and ultimately other pollutants in high temperature and chemically
aggressive engine emissions environments, and will position US industry for a
leadership role in engine emissions NOx control. In order to meet these
standards, automobile and truck manufacturers have turned to two after-treatment
technologies that reduce tailpipe NOx emission levels. Both after-treatment
technologies require NOx sensors, to 1) control the after treatment trap-
regenerate cycle, and 2) to monitor after-treatment system performance,
confirming proper NOx restriction or triggering the ?check engine? indicator.
The NOx sensor will allow clean, energy efficient diesel engines to continue to
replace gasoline engines, thereby reducing fuel consumption and carbon emissions
without increasing NOx pollutants. Furthermore, as the NOx sensor and NOx
remediation technologies are introduced into diesel automobiles, trucks,
locomotives, diesel power generators etc., these systems will become cleaner
providing significant value to society in the form of cleaner air, improved
health and reduced medical costs.