* 0839598
* SBIR Phase I:  A Cell-based Wireless Sensor for Stand-off Detection of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Tayfun Ozdemir, Virtual EM Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,947.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project involves using
olfactory neuron cells integrated with electronic circuits, and interfacing with
a wireless hardware based on ZigBee technology for detection at a standoff
distance. Recent experiments with pouched rats have demonstrated that their
highly sensitive olfactory system can detect and recognize vapors diffusing from
IEDs. The vapor molecules of the explosive bind to specialized receptors on the
cilia of olfactory neuron cells in the nose, triggering an electrical response
that propagates to the brain. This approach takes advantage of the sensitivity
and specificity of olfactory sensory neurons, which are unequaled by any state-
of-the-art human-made sensor technologies. High-sensitivity front-end amplifier
circuits, fabricated on the same silicon die, are able to detect action
potentials and amplify the electrical signals toward subsequent transmission
through a ZigBee wireless system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is urgent need on
the part of the U.S. military to develop effective IED detection systems since
IEDs account for the majority of U.S. casualties in Iraq. By modest alterations,
the same technology can be used in the transportation of sensitive goods such as
medicine and weapons as well as security and protection of sensitive assets.
Monitoring and protecting working and living environments against harmful
pathogens is another market.&lt;br/&gt;