* 0839052
* Constraint Programming and Decision Making Workshop, CoProD'08
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Martine Ceberio, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2010
* USD 7,441.00

Constraint Programming and Decision Making Workshop, CoProD'08&lt;br/&gt;Friday
October, 3rd ? Saturday October, 4th&lt;br/&gt;Request for Event
Funds&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Organizer: Dr. Martine
Ceberio&lt;br/&gt;Computer Science Department&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at
El Paso&lt;br/&gt;mceberio@utep.edu&lt;br/&gt;Constraint programming techniques
are important components of intelligent systems. They have been applied
successfully to a number of fields, such as scheduling of air traffic, software
engineering, and networks security. Despite the proved usefulness of these
techniques, they are under-utilized in real-life projects, mainly due to the
lack of knowledge of researchers and practitioners from other fields about
constraints in general and their use in decision making in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;Constraint solving and optimization are my primary
research areas. I have been on the program committees of several related
international conferences. At the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), I am
leading a research group on constraints; we have been successfully collaborating
with researchers from UTEP and from other schools in the US and abroad. In order
to build upon our success, I am organizing a workshop at UTEP that will be
focused on constraint programming and decision making. The objectives of the
workshop are: 1) to draw together a network of researchers interested in
constraint techniques, in particular researchers and practitioners that use
numeric and symbolic approaches (or a combination) to solve constraints and
optimization problems, and 2) to address the gap between the great capacity of
these techniques and their limited use.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. An
expected outcome of the workshop is the definition of new directions for
combining numeric and symbolic approaches in solving constraints and
optimization problems in particular and in decision making in general. Such a
workshop is much needed as there is little connection between actual
practitioners and researchers in constraints and decision making, and also
because it will be a unique opportunity to gather together preeminent
researchers mainly focused on combining symbolic and numeric solving and
decision methods. CoProD'08 has the potential to impact these communities by
easing collaborations and therefore the emergence of new techniques, and by
creating a network of interest.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. CoProD'08 is scheduled
back-to-back with a large bi-annual international conference, SCAN?2008, on
Scientific Computing, Computer Arithmetic and Verified Numerical Computations
(El Paso, 09/29-10/03/2008). As one of the main organizers of this conference, I
have been actively encouraging the participation of the constraint community in
this meeting. Out of 8 invited plenary talks, two talks will be given by leaders
of the constraint community and we expect several dozens of constraint-related
participants from all over the world at this meeting. This conference provides
us with a unique opportunity to organize a workshop on constraints because many
preeminent researchers from over the world will be present.&lt;br/&gt;CoProD'08
aims at impacting a broader range of people as a network of interest will be
created and a webpage for this network will relay and advertise information
about the members' research activities and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover,
local students will be involved in the organization of the workshop and will be
given the opportunity to exhibit posters about their constraint-related work
outside of the workshop room, and so will the students of the other
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;The requested budget for this event is a total of $5,941.