* 0839594
* SBIR Phase I: Electrochemical Ozone Generator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Michael Kimble, Reactive Innovations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,967.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
electrochemical ozone generator to treat water for drinking and industrial
processing. In the US, 85% of all public water systems serve fewer than 3,300
people. For providing these small unit drinking water systems, three
congressional findings highlight the challenges. First, the small communities
typically have a low tax basis making affordability a challenge unless the
system is low in cost. Secondly, the small communities typically do not have
technical experts to manage the water disinfection system thus posing a
challenge that the system must be simple to operate. Third, the popular chlorine
based systems will be outlawed in 2015 for drinking water systems according to
the EPA Stage 2 Safe Drinking Water Act. To this end, Reactive Innovations, LLC
is proposing to develop an electrochemical ozone generation system that produces
ozone directly into a process flow stream using only ambient air and DC
electrical power.

The broader impacts of this research are a robust reactor platform is obtained
that can be used for small and large scale water treatment processing. The US
drinking water equipment market was $115M in 2005 growing at a compound annual
rate of 5%. In addition to producing ozone for water and wastewater
disinfection, the proposed electrochemical ozone generator may also be applied
toward purifying water systems for semiconductor manufacturing, pharmaceuticals,
food processing, and pulp/paper processing. These applications represent a
worldwide water treatment market projected to be worth $11B by the year 2015.