* 0839963
* SGER:   Exploratory Research in Sketch-Based Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Julie Dorsey, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2009
* USD 90,000.00

SGER: Exploratory Research in Sketch-Based Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research explores a new paradigm for designing 3D form by amplifying traditional
sketching on paper. Early work has shown that 3D design and analysis can be
performed using only strokes attached to 2D planes and placed in 3D space.
Apparent form emerges as the user observes from different views. This research
will expand early work by adding sketch search and exploration. This work is
examined in the context of a complete system for architectural design that moves
from conceptual sketching to solid models. The work advances the creative design
process by offering a novel approach for creating and editing 3D form, and will
also impact the communication of ideas, where 2D representation has largely
dominated. This work crosses and links disciplines, not only computer graphics
and architecture, but other research areas related to how humans think (such as
computer vision, cognitive science, psychology) and build (industrial design,
civil engineering, mechanical engineering). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
expansion of the World Wide Web and success of companies, such as Google, search
has become an active area of research, with methods developed for searching for
items from text to 3D objects. Yet little, if no, work has addressed searching
and manipulating sketches. In this research, two approaches are considered:
spectrum-graph-based methods and representations in terms of spherical
harmonics. Tools for exploring temporal sketch evolution and navigating
relationships between sketches are also considered. A visual interface is used
for forming sketch queries.&lt;br/&gt;