* 0839981
* Scientific integration and coordination activities of DIVERSITAS, the global change programme dedicated to Biodiversity science
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Anne Larigauderie, International Science Council
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2016
* USD 3,126,215.00

Diversitas will focus on synthesis, integration, and global-scale issues of
environmental science. The program will emphasize the planning and
implementation of the global biodiversity information network (GEO BON) that is
expected to provide sound scientific underpinnings for resolution of the above
issues. Diversitas will continue to organize its efforts in four core projects ?
bioGENESIS, bioDISCOVERY, bioSUSTAINABILITY, and ecoSERVICES) ? and five cross-
cutting networks ? on mountains, landscapes, freshwater, eco-health, and
invasive species. These projects and networks will promote integrative science
in applied areas such as biodiversity conservation and possible links between
biodiversity changes and human health. Diversitas will work towards convening
another open science conference to carry its synthesis activities further, to
engage more developing country scientists, and to fill gaps related to the
scientific basis for adaptation to climate change. &lt;br/&gt;The ESSP will
encourage the Earth system research community and the broader stakeholder
community to identify the most important decadal-scale Earth system research
questions that are most relevant to the needs of decision-makers concerned with
global environmental change and human well-being. The ESSP will help to shape
the Earth system science agenda for the next decade, especially by serving as a
virtual organization for Earth system science and continuing to advance its
joint programs in such areas as water, carbon, food and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both Diversitas and the ESSP will also work to
assure that the results of the research they support is communicated effectively
to decision/policy makers (.e.g., through development of robust biodiversity
indicators, global data bases, and science-policy assessments. &lt;br/&gt;