* 0839864
* Qualitative Behavior of Solutions for Systems of Conservation Laws With Additional Physical Effects
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Tao Luo, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2009
* USD 33,484.00

This research project deals with some nonlinear partial differential equations
of conservation laws with some important additional physical effects appearing
as source terms, such as relaxation and electric fields. The first part of the
project is to study the global existence and structure of multi-dimensional
shock fronts solutions for the hyperbolic conservation laws with lower order
dissipations, such as relaxation. The second part is to study the nonlinear
stability of planar transonic shocks for the Euler-Poisson equations of
semiconductors, both in one-dimensional and multi-dimensional cases. This
research aims at understanding the global structure and behavior of solutions
with shock waves for the nonlinear systems of conservation laws with some
additional physical effects, both in one space dimension and several space
dimensions, elucidating the influence of the additional physical effects such as
relaxations and electric fields on the structure and behavior of shock waves,
developing new ideas and techniques for the study of nonlinear partial
differential equations, and providing new insight to the numerical computation
of shock waves for the nonlinear systems of conservation laws with additional
physical effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systems of nonlinear partial
differential equations to be studied in this project arise in many branches of
applied sciences and engineering, such as gas dynamics, shallow water waves,
semiconductor devices and biophysics. These equations provide basic models of
importance in a wide range of applications. For those equations, shock waves are
very important wave patterns. The study of shock waves is very challenging
because they are highly nonlinear. This is particular so in several space
dimensions and when the additional important physical effects are taken into
account. This research will deepen the understanding of nonlinear waves,
particularly for shock waves. Also, new theories and techniques will be
developed for applications. Moreover, the theories and methods to be developed
in this research will enhance basic understanding of many important nonlinear
wave phenomena and their applications to applied sciences and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;