* 0839484
* SBIR Phase I:  High Permeability Thin-Film Nanocomposite Membranes for Reverse Osmosis Desalination
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Jason Holt, NanOasis Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2009
* USD 149,356.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
scalable process for production of nanomaterials-based, high permeability,
energy-efficient membranes for desalination. While recent strides have been made
in improving the energy-efficiency of seawater desalination processes, it is
widely acknowledged that improvements in membrane permeability are needed to
bring the process closer to cost-parity with existing methods of water
production. The reverse osmosis membranes developed in this project will utilize
unique water transport and salt rejection characteristics of select
nanomaterials to achieve the desired high permeability. The project will also
enhance understanding of the science behind water and ion transport through
membranes on the nanometer-scale, an area of active academic interest.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project is to develop a reverse
osmosis-based desalination system that can operate efficiently at substantially
lower feed pressures than currently available systems (and thereby reduce the
capital and operating costs of producing potable water from salty water). The
concept is likely to be applicable to other challenging molecular separations.
Less than one half of one percent of the world's water is readily accessible
fresh water. As a result, desalination of brackish and seawater has grown into
an enormous ($10B annual) industry. This, however, meets the needs of only 1% of
the world's population. A number of global trends will increase world demand for
potable water. While reverse osmosis (RO) has emerged as the lowest cost
desalination process, it nevertheless remains relatively expensive. Energy and
membrane costs comprise 75% of the operating costs of desalination facilities.
The total costs of the world's RO desalination facilities today exceed $10B
annually. Existing and future RO desalination facility owners need a means to
reduce energy consumption, use fewer membrane cartridges, and construct smaller,
less expensive facilities. Reduction in cost associated with the next-generation
membranes developed in this project will garner interest from a wide array of
water suppliers.