* 0839528
* SBIR Phase I:  Shear Stress Sensor Based on Optical Micro-Spring Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Vadim Stepaniuk, Lenterra Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,981.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at the
development of a wall shear stress sensor with an Optical Micro-Spring (OMS) as
its core element. The OMS, a miniature fiber-based load cell, relies on the
morphology-dependent optical resonances known as Whispering Gallery Modes (WGM)
realized in a microcavity. A miniature and robust sensor is proposed that is
capable of direct measurement of wall shear stress in either transparent or
opaque media. Due to high quality factor of WGM technology, displacements of the
sensing element as small as a hundredth of a nanometer can be detected. The
sensor therefore virtually does not have any moving parts while detecting
sensing element displacements within more than four orders of magnitude of the
shear force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the understanding of
the fundamental processes occurring in the boundary layer of a flow. For non-
Newtonian or otherwise rheologically complex fluids the wall shear stress can
not be easily calculated or, especially for non-transparent flows, measured. The
chemical and pharmaceutical industries suffer from an inability to scale and
predict mixing equipment performance. Direct measurements of wall shear stress
would significantly improve existing CFD models and provide a means to increase
process control, quality and throughput for high intensity mixing devices and to
reduce the cost of the final product. &lt;br/&gt;