* 0839529
* SBIR Phase I:  Co-Production of Industrial Enzymes and Advanced Lipid Biofuels in Algae
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Craig Behnke, Sapphire Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase I project will develop enzyme products from
algae along with lipid biofuels. Algae have the potential to provide carbon-
neutral, renewable biofuels from advanced lipids. At most, algae will be capable
of producing advanced lipids as 30% - 40% of their total biomass, leaving 60% -
70% of the remaining biomass, primarily protein, as waste. As algae growth for
biofuel production is scaled up to the levels required to replace significant
amounts of transportation fuel, the costs for disposing of this waste biomass
will become prohibitive. Therefore, identifying and developing large-scale
commercial uses for the remaining biomass is required for commercial viability
of large scale advanced lipid biofuel production from algae. In order to fulfill
this need, Sapphire Energy will develop a system to co-produce commercially
important industrial enzymes and advanced lipids for biofuels in algae. Stephen
Mayfield of Sapphire Energy has pioneered the recent development of tools to
overexpress proteins in algae. The Phase I experiments examine the feasibility
of using these recently developed tools to produce industrial enzymes in algae
at levels sufficient to be competitive with existing enzyme production systems
while retaining activity and purity.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project is to make algae more
viable as an alternative fuel while also supplying industrial enzymes. Revenue
from the sale of industrial enzymes will negate the costs of disposal of excess
protein byproduct resulting from lipid production in algae, lowering production
costs of advanced lipid biofuels. Development of this technology has wide-
ranging societal impacts as it would reduce a key barrier to commercialization
of a renewable transportation fuel that 1) can directly substitute for
petroleum-based gasoline in current automobile engines, 2) does not compete with
or use food crops, and 3) utilizes wastewater and excess CO2. Additionally, the
work will allow further development of molecular tools for manipulating algae,
increasing the types of products that may be produced in an organism that is
rapidly gaining importance for the production of carbon-neutral, renewable
products.