* 0839588
* SBIR Phase I:  RGB upconverted laser backlights for LCDs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Michael Bass, bdDisplays, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new type of red, green, and blue (RGB) backlight for liquid crystal displays
(LCD) that can provide low cost, high efficiency, high image quality, and low
voltage. While LCDs dominate computers, communication, and entertainment, they
remain limited in their image quality and efficiency by the lack of a low cost,
high quality RGB backlight. This lack of RGB backlighting is due to the market
barrier of the high cost associated with the available technologies. The
proposed project investigates a transformative approach to LCD backlighting
using laser up-conversion that can reach very low cost by incorporating new
materials, photonic device structures, and integration techniques at the
backlight subsystem level. In addition, the Phase I project enables a dramatic
improvement in the LCD system level performance through color and 2D modulation
with increased resolution, color and image contrast, and elimination of the need
for expensive LCD color filters.

If successful one of the key benefits of this outcome is that the increased
performance will reduce the cost displays systems. The LCD has become the
dominant technology for information display in education, science, health care,
government, security, and entertainment. Few other technologies have had as
broad an impact on the U.S. and world societies. The LCD impact comes from its
multibillion-dollar world market and in its diverse range of applications. This
SBIR effort has as its goal furtherance of LCD displays by developing low cost
RGB backlighting. It combines an important opportunity for technology
advancement in a market sector important to the U.S. economy with a
collaborative effort in basic science and new materials with university
researchers to achieve this goal. The new technology offers the opportunity for
rapid development and commercialization of new university developed concepts. In
addition, the technology may find new applications in automotive lighting,
indicator lamps, and other display technologies. The research effort targets
integration of new materials and devices at the subsystem level, with a clear
technology path to innovation for LCDs in each of the leading market sectors.