* 0839592
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Low-Cost Electric Motors for Variable Speed Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Charles Flynn, QM Power, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2009
* USD 96,567.00

This SBIR Phase I research proposal will analyze, develop, and demonstrate a
novel, optimized, high power density and high efficiency electric motor
technology capable of operating at high speeds using Parallel Magnetic Circuit
(PMC) technology. PMC technology is a breakthrough magnetic force control
technology that is applicable to any electromagnetic device. Unlike
?conventional? electro-magnetic motors and actuators, which use series magnetic
circuits limited by the force of the most powerful single magnet element, PMC
moves flux from multiple permanent magnets and field coils into a coherent and
additive geometry - dramatically increasing both efficiency and power density.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed motor will have efficiency greater than 90
percent over a broad range of operating speeds with peak efficiency greater than
97 percent, operate at speeds in excess of 20,000 rpm, cost less than comparable
existing permanent magnet motors, and require no active liquid cooling when
operating within the designed parameters. These power generators have
significant quantitative and qualitative advantages over the incumbent motors
being used in the current variable speed applications. Their smaller size and
ability to operate more efficiently over a wider range of operating speeds, as
well as their ease of integration, installation, and projected reliability,
would greatly increase electric motor viability in the commercial market. This
would significantly increase the viability of electric drive trains and speed
the adoption of efficient and environmentally sustainable electric
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;