* 0839773
* SBIR Phase I: Sensitive, Rapid Heterogeneous Immunoassays Based on Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering and Gold Nanoparticle Labels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Christian Schoen, Concurrent Analytical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a
diagnostic platform for herpes viruses by combining gold nanoparticle labels,
high-speed fluid handling, and sandwich-based heterogeneous immunoassays with
advances in surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). Herpes has reached near
epidemic levels in the United States and other countries. Current diagnostic
approaches severely limit broad level testing of the causative agents of this
disease, herpes simplex viruses types 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2). This
application reflects the increase in market need for a high-speed, low-cost
testing platform capable of quantifying HSV levels critical to diagnosis (tens
to hundreds of viruses per milliliter of sample).

The broader impacts of this research are demonstrated by the urgent need for
reliable techniques that can be deployed as rapid, low-cost analysis methods
ranging from point-of-care (POC) diagnostics in the doctor?s office or hospital,
to laboratory testing. Presently more than 50 million Americans have genital
herpes, with another 1% of the U.S. population predicted to become infected
annually. A 1999 survey showed ~20% of pregnant women tested positively for
HSV-2 antibodies. If economic and rapid POC testing were available as a litmus
test for HSV-2 in maternity wards, more informed decisions for herpes
necessitated cesarean deliveries could be made, thereby protecting the immune-
compromised neonates. A technique capable of quantifying HSV at the noted levels
would also find a niche in the researcher?s laboratory in evaluating the
antiviral effectiveness of candidate vaccines, as well as by pathologists in
defining infective pathogen thresholds.