* 0839070
* Travel Support for Students, Post-Docs, and Young Faculty to Attend the Symposium on Synthesis of Bio-Inspired Hierarchical Soft and Hybrid Materials, April 2009, San Francisco, CA
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Shu Yang, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 08/31/2009
* USD 4,000.00

Intellectual merit is based on the fundamental property common to many
biological structures ? that they frequently display hierarchical organization
on length-scales ranging from the nanometer to the macroscopic
level.&lt;br/&gt;Such organization provides the foundation for many of the
material properties, including for example the remarkable mechanical properties
of bone, the dazzling optical effects of butterfly wings, the self-cleaning
ability of the lotus leaf, and the dry adhesion in gecko foot hairs. Although
there have been a few very successful symposia held at ACS, MRS meetings and
Gordon Research Conferences, none has been dedicated to the exploration of
hierarchical materials. With rapidly growing interest in soft matter and
organic-inorganic hybrids, a symposium that both emphasizes novel synthetic and
assembly strategies, and which explores the structure-property relationships of
both biological and synthetic materials is extremely timely and likely to be
interest to a large number of researchers working in a wide range of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed support lies in
recruiting a larger number of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers and
young faculty members to attend the conference. Through discussion of the
design, synthesis, assembly and characterization of both biological and
synthetic materials at the symposium, we aim to bring the latest developments in
the field of hierarchical materials to abroad audience. A total of 22
internationally-renown speakers, most of whom are young researchers, have been
invited and confirmed to present their research findings at the MRS meeting.
Many young researchers, including graduate students, post-doctoral researchers
and young faculty are unable to attend national conferences due to the
associated registration and travel costs. Therefore, funding support from NSF
will be critical to the success of the symposium. Specifically, it will be used
to provide 10 travel awards at ~ $400 each to support young researchers to
attend the proposed symposium. Priority will be given to graduate students who
will attend their first national meeting, young faculty who will give oral
presentations, and those who belong to the underrepresented groups. Two co-
organizers of this symposium are female professors and have proven track-records
in recruiting and promoting women and minority students to attend national and
international meetings.&lt;br/&gt;