* 0839053
* The Sea Ice System in Antarctic Summer, Oden Southern Ocean Expedition (OSO 2010-11)
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Brent Nowak, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 12/31/2012
* USD 340,718.00

Several aspect of the seasonal melting and reformation cycle of Antarctic sea
ice appear to be divergent from those occurring in the Arctic. This is most
clearly demonstrated by the dramatic diminishing extent and thinning of the
Arctic sea ice, to be contrasted to the changes in Antarctic sea-ice extent,
which recently (decadaly) shows small increases. Current climate models do not
resolve this discrepancy which likely results from both a lack of relevant
observational sea-ice data in the Antarctic, along with inadequacies in the
physical parameterization of sea-ice properties in climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will take advantage of the cruise track
of the I/B Oden during transit through the Antarctic sea-ice zones in the region
of the Bellingshausen, Amundsen and Ross (BAR) seas on a cruise to McMurdo
Station. Because of its remoteness and inaccessibility, the BAR region is of
considerable scientific interest as being one of the last under described and
perhaps unexploited marine ecosystems left on the planet
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of on station and underway observations of sea
ice properties will be undertaken, thematically linked to broader questions of
summer ice survival and baseline physical properties (e.g. estimates of heat and
salt fluxes). In situ spatiotemporal variability of sea-ice cover extent,
thickness and snow cover depths will be observed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;