* 0839576
* Enhancing Hydro-NEXRAD: Community Resource for Use of Radar-Rainfall Data
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Anton Kruger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 399,955.00

Ready access to reliable spatial and temporal data on rainfall amounts is
essential to studies of the terrestrial water cycle and, more generally for
studies of biogeochemical cycling in terrestrial environments. The Hydro-NEXRAD
system has included multiple users in the Baltimore Ecosystem Study (BES) LTER
study site, with a special focus on analyses of ?hot spot ? hot moment?
biogeochemical cycling associated with wetting and drying episodes. System
upgrades and expansions of the data sets will increase the user base to include
scientists involved in terrestrial biogeochemical cycle research in diverse
settings across the US. People who research or teach in fields related to
biogeochemical cycling come from many disciplines, and few are familiar with the
cutting-edge technology now used to measure rainfall and its strengths and
limitations. This project would provide them a usable tool tested in actual
research projects that are relevant to their research and educational
interests.&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in many disciplines who need rainfall data
would acquire an innovative software product that would enhance rapid access to
more precise and reliable information to support scientific discovery. A tested
and refined product would be passed on to a cyber-infrastructure team for
continuing user support after the project concludes. The transformation in
obtaining reliable precipitation data would transform the water balance studies
that are foundational for a wide range of research. Especially important is the
capability for rainfall analysis over a broad range of time and space scales and
organized by drainage basins.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Hydro-NEXRAD is
innovative over-the-Internet technology for organizing and accessing data from
the national network of weather radars thus enabling increased use of the data
in hydrologic research and education. This technology allows rapid producing of
customized drainage basin-centric rainfall maps by merging data from multiple
radars and rain gauges. This proposal is to test system performance against what
researchers need to support work on flood hydrology, water quality modeling,
eco-hydrological analyses of water and biogeochemical cycles, water transport in
river networks, evaluation and calibration of distributed hydrologic models,
etc. Important issues are accuracy limits, validation methodologies, estimation
uncertainties, and how these vary with climate, topography, etc. Additional
issues arise in working in real time and exploiting the ?super-resolution?
upgrade of the NEXRAD system in 2008. Other user needs surface in using the
products to support course work. The goal is to close this gap between ?rainfall
products? and ?user needs? by working with both data providers (principally NOAA
and UCAR?s Unidata) and with users.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The product would
serve research and teaching in hydrologic science and provide a prototype for
future radar-rainfall data systems for general research use and for water
resources management in the public and private sectors. The Hydro-NEXRAD system
has developed a strong user base, as documented in part through supporting
letters from users, but efforts should be made to expand the user base to
include a broad spectrum of applications in hydrology, agriculture, engineering
design, ecology, forestry and urban planning The PIs will promote their product
through conventional publications documenting system capabilities and
performance tests, but these publications should be directed at applications
groups that are underrepresented in the current set of users. The PIs will also
utilize ?outreach? capabilities to potential user groups, especially through
community-based organizations like CUAHSI. The Hydro-NEXRAD system has also
developed an active group of users for educational activities. The educational
impact of the system will be expanded by promoting tools that have been
developed by users through the CUAHSI outreach activities. Additional support
will make rainfall mapping more accessible to non-experts and for operational
purposes by a wide range of governmental and private users.&lt;br/&gt;