* 0839272
* SBIR Phase I: Atmospheric Pressure Deep Etch for MEMS Manufacturing and Integration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Simon Selitser, TimeDomain CVD Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel approach to through-wafer via formation in silicon. Vertical stacking of
MEMS and CMOS devices is becoming increasingly popular for increasing functional
density, and for combining specialized microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
with standard silicon integrated circuits. Vertical stacking generally requires
that via holes for contacts be formed through a wafer using anisotropic etching,
but current low-pressure techniques for performing this step are slow and
expensive. This project will apply the company?s unique Linear Inductive
Plasmatron technology to silicon etching using both the current multistep
(etch/passivation) approach and single-step etching. The increased species
densities at atmospheric pressure should enable passivation and etching of high-
aspect-ratio features without etch-stop behavior observed at low pressure, and
low electron temperatures ensure minimal plasma damage.

If successful such a tool will greatly reduce the cost of via fabrication and
enable 3D stacking of circuitry in applications where it would otherwise be
prohibitively expensive. The unique characteristics of an atmospheric-pressure
plasma etch process allow design of a processing tool that combines low cost,
high throughput, and high performance. Because gas flows can be used to define
reaction regions, wafers can be exposed to multiple process steps at high rates
in batches using a carousel-type architecture. Once proven as a semiconductor
manufacturing tool, the Linear Inductive Plasmatron is likely to find other
applications in high-rate, low-cost processing for semiconductor fabrication,
photovoltaic fabrication, and other manufacturing dependent on thin film
deposition and etch processes.