* 0839952
* An Innovative Model for Workforce Development in Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Michael Lavine, Five Colleges Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This project, which is cofunded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activity (OMA) in the NSF Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, will develop a joint postdoctoral program
among the Five Colleges --- Amherst, Hampshire, Mount Holyoke, and Smith
Colleges and the University of Massachusetts, Amherst --- for two purposes: to
introduce new postdoctoral faculty to professional life at liberal arts colleges
and research universities and to foster collaborative research among statistics
students and faculty and other Five College researchers. During the three-year
fellowship, each postdoctoral associate will teach one course per semester at
one of the undergraduate colleges and will be the lead statistician on a
research team of statistics students and an investigator from another
discipline. The undergraduate teaching will be overseen by the statistics
faculty already at those colleges, while the research teams will be put together
and overseen by the statistics faculty at the University of Massachusetts. By
the end of their appointments, the postdoctoral faculty will have been mentored
in teaching by several different professors from liberal arts colleges and will
have participated in several different multidisciplinary research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical workforce will benefit in
several ways. Graduate and undergraduate students on the research teams will
experience applied statistics through collaborative research; the postdoctoral
faculty will serve as their mentors and role models for potential new career
options. The postdoctoral faculty will be able to make more informed career
choices after having been introduced to academic life in both small colleges and
large universities. Modern applied statistics will be introduced to more
students earlier in their careers and to faculty from other disciplines who
might not otherwise become familiar with recent statistical developments.
Researchers from all fields can bring their quantitative research questions to
center for statistical consulting and collaboration.