* 0839300
* SBIR Phase I:  An Innovative and More Effective Means to Manage the Communication Process Between Colleges and Prospective Students
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Greg Perfetto, 422 Group
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a more
effective means to manage the communication process between colleges and
prospective students by automating the response logic needed to successfully
transition critical decision making steps. Data mining techniques and geo-
demographic analysis have recently gained limited popularity in college
recruiting as a means to segment prospect populations based on historical data
and then to recalibrate manual communication strategies. However, these static
methods are retrospective in nature and require several years of consistent
historical data for implementation, limiting their appeal. The approach proposed
in this research employs an automated system that analyzes the ongoing
interaction between colleges and prospects. Through the application of database-
embedded and integrated modeling and pattern analysis techniques, key decision
points are identified in the communication process as they occur.

The recruitment process in higher education is becoming increasingly complex and
compressed. Students are waiting longer to reveal their interest to colleges and
submitting applications to more colleges. There exists only a brief window,
between the point a prospect becomes 'known' to a college and the actual
matriculation decision, when the opportunity exists for targeted communications
to simultaneously inform and influence each students' decision-making process.
As competition for students increases dramatically over the next decade in the
face of rising attendance costs, changing demographics, and a decline in the
number of college-bound students, each institutions' ability to survive, much
less prosper, will depend directly on its ability to identify, qualify, and
communicate with prospective students in an more efficient and cost-effective
manner. If successful, the effort proposed will provide a means for measurable
value for those institutions that embrace this approach.