* 0839481
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovation for an Easy to Use Clinical a/LCI System for in Vivo Detection of Precancer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* William Brown, Oncoscope, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 127,934.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
new clinical instrument for detecting early stage cancer in human epithelial
tissues, the origin of most cancers. The instrument is based on a novel optical
spectroscopic technology which is capable of providing information about cell
nuclear morphology in vivo without the need to physically remove tissue.
Preliminary experiments have shown a very high level of sensitivity and
specificity when compared to pathological evaluation of tissue. The ability to
quickly and accurately examine many tissue sites translates to significant
commercial potential in clinical and research applications. The proposed
research will enable clinical usage by simplifying instrument design and
providing a robust, well calibrated fiber probe. The new instrumentation design
will be validated with tissue phantoms experiments and in vivo measurements.

The broader impacts of this research include benefits to society, education and
technology development. The proposed optical system will benefit society as it
has the potential to greatly improve endoscopic screening and surveillance of
epithelial tissues for signs of cancer by providing instant feedback on tissue
health while avoiding the need for random biopsy. We will enable utilization of
this technology in teaching, research, and industry through conference
presentations and hardware offerings aimed at the research market. Finally, the
proposed technology products has a very high commercialization potential such
that successful development will lead to employment of technical staff such as
electrical and biomedical engineers.