* 0839505
* SBIR Phase I:  Cost- and Energy-Efficient Conversion of Cellulosic Biomass to Bio-Fuel Feedstock of Consistent and Preferred Geometry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2009
* William Endres, Endres Machining Innovations
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 09/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a new
cutting attachment for chipping/grinding/chopping of cellulosic biomass to yield
feedstock for production of cellulosic ethanol. With increasing energy/diesel
prices, power consumption in chipping/grinding/chopping is of heightened
concern, as is the cost/inefficiency of equipment downtime for tooth/knife
replacement. The innovative cutting technology draws on the vast research base
in metal cutting to address these chipping, grinding and chopping applications
with a single base product, achieving greater economies of scale. It involves a
rotating tooth and multi-tooth layouts that replace current chipper/chopper
knives and grinder teeth to achieve lower specific energy, reduced tool-change
downtime, and thinner chips to facilitate efficiency later on in the ethanol
production stage.

The broader impacts of this research are to facilitate the diversification of
the country?s energy portfolio by improving the economic end energy viability of
biofuels produced from cellulosic feedstock like wood chips, switchgrass, and
corn stover. While ethanol is an attractive alternative fuel, care must be taken
not to negatively impact food supplies with an excessive shift to grain-based
ethanol. Since non-prime farmland can be used for energy crops like switchgrass
and fast-growing trees, production of ethanol from cellulosic biomass (including
agricultural waste and forestry residues) can enjoy significant growth without
undue competition with the food supply. Other energy applications to be impacted
include use of chipped/chopped biomass in boilers that produce heat and
electricity, which are using cellulosic biomass at increasing rates.