* 0839258
* SBIR Phase I:  Self-Aligned Miniature External Cavity Tunable Laser from Blue-Violet to Infrared
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Christophe Moser, ONDAX INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,789.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project is intended to
develop a miniature, low cost tunable laser enabled by the volume holographic
filter technology already developed and commercially available today. The
project will focus in developing the tunable light source for the blue-violet
and near infrared range in order to address the above-mentioned markets. It is
intended that the activities of this project will result in the development of a
novel architecture: a self-aligned external cavity tunable laser (ECTL) enabled
by an ultra-narrow band multi-line filter. The passive self-aligning nature of
the proposed tunable laser is the main driver for low cost manufacturing. A
unique feature of the architecture of the ECTL is its axial symmetry. This
enables the use of axially symmetric components such as TO-can laser packages,
lenses and volume holographic filters which further reduces the cost of
manufacturing. The ultra-narrow band spectral light management capability of the
volume holographic filter enables an extremely compact ECTL: an initial proof of
concept tunable laser generated single mode light with a physical length of 12
mm and a couple nanometer tuning range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful the outcome of this project will have many commercial applications.
The tunable laser technology is a platform that can be applied from the blue-
violet (375 nm) to the infrared (4000 nm) and use commercially available low
cost semi-conductor lasers. The attractive price/performance ratio of the match-
box size tunable laser, over such a large spectral range, will open market
segments in different fields that have been sparsely addressed by the state-of-
the-art tunable laser technology. In particular, the technology can play a role
in decreasing the rate of carbon emission by monitoring and optimizing
efficiencies in combustion processes such as engines and coal plants. The
technology could contribute to increasing the deployment of environmental
stations by providing the optical source at a fraction of today?s
cost.&lt;br/&gt;