* 0839270
* SBIR Phase I: Fabrication of Nanobattery Systems Using Femtosecond Laser Machining
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Jacob Conner, US Photonics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 144,706.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will use
femtosecond laser machining to fabricate Lithium ion based nanobatteries
composed of arrays of nanocells. In addition, an array of addressable batteries
will also be constructed. A femtosecond laser is a powerful tool to machine
features on a variety of materials in the nanoscale regime. These batteries will
be grown on flexible, polymer substrates. Each nanocell will be around 20 nm to
50 nm in diameter. High surface area to volume ratio should lead to light
weight, high-power, safe and reliable batteries with extremely fast recharging
times. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is that the
nanoscale laser machining techniques that will be developed for this project can
be readily adapted to apply to other technologies to fabricate nanosensors,
nanoactuators, one nanodevice at a time. Also, nanobatteries are expected to
overcome the current limitations of conventional batteries (high weight and
volume, slow recharging times etc) and will find applications in diverse
industries like defense, transportation (aviation and automobiles),
communications (power for satellites) and consumer electronics. The nanobateries
can potentially replace conventional batteries in a wide range of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;