* 0839851
* RUI:  Do Dimethyl Sulfide (DMS) and Isoprene Control Iron Bioavailability in Marine Aerosols?
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Anne Johansen, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2012
* USD 146,254.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans a 2-year program to determine the
significance of previously identified mechanisms that may control atmospheric
iron speciation before and after deposition into the ocean. Photochemical
experiments will be carried out on previously collected marine aerosol samples
(South Atlantic Ocean, 2005; Equatorial Pacific Ocean, 2006) in the presence of
dimethyl sulfide (DMS) and isoprene oxidation products, as these compounds have
been shown to increase iron bioavailability in laboratory simulations. By
optimizing analytical capabilities for low concentrations of essential chemical
constituents, results from this study will provide further evidence to support
or refute the hypothesis that phytoplankton themselves are key protagonists in a
feedback cycle to manipulate the form of iron in aerosol particles for their
optimal metabolic use. Crustal aerosol particles deposited at sea constitute a
significant source of scarce micronutrient iron that limits phytoplankton growth
in remote open oceans. Phytoplankton, in turn, modulate global climate by
accounting for half the earth's photosynthetic absorption of CO2, as well as by
emission of climate forcing gases, such as DMS and nitrous oxide (N2O). The
systematics of open-ocean aerosol iron delivery as well as the chemistry that
controls iron bioavailability to phytoplankton, however, remains ill defined
thus prohibiting any quantitative analysis of how phytoplankton affect global
climate.

The work will be carried out by undergraduate and M.S. students at Central
Washington University (CWU) with existing and new instrumentation, the latter of
which will significantly increase the capacity of the PI's lab to investigate
iron in the atmosphere-ocean context. Students involved in this research will
obtain valuable hands-on experience in the field and the laboratory, and will
interact with scientists from diverse research areas and countries, preparing
them for the intricate nature of present and future scientific challenges.
Outreach activities specifically designed for K-12 students that include global
warming and its regulation by feedback mechanisms will be an integral part of
this research program.