* 0839493
* SBIR Phase I:  A 3D Interactive Virtual Patient Platform for Nursing Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Robert Levine, ArchieMD, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I Project combines web-
deliverable, 3-D computer graphics and gaming technology to provide a non-
linear, immersive learning environment for nursing education. The outcome of the
project is a toolkit which will center on an automated virtual patient capable
of providing case-based, non-linear, clinical training scenarios that
incorporate the full range of nursing skills. The proposed environment will
integrate the virtual patient with physiologically accurate visualizations and
an automated feedback module to provide a comprehensive learning environment.
Modern computer-simulations present a unique ability to present
medical/scientific information in an easy to understand manner. Technology
advances in computer graphics present opportunities to present higher quality
visual models in an interactive fashion that can convey the scientific process
in a way which makes learning interesting and interesting for the students while
capturing their enthusiasm for nursing.

This project will impact nursing education by ncreasing learning opportunities
students in this field. This technology may play a critical role in mitigating
the well documented future nursing shortage, by providing high quality virtual
nursing educational experiences, without increasing the number of nurse
educators.