* 0839669
* SBIR Phase I:  Slitless, compact, low-cost, and multichannel volume holographic spectrometers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Chaoray Hsieh, ProSpect Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new platform for spectrometers using cylindrical beam volume holograms (CBVHs)
as dispersive elements. Due to its unique characteristic, the CBVH enables the
capability of the design of two-dimensional (2D) spatial-spectral output
patterns to significantly enhance the functionality of holographic
spectrometers. As an example, a multichannel spectrometer is proposed for
deployment by dividing a CBVH into several rows, and each row is specifically
designed and recorded to perform wavelength dispersion in a wavelength range (or
channel) within the entire spectral bandwidth. Thus, a significant improvement
of the spectral bandwidth can be achieved without sacrificing spectral
resolution while keeping all merits of a compact, lightweight, low-cost,
reliable, and alignment robust spectrometer. With the proposed multichannel
spectrometer design, several species of interest can be detected at one shot
even though their spectrums are distributed in a very large spectral bandwidth.
Due to the design flexibility of volume holograms, this technology enables the
design of spectrometers with custom functionalities without adding any
complexity (such as more elements and complicated system arrangement) to the
system.

If successful a spectral sensor system that provides spatial and spectral
detection offers great utility to the life science and medical markets. For high
throughput screening, it is desired to have multiple channels read
simultaneously on a test containing multiple sample sites. For fluorescence
based tests, multiple fluorophores need to be quantified requiring more spectral
information. Maintaining good sensitivity is still required in these
applications for low concentration detection at a low cost and size demanded by
these markets. The proposed multichannel spectrometer based on CBVH will have a
broad range of applications in the fields of biochemistry, medicine,
pharmaceuticals, industrial quality assurance, homeland security, mineralogy,
and environmental monitoring. Moreover, the proposed technology offers a
practical solution for the design of custom sensors that can perform optical
measurement in a large spectral bandwidth. The compact and lightweight nature of
the proposed spectrometer makes it a perfect choice for handheld sensing devices
that are of high current demand in several fields as mentioned above. The entire
US market volume that can be covered by this technology has been $2.6B in 2005,
with a prospected 7% growth rate through 2010. The use of sophisticated volume
holograms with 2D spatial-spectral output patterns is an important enabling
technology that can impact the design of custom multi-purpose spectrometers (or
sensors) beyond the proposed functionalities.