* 0839750
* SBIR Phase I:  Internet-based Software for the Treatment of Depression  among Veterans
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Justin Savage, Prevail Health Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project seeks to
determine the feasibility of a web-based tool that provides depression treatment
for Veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan. A recent Pentagon report
estimates that approximately a third of all soldiers returning from deployment
suffer from a mental health disorder and that unfortunately the military health
system does not have the resources in place to address this problem due to
limitations in both labor and funds. The proposed innovation will enable the
military's mental health professionals to offer an effective, evidence-based and
drug-free depression intervention, which will effectively mitigate stigma
concerns faced by military personnel and will provide treatment at a fraction of
the cost of the typical depression interventions available today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the effort will create significant value by
1) allowing VA mental health professionals to provide an easily accessible,
evidence-based and drug-free depression treatment to returning military
personnel suffering from depression 2) enabling veterans to seek treatment
without having to face the fear of stigmatization due to seeking face-to-face
treatment that is typically within the confines of a mental health care facility
3) reducing the economic burden on the military health care system by providing
an effective and scalable depression treatment of at a fraction the cost of
today's typical depression interventions. With an estimated 10 million veterans
and 60 million civilians in the U.S.A suffering from depression, cost-effective
and innovative methods to help address this burgeoning healthcare epidemic are
critical to the well being of our nation. Through further research, this web-
based framework can also extend to other mental health problems that plague our
country such as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, Drug Abuse, Anxiety and
Alcoholism.