* 0839425
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Biodegradable Aliphatic Polycarbonates
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2009
* Christopher Simoneau, Novomer LLC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 09/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop novel
biodegradable aliphatic polycarbonates using carbon dioxide as a feedstock. This
research will lead to the development of biodegradable polymers that are not
derived solely from petrochemicals, energy intensive fermentations, or food-
based feedstocks. Currently available biodegradable polymers rely on food-based
feedstocks, resulting in unintended economical (rising food costs) and
environmental (greater carbon emissions) consequences. Using an innovative
catalyst system, Novomer will synthesize several polymer compositions and
architectures from readily available epoxides and CO2. The resulting polymers
will be cast into films then evaluated for biodegradability.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project may be revolutionary in
the plastics industry by producing environmentally-friendly polymers. The
proposed materials will reduce the use of petrochemicals in plastics production,
reduce the use of non-biodegradable polymers, and will recycle CO2 by-products
from energy production and other sources. Commercially, the efficient catalyst
technology will make biodegradable polymers in a cost-effective alternative to
polymers derived solely from petrochemicals, thus opening up new markets for
environmentally-friendly polymers.