* 0839308
* SBIR Phase I: Sensing Technology for Cell Tracking in Suspension
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Greg Sitton, RateScan
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
instrumentation that will track significant numbers of individual cells in time
and extract the single-cell growth rates of their physiological state. In
contrast to microscopy the cells will be kept in suspension. The core innovative
concept that will enable the proposed instrument is a two-phase flow phenomenon
termed the Segre Silberberg effect. The Segre Silberberg effect states that
particulates in a fluid in a capillary will self-organize on the same streamline
and therefore have the same velocity independent of the direction of the flow.
Thus, by simply pumping in the forward and reverse directions for equivalent
amounts of time, the same plug of cells will pass by the measurement point in
the same order. Thus repeat measurements of large numbers of single cells can be
obtained. The research objectives of this proposal are to examine what are the
upper limits of this effect in terms of the number of cells that can be
successfully tracked.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this technology will be the
development of an instrument capable of accurately measuring individual,
suspended cells and their development in time in a precisely defined
environment. Such instrumentation currently does not exist. It will enable a new
research approach to study development and cell cycle progression of microbial
cells, differentiation of stem cells, or the response of individual cancer cells
to specific drug treatments. Based on the results from a survey at the annual
American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) Meeting there was an overwhelming
positive response to this cell analysis technology. The survey results strongly
suggest that, among researchers in the area of cell biology, there is a high
level of interest in and need for an instrument that can track and measure
individual, suspended single cells in real time. Given these responses it is
conservatively estimated that the total number of laboratories and research
institutions across academic, industrial and medical organizations in the US
that could benefit from this instrumentation is around 1,000. With the same
number in the rest of the world, there are up to 2,000 potential customers in
total for this instrumentation representing a potential market size of $600 -
$800 Million. This tefchnology has a significant commercial potential and could
have a large impact on the scientific community.