* 0839730
* SBIR Phase I:  Synthesis of Metal and Metal Alloy Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Lynn Astle, Cosmas
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 04/30/2010
* USD 137,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
development of a novel solid-state method of synthesizing metal and metal alloy
nanoparticles. A method has been developed for metal oxide and mixed metal oxide
nanoparticles which can now be extended to the synthesis of metal and metal
alloy nanoparticles. This approach will be very low cost and environmentally
friendly and will produce high quality nanoparticles of any metal or alloy of
any number of metals in exact stoichiometric proportions. The method simply
involves mixing common dry chemical starting materials and baking the resulting
precursor material at modest temperatures (e.g., 300°C) for approximately one
hour. If the baking step is performed in the ambient atmosphere, metal oxides
are formed; however, if a reducing environment is employed at somewhat higher
temperatures, metal nanoparticles are formed. In initial experiments, the metal
particles are rather large, 30-50nm as compared to 2-10nm for the oxides, and
there is oxide contamination. This project focuses on developing the method to
produce small, pure metal and metal alloy nanoparticles.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project is to develop a
nanoparticle synthesis that does not use solvents which would result in a
process that is economical and has better enivironmental impact than current
processes. This process could have major impact to the fields of catalysis,
batteries, and fuel cells. The European Commission published a comprehensive
report on nanotechnology which predicted that the nanomaterials market is going
to reach 300 billion Euros by 2015. If this forecast is accurate, manufacturing
of nanoparticles is going to be required on a scale equivalent to many of our
largest current industries. Because the market is still in its very early stages
of development, this industry has an opportunity to adopt intelligent methods
before more energy consumptive and polluting approaches become entrenched as
industry standards. Current methods for making nanoparticles suffer from heavy
energy consumption, large amounts of waste, and/or purification problems. The
Cosmas synthetic method has the potential to become the method of choice for
supplying novel metal and alloy materials for hundreds of low to high technology
applications because it will be low cost, environmentally friendly and will
yield nanoparticles which can meet virtually any product specification.