* 0839093
* Collaborative Research: Integrated High Resolution Chemical and Biological Measurements on the Deep WAIS Divide Core
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 09/30/2013
* USD 809,174.00

McConnell/0839093

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award supports a project to use the WAIS Divide deep core to investigate
the Last Deglaciation at sub-annual resolution through an integrated set of
chemical and biological analyses. The intellectual merit of the project is that
these analyses, combined with others, will take advantage of the high snow
accumulation WAIS Divide site yielding the highest time resolution glacio-
biogeochemical and gas record of any deep Antarctic ice core. With other high
resolution Greenland cores (GISP2 and GRIP) and lower resolution Antarctic
cores, the combined record will yield new insights into worldwide climate
dynamics and abrupt change. The proposed chemical, biological, and elemental
tracer measurements will also be used to address all of the WAIS Divide science
themes. The broader impacts of the project include education and outreach
activities such as numerous presentations to local K-12 students; opportunities
for student and teacher involvement in the laboratory work; a teacher training
program in Earth sciences in the heavily minority Santa Ana, Compton, and Costa
Mesa, California school districts; and development of high school curricula.
Extensive graduate and undergraduate student involvement also is planned and
will include one post doctoral associate, one graduate student, and
undergraduate hourly involvement at DRI; a graduate student and undergraduates
at University of California, Irvine (UCI); and a post doctoral fellow at MSU.
Student recruitment will be made from underrepresented groups building on a long
track record of involvement and will include the NSF funded California Alliance
for Minority Participation (CAMP) and the Montana American Indian Research
Opportunities (AIRO).

This award does not involve field work in Antarctica.

