* 0839678
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Processable High Performance Ni Superalloys for Heat Exchanger Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Jason Sebastian, QUESTEK INNOVATIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 96,350.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will design and develop
a new high performance Ni superalloy material for high temperature heat
exchanger applications. The alloy design will leverage existing QuesTek efforts
on Ni superalloy modeling, design, and prototyping, including multicomponent
thermodynamic and kinetic models of microstructural stability and precipitation
behavior. The key microstructural design concept is based around achieving the
superior strength, high thermal conductivity, and elevated thermal-mechanical
strength (fatigue resistance) required of high performance heat exchanger
materials via a combination of L12-type and DO22-type precipitation. In Ni
superalloys these two types of precipitates nucleate and grow in a highly
interactive manner ("compact morphology"). QuesTek will harness this "self-
assembly" behavior by understanding the detailed chemical (thermodynamic) and
elastic (stress) interactions during the controlled co-evolution of these
precipitates. The goal is a breakthrough in heat exchanger material temperature
capability with significantly higher service temperature capabilities (and
thermal efficiencies) than previously achievable.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to keep pace with
improving system technology by producing higher-temperature and lower-weight
heat exchangers that are increasingly in demand. State-of-the-art heat
exchangers are fundamentally limited by the availability of next generation
superalloys in two ways. First, the weight of heat exchangers is limited by the
thickness of existing materials. Current operating temperatures require thick
gauge material to withstand severe thermal cycle stresses resulting in a heavy
component. Materials that could withstand higher stresses at elevated
temperatures would enable thinner sheets resulting in weight savings in addition
to better heat transfer across thinner sections. In addition, thermal
conductivity and thermal efficiency are enhanced at higher operating
temperatures. The life and operating temperature of heat exchanger components
are limited by the temperature capability of currently-available materials in
sheet form. Improvements in material performance would have direct benefits to
high temperature heat exchanger performance.