* 0839146
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Processing of Mesoporous Materials for Intermediate-Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of designing engineered mesoporous zirconia films for intermediate
temperature (600°C) solid-oxide fuel cells (IT-SOFCs) with the aim of extending
the basic and practical knowledge of synthesis as well as electronic behavior of
mesoporous films, while at the same time producing materials that have a direct
application in IT-SOFCs. This work will, for the first time, demonstrate
mesoporous zirconia films for IT-SOFCs. The objectives of this study are: 1)
refinement and detailed design of a large-scale and practical means of
generating significant amounts of mesoporous zirconia powders and films, and 2)
assessment of the ionic conductivity properties of the films. The successful
completion of this project will result in mesoporous ceramic films with high
electronic conductivity for IT-SOFCs. Compared to state-of-the-art, the proposed
technology has competitive advantages including: synthesizing highly stable
mesoporous materials, obtaining compacts with grain sizes in the nanometer
regime, and allowing the determination of permeability and electronic properties
in these types of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts/commercial
potential of this project is to aid in the development of less expensive fuel
cells. This technology could provide a solution for portable power and partly
eliminate the need for batteries. SOFCs offer a promising technology options for
the fuel cell industry which is one of the fastest growing segments of the power
industry due to the need for reliable power sources. Most SOFCs are used at the
operating temperature of 800-1000°C because the resistance of the standard
commercial electrolyte material is lower at high operating temperatures. To
reduce the cost of the SOFCs and to accelerate their market application, the
operating temperature of SOFCs needs to be decreased. Mesoporous zirconia is an
excellent candidate material for the IT-SOFCs application. The mesoporous film
technology is unique compared to the competing technology and will allow for the
development of effective power sources. This technology is of increasing
importance for the future energy needs of this country.