* 0839966
* Optimizing the Mathematics Postdoctoral Experience: A Teaching and Research Postdoctoral Fellowship at Harvey Mudd College
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Andrew Bernoff, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2015
* USD 800,000.00

The five-year project "Optimizing the Mathematics Postdoctoral Experience: A
Teaching and Research Postdoctoral Fellowship (TRPF)at Harvey Mudd College,"
which is cofunded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activity (OMA) in the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, will establish a new postdoctoral fellowship focused on the
synergistic activities of teaching and research as well as connections between
the two. These fellowships will emphasize engaging undergraduates in
mathematical research and discovery. Over the five-year term this program will
provide support for ten postdoctoral fellows (TRPFs) and summer support for ten
undergraduate research associates. The TRPFs will develop their research with
the guidance of at least one research mentor, teach an average of one course per
semester in tandem with a teaching mentor, supervise a summer research student,
advise a capstone research experience such as a Senior Thesis or one of Harvey
Mudd College's industrial research-based Clinics, and participate in outreach
activities and other vital departmental functions. The Mathematics Department
will make annual assessments of the TRPFs' teaching and research progress and
their preparation to enter the mathematical workforce which will be used to
guide both programmatic changes and to tailor an individual work plan designed
to best meet the goals and needs of the individual
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TRPF Program will enhance the mathematical
workforce by producing high-quality teachers who will enter the academy well
prepared to both pursue their own research careers and to mentor aspiring
undergraduate researchers. Their ability to engage and inspire undergraduates
through the integration of teaching and research is critical for the recruitment
and retention of students pursuing undergraduate and graduate degrees in the
mathematical sciences. By cross-training the TRPFs in one of the many
departmental outreach programs they will be able to more effective promote
mathematical fluency beyond the traditional college boundaries. It is also
expected that the TRPFs will remain networked with each other and the Harvey
Mudd College faculty, providing a natural ongoing mentoring network, which
should enhance their ability to thrive in their chosen careers in the
mathematical sciences.