* 0839653
* SBIR Phase I:  One-Step MembraneReactor-based Process for Conversion of Biomass Gasifier Off-gas to Syngas Ready for Alternative Fuel Syntheses
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Paul Liu, Media and Process Technology Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a one-step
membrane reactor-based process to clean-up, concentrate, and condition bio-based
syngas to make it suitable for downstream processing into fuel or chemicals. The
biomass-based energy production pathway has been favored recently due to
no/minimal net CO2 emission. The recent skyrocketing prices of imported crude
have made domestically available biomass a very attractive alternative fuel and
chemical source. Thermochemical conversion of biomass into fuels and chemicals
has been considered one of the better developed bio-based energy production
processes. However, today for thermochemical conversion of biomass to play a
significant role in reducing our country's dependence on imported fossil fuels,
the syngas generated during biomass gasification must be (i) meticulously
cleaned to remove trace contaminants (e.g., tar, H2S, NH3, HCl, etc.), (ii)
concentrated via removal of a broad range of diluents (e.g., N2, O2, CH4, etc.),
and (iii) conditioned to the proper ratio to meet the feedstock requirements of
such diverse products as hydrogen for fuel cells or syngas for methanol and
higher alcohol synthesis and for hydrocarbon production via Fischer-Tropsch.
During Phase I of this project, the gas clean-up/concentration/conditioning
process based upon the proposed one-step concept will be demonstrated in a bench
top unit with synthetic feeds. The experimental and simulation results thus
generated will be used to validate the proposed technical concept and provide
economic basis for the next phase technical and commercial development with an
end user participant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of this process will
play a pivotal role in linking the existing upstream biomass gasification
technology with the downstream hydrogen or syngas use technology. The production
cost using existing technology was about 2 to 4 times of the cost of fossil
diesel in 2004. By implementing this technology, the projected bio-based fuel
cost will be in line with current fossil fuel prices according to preliminary
cost analyses. The development and commercialization of this process will play a
pivotal role in linking the existing upstream biomass gasification technology
with the downstream syngas to fuel/chemical conversion technologies and will
boost the domestic energy supply with minimal net greenhouse gas emissions.