* 0839783
* SBIR Phase I:  MEMS-Based System for Particulate Matter Pollution Monitoring Using Thin-Film Bulk Acoustic Wave Resonators (FBARs)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Justin Black, Harmonic Devices Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of a miniaturized, battery-powered, and inexpensive sensor to
provide real-time mass measurements of airborne particulate matter (PM). PM is a
major public health issue, and there is an urgent need for inexpensive devices
that monitor PM in epidemiological studies of aerosol exposure, especially with
regard to pollutants. The highly innovative PM mass monitor leverages state-of-
the-art micromachined electromechanical system (MEMS) technologies to achieve
unprecedented reductions in power consumption, cost, sample flow rate, and form
factor. The system employs the thermophoretic deposition of particulates from a
sample stream onto a thin-film bulk acoustic wave resonator (FBAR), and
determines the mass deposited by measuring the frequency shift of an electronic
oscillator. The Phase I effort will focus largely on improving the sensitivity
and stability of the MEMS FBAR mass sensor, but also seek to reduce the monitor
size and power consumption and to improve the interface electronics.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this technology will be to
inexpensively and quickly assess airborne particulates for human health and
industrial cleanliness. Present instrumentation to measure PM mass can be bulky,
costly to purchase, and difficult to operate. This real-time MEMS PM mass
monitor provides a compelling value proposition by offering stand-alone
operation and an order of magnitude reduction in size and power and lower cost
in comparison to existing aerosol mass monitors. Markets for the instrument
include industrial hygiene and clean room monitoring, power plant monitoring,
mobile monitoring in aircraft, indoor air quality monitoring, ambient PM
monitoring, and emergency response. The 2007 worldwide addressable market for
the technology is over $100 million. This work contributes to scientific
understanding by enabling a highly-sensitive, portable, and low-cost PM mass
monitor for epidemiological studies of aerosol exposure. The technology has
important societal impact by assisting those seeking to improve air quality and
reduce the health impacts of airborne PM in the environment and workplace and by
reducing the cost of collecting airborne PM pollution data.