* 0839294
* SBIR Phase I:  ManyWheels VehicleTransport Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Kevin Dewalt, Dewalt                  Kevin          M
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will pursue a solution
to the inefficiencies in transporting automobiles. 80 million new and used
vehicles are sold annually in the US in a rich, dynamic market involving
manufacturers, dealers, wholesalers, consumers, banks, rental agencies, and
others. In spite of the sophistication and size of this market, the
transportation of these vehicles from seller to intermediary to buyer operates
inefficiently, often using technology and business processes that pre-date the
Internet. Commercial automobile transporters frequently drive routes with spare
capacity or empty trucks because they cannot identify and secure new business
opportunities in real time. This project will improve the efficiency of
transporting automobiles by developing market-mechanisms to allow shippers and
transporters to discover and negotiate opportunities in real time. Creating such
a market requires solving a real-time logistics problem in an enormous, highly
fractured market of thousands of businesses shipping millions of pieces of cargo
among 10,000 transporters which often have limited communications infrastructure
beyond PDAs and cell phones.

Billions of dollars are spent annually transporting automobiles; the potential
for even single-digit efficiency improvements creates a compelling business
opportunity. The company that can achieve such improvements may benefit from the
scalability and network effects that create attractive investment opportunities
for venture capitalists. The financial model also improves with rising fuel
prices. Additionally, the solution will have the strategic benefit to the US of
reducing our oil consumption. It will also have the social benefit of reducing
the US carbon footprint.