* 0839385
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer Probes for Molecular Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Daniel Sobek, Zymera Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the detection of an established target in cancer diagnosis and treatment using
new targeted Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer to Quantum Dots (BRET-QD)
technology. BRET-QD offers substantial advantages over fluorescence or
luminescence imaging by: (1), circumventing the need for external illumination
while delivering comparable or better sensitivity; (2), providing compatibility
with existing image capturing technology; (3), providing superior probe
stability compared to radiolabel technology, enabling longitudinal studies; and
(4), delivering greater in vivo penetration-depth than fluorescence-based
probes. The project will demonstrate the direct detection of the HER2 cancer
marker in breast cancer cell lines. Successful detection of HER2 in live cells
from a breast cancer cell line will provide the proof-of-concept necessary for
advancing to direct tumor and tissue imaging with BRET-QD probes in small
animals.

The broader impacts of this research are the development of a sensitive and
convenient targeted imaging probe platform and its application to breast cancer
detection. In order to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying diseases
such as cancer, there is increasing interest in advancing from cell-based assays
to in vivo imaging of disease states in small animal models. The targeted BRET-
QD platform will provide a cost-effective, convenient and effective alternative
to fluorescence and bioluminescence imaging probe technology. In addition to
cancer applications, this platform will be applicable to virtually any
investigation requiring sensitive detection of a known molecule that can be
targeted via a biotinylated antibody or other biotinylated molecule.