* 0839176
* SGER: Static Voltage Stability Analysis using Grobner Basis Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Parthasarathi Nag, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 03/31/2010
* USD 75,357.00

The phenomenon of voltage (in)stability has been identified as a significant
threat to power system security and reliability. Previous research efforts to
study voltage stability have been based on numerical techniques. While such
techniques can be efficiently implemented on large scale power systems, they
yield little analytical information. On the other hand, symbolic algebraic-
geometric based methods, while capable of yielding explicit analytical
information pertaining to bus voltage and load sensitivities, are limited to
very small systems because of their large computational complexity. This effort
addresses the scalability issue by adopting a mixed symbolic/numerical approach
exploiting the strengths of both conventional power-flow based and symbolic
algebraic/geometric techniques to extend static voltage stability analysis on
larger power systems. The objective is to obtain local symbolic sensitivities of
bus voltage and loads. These can be used in the design of VAR support devices at
such buses. The investigation will further focus on the identification of system
conditions under which the resulting parameterized power flow equations can
always be reduced to triangular form using Gröbner basis (GB)
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project advances the knowledge and understanding in the area of GB reduction
techniques for multiple power flow solutions and provides a theoretical
foundation to facilitate analytical (static) voltage stability studies in larger
power systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed algebraic-geometric techniques can be applied to obtain analytical and
theoretical insights in networks arising from other contexts, for example,
wireless communication and sensor networks. If successful, the effort will
contribute to improved security and reliability of one of the Nation's most
critical infrastructures, the electric power grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational plan is to absorb the proposed research techniques in to a graduate
course in power systems analysis at NDSU. The results will be disseminated
through journal and conference publications and through a power engineering
newsletter to educational institutions including five tribal community colleges
comprising Native American students. The Co-PIs activities will serve to enhance
research efforts at a non-Ph.D. granting university.