* 0839335
* SBIR Phase I: Semi-Autonomous Adaptive Neural and Genetic Segmentation of Medical Images
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* John McInerney, KJAYA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will implement a
physician-assisted, real-time adaptive system for the segmentation of anatomical
structures in 3D medical image data. Medical image segmentation seeks to change
the representation of an anatomical structure, making it more easily analyzed.
Because of the extreme variability of these structures in biological systems,
current idiosyncratic manual methods currently in use are tedious, time
consuming, and error prone. Image segmentation cannot in general be
programmatically solved. The proposed system is a Neural Network (NN) based
adaptation of the individual data using parallel Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) and coupled with a Genetic Algorithm (GA) based adaptation across GPU
cores. The system will build a diagnostically useful segmentation of the
anatomical feature within seconds from an area of interest outlined by a
physician using a Computed Tomography (CT) or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
scan.

Fast growth in medical imaging overwhelms available diagnosticians. An intuitive
and inexpensive system to quickly and accurately deliver diagnostic relevant
segmentation of medical images offers tremendous commercial value. Currently,
each scan requires approximately 50 minutes of manual preparation. The diagnosis
and treatment of an estimated 20 percent of diseases benefit from medical
imaging. Newer scanning technologies have increased in resolution, but such
techniques have not made segmenting easier or faster. The proposed method will
enable more diagnostics to be done with the quality controlled directly by
physicians.