* 0839068
* Collaborative Research: Atmospheric Data Assimilation Techniques for Antarctic Applications
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Ying-Hwa Kuo, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2013
* USD 481,405.00

Abstract

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The paucity of conventional meteorological observations over the Antarctic
continent represents a major challenge to both weather forecasts and climate
analysis. This puts a premium on the productive use of satellite data, including
non-traditional approaches such as is exemplified by the GPS radio occultation
(RO) soundings, currently available from the joint Taiwan/US COSMIC/FormoSat-3
mission. This polar orbiting constellation of 6 low earth orbiting platforms
(LEOs) uses RO limb sounding of the atmospheric refraction of the global
positioning satellite network signals to yield, amongst other things,
atmospheric soundings of temperature, pressure and moisture content of the
atmosphere at high spatial and temporal resolution. Given the virtual total lack
of radiosonde data over the Southern Ocean and the Antarctic continent, methods
to most productively utilize this powerful observing system are of interest to
researchers and observational groups alike.

Investigators from NCAR and the Ohio State University propose to develop
effective and efficient data assimilation approaches to incorporating COSMIC RO
soundings into Antarctic weather prediction and other atmospheric (e.g. climate
and atmosphere system variables) data records. Existing 3 or 4 dimensional
variational (3/4D-Var) and ensemble based (i.e. probabalistic) data assimilation
schemes will be used in conjunction with the Weather Research and Forecast (WRF)
model in order to specify which data assimilation scheme is best suited to
weather analysis, and reanalysis, in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean
atmospheric environments.