* 0839744
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Microencapsulation for Oral Delivery of Antiviral dsRNA to Shrimp
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* John Buchanan, Aqua Bounty Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 95,236.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on
oral delivery of an antiviral treatment for White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV)for
use in shrimp aquaculture. This antiviral is based on the concept of RNA
inhibition, or RNAi, and is focused on priming the shrimp?s natural antiviral
machinery to silence critical genes of the infecting virus, thus preventing
spread of viral infection. If successful in proof of concept in Phase I, Phase
II research will focus on testing and optimizing oral delivery of RNAi
antivirals in response to viral challenges. This research is combines expertise
in evaluating therapeutics for shrimp and understanding of RNAi-based approaches
for controlling viral infections, with the proprietary technologies for micro-
encapsulation to enhance stability and availability of therapeutics.

The broader impacts of this research are to address the dire need for antiviral
treatments for successful shrimp aquaculture. In particular, White Spot Syndrome
Virus (WSSV) will be the first target for a commercial product. WSSV is endemic
in the majority of shrimp producing countries, and causes losses of over $1.5
billion annually. The virus can potentially destroy the shrimp output of an
entire country as it did in Ecuador in the early part of the century. The oral
delivery of RNAi therapeutics to shrimp could be adapted to target other
economically damaging viruses. Such technologies for oral delivery of RNAi-based
antivirals to shrimp could be the first blockbuster therapeutic in aquaculture.
There is a desperate industry need, and a significant commercial opportunity,
for innovation in addressing shrimp viral infections.