* 0839734
* SBIR Phase I: Particle Filtering Technology for Wearable Medical Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2009
* Alton Reich, Streamline Automation, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,932.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing
improved noise filters for wearable medical instrumentation. Recently, medical
sensing instrumentation for the monitoring of physiological signals has become
increasingly wearable and noninvasive. However, because these sensors are now
portable they will be exposed to higher levels of noise and artifacts
(especially motion artifacts) than in controlled clinical scenarios. As a
result, these sensors cannot perform reliably unless data is post-processed by a
filter. Conventional filters (adaptive-recursive, wavelet, and others) are
limited by their generic applicability and do not have the necessary
performance. To address this, Streamline Automation, LLC (SA) and Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI) will develop particle filters (PF) based on
physiological models. PF have been shown to outperform all other known filtering
methods, especially for nonlinear systems, such as human physiology, with non-
stationary and non-Gaussian noise (motion artifacts). However, so far PF have
not been used in medical or biological applications. To make this possible, we
propose a state-space modeling approach based on anatomical and physiological
concepts. In Phase I, we will develop and demonstrate the particle filtering
approach based on a cardiovascular-respiratory system state-space model to
process wearable pulse oximeter signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
applications are vast because particle filters have the potential to deliver
robustness and reliability to any physiological monitoring hardware but have not
yet been applied to biosignals. The focus of this project is increasing the
robustness of the wearable pulse oximeter hardware such that it becomes useful
in ambulatory monitoring. This technology should be applicable in urban and
natural disaster areas where multiple traumatic injury victims must be triaged
and evacuated (earthquakes, car accidents, explosions, tornadoes, etc). Other
applications include monitoring of long-distance flight pilots, physical
exercise monitoring, surgery and anesthesia, sleep apnea, patients with chronic
cardiovascular or respiratory conditions, and remote monitoring under austere
environments such as high altitude rescue teams, firefighters, and deep sea
diving. Since particle filtering technology is not limited to pulse oximetry, a
host of other applications exist, provided suitable mathematical models for the
system and measurement are developed. Examples of these are the detection of
faint fetal electrocardiogram, kidney dialysis monitoring, non-invasive glucose
monitoring, and electromyogram filtering.&lt;br/&gt;