* 0839912
* SGER: Collaborative Research: Creating a Climate Math Web Portal
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Christopher Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2010
* USD 28,000.00

This project will develop a Climate Math Web Portal housed on the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) web pages. The web portal is an
important component of a long-term initiative to facilitate high-level
collaboration between mathematicians and climate scientists to solve some of the
deeply mathematical problems in climate change research. The specific objectives
of the proposed web portal are three-fold: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Introduce
some of the mathematical challenges and opportunities in climate change research
to the broadest mathematical audience possible. &lt;br/&gt;2. Introduce the
language, mathematics and central results of climate change research in a way
that is designed to jump-start the learning of an active mathematics audience.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Share resources for education in Climate Math at levels ranging
from graduate training to introductory undergraduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary Advisory Board will be established to
oversee development of the web portal, and experts will be invited to write
expository introductions and annotated bibliographies for simple climate and
process models. Matlab code will be posted for simple models. The portal will
also introduce and provide access to archives of IPCC model output and other
data, and will collect educational materials ranging from recommended reading
lists for graduate seminars to worksheets based on climate data for introductory
undergraduate classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global warming, and the associated
changes in extreme weather patterns, sea level, fresh water supply and habitat
ranges raise urgent policy questions from the local to international levels.
Answers to these questions depend on impact predictions of climate models for
the particular region in question, over the next 50-100 years. But there are
critical stumbling blocks in climate modeling, of a deeply mathematical nature,
that currently prevent climate scientists from making impact predictions at the
level of accuracy required to inform policy decisions. Development of the web
portal will provide an infrastructure that helps to bring the full power of
mathematics to research at the interface of mathematics and climate science, to
address some of the most pressing questions facing climate modeling, and hence
society. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;