* 0839168
* The Antarctic Search for Meteorites
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ralph Harvey, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 07/31/2013
* USD 600,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Since 1976, under the auspices of an inter-agency agreement
between NSF, NASA and the Smithsonian Institution, the Antarctic Search for
Meteorites program (ANSMET) has recovered nearly 17,000 meteorite specimens from
locations along the Transantarctic Mountains. This proposal requests support for
continued recovery of Antarctic meteorites through systematic searches for
meteorite specimens at previously discovered stranding surfaces. Minor
reconnaissance efforts will also take place seeking to discover and explore the
extent of new locations with potential meteorite concentrations. The meteorites
recovered by ANSMET are the best and most reliable source of new, non-
microscopic extraterrestrial material, providing essential "ground-truth"
concerning the materials that make up the asteroids, planets, and other bodies
of our solar system. ANSMET meteorites have helped researchers explore the
conditions that were present in the nebula from which our solar system was born
about 4.5 billion years ago, and provided samples of asteroids ranging from
primitive bodies unchanged since the formation of the solar system to complex,
geologically active miniature planets. ANSMET samples also proved, against the
conventional wisdom, that some meteorites actually represent planetary material
delivered to the Earth from the Moon and Mars, changing our view of the geology
of those bodies. ANSMET meteorites have even generated a new kind of inquiry
into one of the most fundamental scientific questions possible - the prevalence
of biological activity in the universe as a whole. Continued reliance on
students provides a broader impact to this proposed research and firmly grounds
this effort in its educational mission.