* 0839989
* SGER: Field Testing To Confirm The Sensory Hypothesis Of the Male Narwhal Tusk
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Martin Nweeia, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 07/31/2009
* USD 11,863.00

The function of the narwhal tusk has eluded scientific discovery since the
writings of Albertus Magnus in 1495. The long, spiraled tusk, inspiring the
legend of the unicorn, has captivated artists, intrigued explorers and baffled
scientists. Now, there is preliminary evidence suggesting that the tusk is a
sensory organ, detecting gradients of temperature, pressure, particle and ion
solutions, and having tactile sensation. The experiment will be completed in 36
degree Arctic waters on captive whales that are part of normal migration tagging
efforts in Canada. Variable salt ion solutions will be introduced to a gasket
that surrounds a portion of the tusk. As the tusk is exposed to these solutions,
brain and muscle activity, heart and pulse rate, and vocal response will be
monitored. The results are expected to confirm the micro-anatomic model
developed by examining tusks under an electron microscope. The results should
confirm overt visual responses observed during the 2007 expedition, of tusk
waving immediately after high salt ion solutions were exposed to the tusk
surface. The discovery and documentation of this sensory ability will have broad
public and scientific impacts. The narwhal may be nature's best detector of
global warming, as the ability to sense salt ion solutions is directly linked to
ice formation and melting. Furthermore, for tooth tissue development, the
narwhal tusk may be the key evolutionary link to several hundred million years
ago when armored fish may have been able to detect gradients of temperature,
pressure, particles in solution, and tactile events.