* 0840371
* CRIF:MU:  Acquisition of a Cyber Enabled 500 MHz Solid State NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* David Wiemer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2012
* USD 512,460.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Iowa will acquire a cyber enabled 500 MHz solid state nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer. The spectrometer will be used for research projects in the
chemical sciences including: 1) synthesis and characterization of inorganic
nanostructures and polymeric networks, 2) surface adsorption and surface
reactions of environmental interfaces, 3) studies of nanostructured polymers
using lyotropic liquid crystalline systems, 4) studies of zeolites and
mesoporous silica materials, 5) characterization of fluorinated surfactants and
polychlorinated environmental contaminants, and 6) monitoring solid state
reactivity and self assembly using NMR-active nuclei (Si, F) as tags.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most
broadly used tool available to chemists for the analysis of materials. It is
used to identify unknown substances and to provide information on the
arrangement and connectivity of atoms in molecules and materials i.e. their
structures. Solid state NMR requires special instrumentation and techniques
compared to the more widely used NMR of solutions. It provides critical
information on the chemical bonding, structure and atomic environment in both
crystalline and non-crystalline materials, polymers and on surfaces. This
spectrometer will enhance many Iowa programs that promote teaching and learning
of undergraduates and graduate students. It will assist the research and
teaching activities of users from other regional undergraduate campuses who will
use this instrument on weekends through an outreach program that provides access
to advanced instrumentation to promote cross institutional collaborations and
encourage interest in graduate careers of students at these institutions
including several with large numbers of underrepresented minorities.