* 0840741
* MIND NanoArchitecture Workshop: Exploring Design with post-CMOS Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2010
* USD 25,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIND NanoArchitecture Workshop: Exploring Design with
post-CMOS Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this workshop
is to explore the implications of proposed post-CMOS devices at the circuit,
architecture, and system levels. Recognized experts will present their vision,
and strong session chairs will guide the discussion. Anticipated outcomes of
this workshop include benchmarks and figures of merit for evaluating candidate
devices, and identification of alternative circuits, architectures, and/or
compute systems in which specific, promising new structures can extend or
supersede CMOS design-space?s superiority&lt;br/&gt;As CMOS technology is
approaching fundamental limits, much effort is concentrated on finding Post-CMOS
switching devices. These novel devices necessitate the identification of
appropriate circuit architectures, which might be different from what is being
used for conventional CMOS devices. This workshop will explore architectures and
designs which will support Post-CMOS, potentially hybrid, technology
applications. As such, the outcomes of this workshop will lay the intellectual
groundwork for transformative advances that are needed for the design of Post-
CMOS computer systems. &lt;br/&gt;This workshop will have broad impact by
bringing together leading experts from the traditionally-distinct device,
circuit, architectures, and systems communities. This work will increase the
interactions between NSF and SRC-NRI Centers, and help coordinate the work of
the whole NSF / NRI community. We anticipate that the outcomes of this workshop
will direct future developments in this field, including architectural findings
and benchmarks and figures of merit for evaluating candidate devices. On a
grander scale, these outcomes will help identify strategic directions for the
continuation of the microelectronics industry beyond the end of the CMOS
technology roadmap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;