* 0840460
* Student Participation in the 2009 NSF Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Grantees and Research Conference; June 22-25, 2009; Honolulu, Hawaii
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2011
* Zhijian Pei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 225,782.00

The purpose of this award is to provide travel funds for both domestic and
foreign students to attend the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
Grantees Conference, to be held in June, 2009, in Honolulu, Hawaii. The theme of
this conference is Research and Education in a Flat World, and the inclusion of
students from around the world will complement this theme. Domestic students
will be invited to apply for support through announcements on the NSF web site
and through e-mailings sent to all Divisional grantees. Foreign students will be
invited through their respective funding agencies and because of extant
international collaborations with Divisional grantees. Foreign student support
will include conference registration fee and hotel accommodations. Domestic
students will also obtain travel support. Student applications for support will
be reviewed by an ad hoc committee and selections made based on factors that
include diversity, research topic relevance and poster
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and benefit of this
activity will be a broadening the education of domestic students to include a
more international view of engineering and the formation of collaborations that,
in many instances, will last well into the careers of the students. Through this
exposure, students are likely to improve their research and to make
contributions that will provide greater benefit to society in the future.