* 0840751
* RiverWebs: Optimizing a Documentary on Stream Ecology for Science Teachers in the U.S. and Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Kurt Fausch, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2011
* USD 49,116.00

This award supports a U.S.-Japan teacher workshop and other activities designed
to capitalize on a unique opportunity for science education by adapting a
successful NSF-funded science documentary film, RiverWebs, for use in junior
high and high school classrooms. RiverWebs is a unique science documentary about
the natural history of stream ecosystems, exploring the interconnections between
the stream and forest food webs and unveiling the process of discovery and human
stories behind ecological research. The film also chronicles the life and work
of Dr. Shigeru Nakano of Kyoto University, whose seminal work on stream-forest
food web connections in Japan drew the attention of the best U.S. ecologists
before his tragic death in a research accident in March 2000.

A main goal of the project is to engage an advisory committee of U.S. science
teachers directly in the film making process. The project plans to 1) consult
with them on key objectives for the classroom version, 2) engage them in a field
trip to see important elements of stream ecology first hand, 3) garner their
input to align the film with national science teaching standards, 4) ask for
their review of scripts and rough cuts, 5) gain their help in arranging test
screenings in real classrooms, and 6) ask their advice on the best methods and
venues for disseminating the final product. Second, the project plan a
U.S.-Japan Science Teacher Exchange during summer 2009 at the Lake Biwa Museum
near Kyoto to interact with a similar team of Japanese science teachers who are
advising us on a Japanese language version of the film. The goal is to create a
highly affordable DVD package ($10-20) that will be available through
Freshwaters Illustrated. The dissemination plan to ensure a broad impact for
materials includes: 1) promoting it through presentations at the National
Science Teachers Association national meeting and other similar groups, 2)
advertising it in professional publications and newsletters from these groups,
and 3) donating every fifth copy to under-resourced schools in inner city and
rural areas to reach under-represented and disadvantaged students.