* 0840389
* ITR - (ASE) - (sim+dmc):  Parallel Data Mining for Nanoscale Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulation Models
* CSE,CCF
* 11/27/2007,09/30/2010
* Talat Rahman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2010
* USD 280,526.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Advances in computational science and technology
have made the theoreticalmodeling of materials processes and properties viable,
desirable, and a strong supplement to experimental work. Since the understanding
and manipulation of the macroscopic properties of materials relies on
information obtained at the microscopic level, one of the challenges in ASE is
in developing the framework for a seamless, multiscale study of materials
properties and related phenomena. The kinetic Monte Carlo method is one such
technique which is suitable for simulations over a large range of length and
time scales and which has the potential to connect atomistic details with
macroscopic observations.&lt;br/&gt;The standard method is, however, handicapped
because of the requirement of prior knowledge of the&lt;br/&gt;underlying atomic
mechanisms and their energetics. Typically only a few processes involving
single&lt;br/&gt;atom motion are provided as input to kinetic Monte Carlo
simulations, thereby neglecting the role of&lt;br/&gt;collective atomic motion,
vacancy creation, and complex atomic processes, as well as biasing the
time&lt;br/&gt;evolution of the system. In the proposed research in ASE with
technical focus in sim and dmc, we plan&lt;br/&gt;to overcome these limitations
through the inclusion of unique and innovative pattern recognition
schemes&lt;br/&gt;along with automated procedures for the calculation of system
energetics on the fly. This procedure will&lt;br/&gt;allow the development of an
extensive database of possible atomic events. The database so collected
will&lt;br/&gt;serve as input for further analysis and processing using machine
learning and data mining for the&lt;br/&gt;development of efficient, robust, and
accurate mapping functions which will be extensively tested
through&lt;br/&gt;simulations of a variety of phenomena in epitaxial growth and
validated through comparison with relevant&lt;br/&gt;experimental data. The
resulting mapping functions will serve to vastly increase the accuracy and
speed&lt;br/&gt;of simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Our goal of creating accurate and efficient computational
algorithms for the simulation&lt;br/&gt;of phenomena such as thin-film growth
will be a significant achievement in the technical focus areas of&lt;br/&gt;sim
and dmc, because of the innovative methodologies resulting from cross-
disciplinary approaches. The&lt;br/&gt;successful implementation of the
algorithms for computer design of materials, however, will be
a&lt;br/&gt;breakthrough in ASE, as it will enable the development of
technologically important materials with much&lt;br/&gt;reduced cost and much
greater control.&lt;br/&gt;The work will also provide us opportunities for
educational and outreach activities with broad national, international and
societal impact. Apart from the education and training of our graduate and
undergraduate students in ITR, we will propose to work with the K-12 community
in this endeavor. We intend to do so through the integration of research and
education. Our team will collectively incorporate products of the research into
courses on computational methods in physics, on data mining, on machine
learning, and on adaptive parallelization techniques. A module for instructional
and outreach purposes will also be developed. Two high school teachers will be
recruited to spend summer sessions at KSU. Regular outreach activities with K-12
teachers and students will help broaden the pool of individuals in IT and
nanoscale science literate individuals. Existing international collaborations of
the PI with Prof. Alatalo, Finland, Dr. Trushin, Russia, and Dr. Durukanoglu,
Turkey will help extend the outcomes of the proposed work internationally.