* 0840513
* Establishment of a Cyber-Enhanced Computational Modeling Facility for Teaching and Research in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Donald Blake, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 289,399.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Department of Chemistry at the University of California - Irvine will acquire
computer nodes and supporting equipment as part of a larger Computational
Modeling Facility (CMF) on the Irvine campus. The infrastructure will support a
wide range of chemical research: development of semiclassical density
functionals, modeling of molecular electronics, theory of DNA cleavage, modeling
of structure and bonding in lanthanide and actinide complexes, development of
improved methods for computing exchange energies, simulations of two-dimensional
infrared spectra, modeling the structure and dynamics of transition metal
complexes, and the modeling of asymmetric catalysis. The users of the
infrastructure are diverse: from high school students participating in the
COSMOS residential summer school, a faculty member and her students at Hunter
College, a second faculty member and her students at Lincoln University, as well
as the researchers at UC Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern computer
infrastructure allows chemists to do some experiments virtually, without the
need to use chemical reagents. In addition, checked against experiment, new,
more accurate theoretical methods may be developed. In tandem with experiment,
computations allow chemists to examine in detail beyond that of current
experimental methods, the molecular ballet that takes place in complicated
chemical processes. The infrastructure made available with this grant will be
used in teaching and training a broad range of young scientists in computational
chemistry -- from high school, all the way through the post-graduate level.