* 0840713
* Collaborative Project: Ensemble: Enriching Communities and Collections to Support Education in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,09/30/2014
* Lillian Cassel, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,406,657.00

Ensemble adds a computing pathway to the existing set of NSF STEM Digital
Libraries (NSDL). The addition ensures that the NSDL pathways provide a more
complete coverage of STEM areas. The computing pathway supports the full range
of computing education communities, provides a base for the development of
programs blending computing with other STEM areas, and produces digital library
innovations that are propagated to other NSDL pathways. Since computing
communities including computer science, computer engineering, software
engineering, information science, information systems and information technology
continue to rapidly evolve; the computing pathway greatly aids computing
educators in those areas. The computing pathway also addresses diversity, the
complex interactions across the computing communities, as well as meeting the
future need for increasing the numbers of computer related graduates. Ensemble
reaches across the full range of audiences for computing education from K-12 to
graduate and professional education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensemble creates a
distributed portal providing access to the broad range of existing educational
resources while preserving the collections and their associated curation
processes. Ensemble encourages contribution, use, reuse, review and evaluation
of educational materials at multiple levels of granularity. To accomplish the
overall goals, the Ensemble team works directly with relevant professional
societies and accreditation agencies to articulate inter-relationships among the
computing communities. &lt;br/&gt;