* 0840674
* A "Great Migration": Using Measures of Dental Affinity to Retrace the Bantu Expansion(s)
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Joel Irish, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 86,112.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Joel Irish will analyze premodern
African skeletal remains to investigate the ancient continent-wide "Bantu
expansion." This investigation is possible through the cooperation of colleagues
across Europe and Africa. The goals are twofold. The first is historical, i.e.,
to provide additional information about this migration, whose effects on
Africa's linguistic, cultural, and genetic landscapes remain evident today. The
second goal involves the environment which affects human adaptation and in turn
is affected by humans. Minimal resources may have initially encouraged Bantu
migration. Exploitation and over-exploitation of new lands followed, compelling
continuing migration. After several millennia, the result was the modern
distribution of sub-Saharan peoples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The term "Bantu"
identifies a language group spoken by most sub-Saharan Africans. However, early
ethnographic studies revealed that Bantu-speakers were relative newcomers to
this region. Linguistic and archaeological evidence sets their homeland in
western Africa. Their "expansion" is believed to have begun 4,000-3,000 years
ago. Most researchers accept this scenario. However, the fields of linguistics,
archaeology, and genetics, which account for most Bantu research, often yield
conflicting hypotheses concerning: the scale of migration(s), number, routes,
timing, and influence on the migrants and the region's original inhabitants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An alternate approach is proposed to provide fresh
insight, i.e., using the Arizona State University Dental Anthropology System
(ASUDAS) to assess population variation. The ASUDAS returns analogous findings
to genetic research, often yields superior results to other skeletal analyses,
and is time-tested. Specifically, dental study holds a key advantage over
traditional fields of Bantu research -- the ability to examine primary evidence.
Samples will comprise remains of premodern individuals involved in or influenced
by the migrations, along with their descendants who lived before recent
detribalization and admixture. Other methods also have potential in this regard
(e.g. aDNA); however, ASUDAS results can be obtained at a fraction of the cost,
and the method is nondestructive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traits will first be
recorded in proto-Bantu, Bantu, and non-Bantu samples (n&gt;4,000 individuals.),
and added to those already collected by Irish (n=845). These data will identify
trait frequencies beyond that already known. Next, distance statistics will
assess trait variation to estimate inter-sample relatedness. Results will be
used to address region-specific hypotheses and formulate new ones. Finally,
findings will be contrasted with published linguistic, archaeological, and
genetic data to evaluate inter-method concordance. Beyond Bantu-specific issues,
data analysis can also answer theoretical and methodological questions about
human affinity and migration on a broader scale (incl. global).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several broader benefits may be realized. Beyond training
and experience for Dr. Irish's students, he is collaborating with African
colleagues. He will also train African students, reach out to an interested lay
audience -- including Africans who wish to better understand their past, and
give public talks at African institutes. All findings will be communicated
through peer-reviewed publications, and international and national fora. These
results will add to the knowledge base on a vital historical issue, and
contribute information on environment/human interaction.