* 0840531
* Acquisition of a Cyber Enabled X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Chemistry Research Education and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Albert Courey, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2012
* USD 468,073.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California will acquire a Cyber-enabled X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS)
System. The spectrometer will be used by researchers at UCLA, neighboring
comprehensive universities and colleagues in South America to study a number of
problems in the chemical sciences. These include: (1) the electronic properties
in periodic surfactant-templated semiconductors; (2) potential electrode and
capacitive energy storage materials; (3) the synthesis of new types of
conducting polymer nanofiber-metal nanocomposites; (4) new methods to pattern
and array proteins in the nano- to micro-scale range; (5) studies of laser-
assisted chemical vapor deposition of metals and binary compounds; and (6)
potential methods for generating nanometer resolution patterns. The spectrometer
will be used by large numbers of undergraduate and graduate students, both in
instructional settings as well as in research. Access to the instrument will be
widened, via cyber-enabling and other means, to students at Cal Poly Pomona and
California State University Los Angeles. In addition, a research group at CNEA,
Buenos Aires will use the instrumentation, remotely, in their studies of
functionalized mesoporous thin films.

The x-ray photoelectron spectrometers, like the one purchased under this award,
allow chemists to probe the atom-by-atom structure of materials with
extraordinarily high resolution and with depth profiling up to tens of
nanometers. This level of detail is especially needed when probing the chemical
properties of nanoscale materials, where the chemical heterogeneity changes at
precisely these length scales. Without this level of detail, the progress
towards new kinds of nanoscale materials will be made much more slowly. The
infrastructure made available with this grant will be used in teaching and
training a broad range of young scientists in important, cutting-edge,
experimental methods.