* 0840663
* 2008 Organizational Communication and Information Systems Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Brian Butler, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* David W. McDonald
* 07/31/2009
* USD 19,945.00

This is a 12-month standard award to support a Organizational Communication and
Information Systems (OCIS) Doctoral Colloquium program at the Academy of
Management Conference to be held in Anaheim, CA (August 8-13, 2008). This will
bring together approximately 25 dissertation-stage doctoral students in the
field of Information Systems for one and a half days of talks and interaction
with 6 distinguished senior faculty mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants
will come from the USA and from abroad. In the past, the doctoral consortium has
been a successful venue for socialization of young OCIS researchers. Many of
today's leading OCIS scholars have participated in past OCIS consortia. This
project provides support for the travel and lodging of students as well as other
expenses of putting on the doctoral
consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of
the doctoral consortium is discussion of the students' dissertation projects.
These represent cutting edge research in the field of organizational
communication and information systems. The consortium provides both an
opportunity for these projects to be shaped through intellectual exchange as
well as communicating the work to a key group of young
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The OCIS doctoral
consortium brings together highly talented students and several senior
researchers, facilitating the development of a social network that will play a
major role in the career success of new researchers. Since both faculty and
students are diverse on several dimensions (research topics, methodological
approaches, national and cultural background), the students' horizons are
broadened at a critical stage in their professional development.