* 0840298
* US-Costa Rica Dissertation:   Biological processes influencing nutrient limitation in a tropical wet forest
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Michelle Mack, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2010
* USD 14,960.00

This award to Dr. Michelle Mack at the University of Florida supports graduate
student Silvia Alvarez-Clare to conduct doctoral dissertation research at EARTH
University Forest Reserve in Costa Rica. Ms. Alvarez-Clare will be supervised in
Costa Rica by Dr. Ricardo Russo from EARTH University. Ms. Alvarez-Clare's
investigation will focus on the biological processes influencing nutrient
limitation in a tropical wet forest. Specifically, the proposed study will (1)
directly test if nitrogen, phosphorus, or a combination of N and P, limit tree
biomass production and litterfall decomposition in a lowland diverse tropical
wet forest; (2) investigate how the plant community as a whole influences plant-
soil-microbial-feedbacks and thereby nutrient limitation; and (3) explore the
mechanisms by which an increase in nutrient availability mitigates or reinforces
nutrient limitation in a diverse forest with plant and microbial communities
adapted to low nutrient concentrations. This potentially transformative research
will supply much needed information on tropical forest productivity and nutrient
cycling, specifically how tree species composition and demographic stages
influence ecosystem nutrient dynamics. Additionally, the research will provide a
scientific baseline for future policy and management decisions regarding
tropical forest resources.