* 0840891
* SGER: TF:SING - A New Method for Resource Management in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Zhen Jiang, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 02/28/2010
* USD 60,277.00

Due to the critical resource constraints, it is important to provide an
optimization of utilization of the deployed resource for reliable communication
in wireless sensor networks (WSNs). One of the main challenges is developing a
scalable and distributed method to identify the resource deficit and redundancy
and to control the corresponding scheduling/balancing activities within local
area, i.e., a cost-effective localized solution for max-min
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the management of the
deficit and the redundancy of network coverage and connectivity to solve the
hole problem in WSNs. The research provides a comprehensive understanding of
network topology in the local view of each sensor node as well as a local
description of the network configuration for the resource of the coverage and
connectivity. As a result, the global configuration can be inferred into each
local description. Therefore, the global optimization can be achieved while
keeping all the actions into a limited area. The investigator finds a new
routing scheme to avoid the effect of resource deficit caused by holes, provides
a hole-repair process with synchronization and conflict control, and extends all
the results from 2-D networks to 3-D networks and from uniform disk
communication range model to realistic model. This research leads to new
directions in efficient resource management in the fields of energy
conservation, secured communication establishment and management, data delivery
in delay tolerant mobile networks, and node collaboration. It is likely to make
WSNs more affordable and amenable to commercial, civilian, and military
applications.