* 0840455
* CRIF:MU: Acquisition of Laser Instrumentation for Ultrafast Raman Measurements
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Matthew Platz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 01/31/2012
* USD 472,600.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at Ohio State
University will acquire a femtosecond, regeneratively amplified Ti:Sapphire
laser system, in conjunction with a multichannel detection system, to perform
femtosecond stimulated Raman Spectroscopy experiments. The instrumentation will
be used to provide understanding to several important problems in chemical
science, including (a) how energy flows in the excited states of molecules, from
the observed photophysical and photochemical properties of organometallic
compounds, nitrenes, carbenes and DNA; (b) how to enhance charge injection and
propagation processes in organometallic compounds for solar energy conversion;
(c) how vibrational relaxation mediates ultrafast internal conversion of nucleic
acids; and (d) what the molecular nature of the localized excited state is in
systems used in the photocleavage of DNA by charge transfer
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectroscopy is a powerful tool for studying
vibrational spectra in molecules and macromolecular systems such as DNA. The
spectra will provide information on chemical bonding and the effect from the
surrounding environment in these systems. Time resolved Raman spectroscopy
allows the study of short lived photochemical species and excited states
providing dynamical information on energy flow and relaxation as well. The laser
Raman system in the Center for Chemical and Biophysical Dynamics at Ohio State
will be used in research by undergraduates and graduate students and provide
them training with state-of-the-art equipment.