* 0840123
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Strontium Isotopic Investigation of Population Movement during the Middle Woodland in the Midwestern United States
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2009
* Dana Beehr, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 14,852.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Barry Lewis, Dana Beehr will study population
movement during the North American Middle Woodland time period. The Middle
Woodland period lasted from 150 BC to AD 400 in Midwestern North America, and
was characterized by a cultural phenomenon known as the Hopewell Interaction
Sphere (HIS). A widespread network of trade and exchange of status and ritual
goods, the HIS spanned most of Midwestern North America with epicenters in Ohio
and Illinois. The exact nature of the HIS was controversial for a long time,
with some researchers claiming it was primarily an ideological network while
others focused on trade in goods. It is now recognized that the HIS was probably
not a centralized phenomenon. Trade happened on the individual level and
involved a variety of small-scale processes such as pilgrimages or vision
questing. However the scale and direction of these processes are unclear. Recent
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) work has suggested that gene flow, and hence
population movement, proceeded from Ohio to Illinois, in opposition to
traditional Ohio-centric interpretations of the HIS. This project will attempt
to identify the direction of HIS population movements through strontium isotopic
analysis, a technique that is applied to human skeletal remains to determine an
individual's lifetime migration history. The proposed research is important
because population movement is a powerful demographic force that has long been
neglected in the study of the Middle Woodland. Given the wide-reaching nature of
the HIS, some form of population movement must have been occurring among
regions, and this project offers the chance to explore the nature and direction
of such movement. The project will concentrate on the two epicenters of the
Hopewell phenomenon, Illinois and Ohio, and will examine data from several
sites, including the Hopewell site itself, which is believed to be the largest
and most influential HIS site. Understanding the relationship between these two
regions will contribute to an understanding of the nature of the HIS phenomenon,
and may help to evaluate the extent to which the Ohio region was dominant during
the Middle Woodland. Broader impacts of this study will include an enhanced
understanding of the Middle Woodland period. This will also be the first wide-
scale use of strontium isotopic analysis in Midwestern North America, and will
provide a database of Middle Woodland strontium values on which other
researchers can draw for use in their investigations. The results of the study
and a copy of the forthcoming dissertation will be provided to the agencies that
have given permission for their collections to be included in this project,
including the Ohio Historical Society and the Chicago Field Museum, so that they
may incorporate the findings into the information they provide the public.
Finally, the funding of this study will assist in training the author and
several undergraduate assistants in the technique of strontium isotopic
analysis, a complex and valuable new technique that is becoming increasingly
important in the field of archaeology today.