* 0840515
* Acquisition of a Cyber-enabled Regional 400 MHz Solid-State NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Heppert, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 577,800.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Chemistry Department at the University of Kansas will acquire a 400 MHz solid
state nuclear magnetic resonance (ssNMR) spectrometer. The acquisition will
advance a range of research projects, including: 1) identifying and quantifying
the various functional groups that reside within the soil, including: carbonyl,
phenolic OH, alcohols, aldehydes, amines, ester links, carboxyl groups as well
as aromatic rings, 2) quantifying the dynamics and structure of biological
macromolecules to determine their role in cellular function and biomolecular
recognition, 3) improving the sensitivity of ssNMR to study pharmaceutical
solids, 4) establishing the fibrilar structure of the full-length
beta2-microglobulin protein in dialysis-related amyloid towards understanding
the role amyloid fibrils play in disease, 5) investigating metal binding by
teichoic acid, and 6) obtaining mechanistic information concerning enzyme
expansion from study of protein backbone dynamics at sites distant from the
binding site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid-state NMR spectroscopy is a very
powerful analytical technique for the analysis of solids in research fields as
diverse as chemistry, materials science, food and agricultural products,
pharmaceuticals, biology, soil science, geology, and engineering. The spectra
enable researchers to identify and characterize substances. They provide
information on the arrangement and connectivity of atoms in molecules and
materials i.e. their structures by detecting transitions between energy levels
arising from the nuclear spin properties of atoms. This acquisition will promote
education and the dissemination of information by training graduate students and
postdoctoral associates in performing solid-state NMR experiments and
incorporating ssNMR spectroscopy into the undergraduate curriculum. The
spectrometer will used by researchers at the University of Missouri- Kansas
City, Oklahoma State University, and the University of Oklahoma. It will be open
to other researchers throughout the states of Kansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma.
The instrument will be cyber enabled to enhance this wide use and allow users to
monitor the course of their experiments remotely.&lt;br/&gt;