* 0840772
* Mechanisms of Rapid and Winter Cold-Hardening in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2015
* David Denlinger, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2015
* USD 678,832.00

Ongoing collaborative research between investigators at Miami University and
Ohio State University will focus on molecular and physiological adaptations used
by insects for surviving low temperature. Specifically this work will compare
two distinct responses, termed rapid cold-hardening and winter cold hardening.
The first is an extremely swift physiological response that occurs within
minutes to hours after mild chilling. This rapid cold-hardening response is
ecologically important because it allows insects to continuously fine-tune their
physiological function and organismal performance to match even modest changes
in environmental temperature. In contrast, winter cold-hardening allows insects
to survive extreme and extended periods of cold. This project will use a model
insect, the fly Sarcophaga crassipalpis, to investigate changes in membrane
fluidity and stress (heat shock) proteins that occur during cold-hardening. The
role of calcium and calmodulin in regulating rapid cold-hardening will also be
investigated. The results of these studies will provide a more comprehensive
understanding of the integrated physiological events that enhance cold tolerance
and allow insects to adjust their physiological performance to match changes in
environmental temperature. This research may also provide new strategies and
tools for disruption of insect pest populations and for the long-term storage of
insects and other organisms at low temperature. Another major objective is to
provide outreach and professional development for teachers and students,
including continued collaborations with teachers in the development and
publication of inquiry-based articles in peer-reviewed, science education
journals. The two laboratories will continue their commitments to training not
only graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, but also undergraduate
students by providing extended research experiences that include publication of
scientific papers and presentations at national meetings.