* 0840615
* SGER:  Development of a Novel Strategy for De Novo Sequencing of Wheat BACs Using the SOLiD Sequencing Platform
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Jan Dvorak, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2009
* USD 195,958.00

PI: Jan Dvorak (University of California - Davis) CoPIs: Katrien M. Devos
(University of Georgia), Olin D. Anderson and Ming-Cheng Luo (University of
California - Davis)

Complete BAC-by-BAC sequencing of large plant genomes, such as those of wheat,
barley, and other economically important plants, is currently prohibitively
expensive. Next generation sequencing technologies, such as the 454 Life
Sciences (Roche), Solexa (Illumina), and SOLiD (Applied BioSystems), offer
sequencing with much higher throughputs and at greatly reduced costs.
Unfortunately, the short read-lengths complicate the use of these techniques in
de novo sequencing of eukaryotic genomes. That is particularly true for large
plant genomes that contain vast amounts of repeated DNA sequences. The goal of
this project is to assess a novel strategy for de novo sequencing with the SOLiD
platform in collaboration with Applied BioSystems. This strategy will employ
sequencing of two-dimensional pools of bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
clones of genomic DNA. The strategy will be evaluated using two-dimensional
pools of BAC clones of Aegilops tauschii, one of the diploid ancestors of
polyploid wheat. A program will be written to deconvolute the pools and assemble
sequences of individual clones.

Broader impacts: The development of a de novo sequencing strategy for the SOLiD
sequencing platform will make it possible to seriously consider genome
sequencing of species with large genomes, such as wheat, at realistic costs and
in a realistic time frame. It is the hope that the sequencing technique and the
software developed will be universally applicable to the sequencing of any large
plant genome. The initial repository for public access to the assembly software
developed is at http://wheatdb.ucdavis.edu:8080/wheatdb/index.jsp. The software
will also be integrated with public web sites, such as GrainGenes
(http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/GG2/index.shtml), that provides a compilation of
molecular and phenotypic information on wheat and other cereals.

