* 0840501
* CRIF:MU Acquisition of Cyber-Enabled X/Q-band CW EPR Spectrometer for Use in Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Tatyana Smirnova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 10/31/2012
* USD 499,050.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities Multiuser Program (CRIF:MU), Professor
Morteza G. Khaledi and colleagues Alex I. Smirnov and Tatyana I. Smirnova from
North Carolina State University will acquire a cyber-enabled X/Q-band
continuous-wave EPR spectrometer. Research projects that will benefit from this
instrument include: 1) structure property relationships in transition metal
complexes of biradical ligands; 2) investigation of conformations of
biomolecules by advanced spin-labeling EPR methods; 3) developing new hybrid
nanomaterials for membrane protein biochips; 4) synthesis of multifunctional
hybrid structures with unique electronic properties and development of
molecular-level strategies for elucidating the principles for the formation of
low- and three-dimensional frameworks; 5) reversible addition fragmentation
transfer (RAFT) polymerization kinetic studies in applications for DNA
biosensing; 6) understanding the mechanism of catalase-peroxidase (KatG)
function and its unique model complexes containing unnatural amino acids; 7)
development of dehaloperoxidase as a tool for bioremediation; 8) interaction of
chiral polymers with biological membranes; 9) probing the magnetic and redox
properties of metallotropic liquid crystals with the highest known inorganic
content, and 10) investigating the impact of organic matter on the reduction of
iron phosphates in soil systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An EPR spectrometer yields
information on the molecular and electronic structure of molecules. It may also
be used to obtain information about the lifetimes and identities of free
radicals, short-lived species that are often essential for the initiation of
tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions. These studies will have an
impact in a number of areas, from chemistry to materials and biological
chemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research.