* 0840390
* Acquisition of a Cyber-accessible 400 MHz NMR at the University of Southern Mississippi
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,12/31/2012
* William Jarrett, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 434,911.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
Southern Mississippi University will acquire a cyber enabled 400 MHz nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. It will be employed in a wide variety of
research projects, supporting structural, reaction, and analytical studies such
as 1) synthesis and characterization of vanadium(V) complexes; 2) development of
new olefin metathesis catalyst applications in aqueous media, enhanced reaction
control and asymmetric reactions; 3) synthetic routes for unnatural amino acids;
4) characterization of metallic nitride fullerenes; 5) development of host-guest
systems as molecular sensors; and 6) experimental verification of quantum
chemical shift prediction methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multinuclear NMR
spectroscopy is the most used analytical tool in any molecular-synthetic
discipline in chemistry. The spectra enable researchers to identify unknown
substances and to provide information on the arrangement and connectivity of
atoms in molecules and materials, i.e., their structures by detecting
transitions between energy levels arising from the nuclear spin properties of
atoms. This spectrometer will enhance many Southern Mississippi programs that
promote teaching and learning of undergraduates and graduate students. The
instrument will also be used by three community colleges in Mississippi and the
University's Gulf Coast campus in Long Beach. Remote access and operation
(cyber-enabling) will be a feature of the instrument to enhance usage and
productivity.