* 0840830
* ChemEd Digital Library Wikihyperglossary
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* John Moore, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,453.00

Chemistry (12)

This project advances knowledge and practice by demonstrating the applicability
of Web 2.0 approaches to chemical education, adding significant value to the
Chemical Education Digital Library (ChemEd DL), the NSDL?s chemistry Pathway.
JavaScript Automated Search (JAS) and Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (AJAX) are
combined to create a wikihyperglossary (WHG). This tool automates the process by
which a user can insert into a digital text document or Web page hyperlinks
connecting to glossary definitions that were created or modified by an
individual or a community. Hyperlinks can be to textual material such as
definitions of words, or they can involve multimedia such as videos showing
reactions of the chemical elements or manipulable Jmol structures for molecules.
When a user reads a word or phrase in a document that is connected to a glossary
term, the information associated with the term can be viewed without leaving the
original document. The Web paradigm and its success show the value of making
information accessible by mouse click, in text as well as graphics, movie, and
audio formats. From students' perspectives, this information needs to also be
engaging and personalized. The methods demonstrated by this research enhance the
value of the ChemEd DL and can be readily extended to other Pathways and NSDL
collections.

This project creates a means of adding value to existing information by making
learning more convenient and efficient. Teachers are able to quickly and easily
enhance text documents to include links to well tested Web resources such as
those of the ChemEd DL. Students are able immediately to link documents they are
reading with definitions of scientific terms (or add such links to their own
work). Members of the public struggling to interpret scientific documents that
may be crucial to informed decisions on public policy are much better able to
interpret such documents by adding WHG annotation links to information that
explains the concepts included in the documents. Those beginning work in new
fields of research are able to get up to speed much more rapidly by choosing an
appropriate glossary for the new field and annotating research papers that are
essential to understanding the field. Those working with new graduate students
are able to annotate documents and research papers to provide much more rapid
access for neophytes.