* 0840003
* Unpacking Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2010,02/28/2010
* Elise Engler, Engler                  Elise
* Standard Grant
* Peter West
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1.00

This project, "An Artist Unpacks Palmer Station" would consist of drawings
chronicling an artist?s immersion in this remote setting dedicated to scientific
pursuit. The drawings would inventory visible manifestations of climate change
and to seek to explain them through interaction with the station?s scientific
community. The routines of daily life would also be recorded, allowing the
drawings to present a full picture of human existence in this singular location.
By deconstructing and then reassembling the details of travel, research, life
forms, and landscape, the project would allow parallels to emerge between
scientific study and art-making as paths to understanding.

As with the artist?s previous projects, the drawings would be executed in
colored pencil on vertically oriented, scroll-like sheets of white paper,
uniform in width but varying in length as the subject requires. (Twelve inches
wide and up to five feet in length.) In style, they present visual inventories,
collections of discreet objects drawn in miniature (about one-inch square) and
set row upon row. Each drawing in turn becomes a page in a vast pictographic
text that gives viewers insight into what it takes to perform specific tasks or
be in particular settings. Photography would also be used to record objects and
circumstances so that the more time-consuming process of drawing could be
extended beyond the stay in Antarctica and to minimize the artist?s presence
when necessary.