* 0840001
* Explorations in Statistics Research
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Deborah Nolan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 297,360.00

The Exploration in Statistics Research Workshop is a summer program that brings
together forty participants from around the country, including twenty-four
undergraduate students, eight graduate students, three researcher-presenters,
two-to-three organizers, and two-to-three additional faculty. During this one-
week workshop, undergraduates work closely with statisticians and graduate
students to analyze data from important, current research problems at the
frontiers of applied statistics. The first day of the program is a fast-paced
introduction to statistical software. Then, led by a research statistician,
students explore a research topic for two days. Over the course of six days,
they work with three different researchers on three different topics. Each two-
day exploration begins with the researcher's introducing his or her problem.
This is followed by an investigation phase where students become familiar,
primarily through visualization, with the data collected to address the problem.
Students continue with their analysis in greater depth, they present and discuss
their findings, and the researcher connects students findings to research
results in the field. In addition, students attend three afternoon and evening
sessions on how to apply to graduate school, what graduate school is like, and
careers in statistics. The program is to be hosted at different institutions for
four years. It will be held at the University of California, Berkeley, in 2009,
the National Center for Atmospheric Research in 2010, UCLA in 2011, and Columbia
University in 2012.

The Explorations in Statistics Research Workshop gives students an
understanding of the role of statistics in scientific discovery, with the goal
of encouraging them to pursue advanced studies in statistical science. Students
employ computationally powerful, yet intuitive, modern statistical methods, and
they delve into problems to begin to unlock the answers to important research
questions. It is expected that this experience will entice participants into
graduate studies in statistics. Furthermore, the program has the potential to
increase the diversity of U.S. students who pursue graduate degrees in
statistics. As seen in 2005 and 2006 pilot workshops, twenty-five of the forty-
nine undergraduate participants in the program were women, and eleven were
students from historically under-represented groups in science. Furthermore, the
program is expected to improve the training of the workforce by exposing current
and future faculty to innovative approaches to teaching statistics that are more
applied and computationally-based and more likely to excite students about
statistics research. In addition, educational materials from the workshop
projects will be disseminated to the broader statistics community for use in
undergraduate statistics courses.