* 0840792
* Open Efforts for Computational Materials Research &amp; Education: A NSDL MatDL &amp; TMS Pilot working together with the Materials community
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Laura Bartolo, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 02/29/2012
* USD 149,958.00

This project is expanding the activities of the existing NSDL MatDL Pathway
through collaboration with the Minerals, Metals, and Materials Society (TMS), a
major international professional materials society, to lay the foundation for
sustainable free access to authoritative computational materials research and
education resources in the materials community. By coordinating complementary
services, MatDL and TMS are supporting the extension and deployment of open
source computational materials software in support of materials researchers and
educators. In particular two open source computational materials research code
projects, FiPy and OpenThermo, are being transformed for incorporation into
enhanced educational modules suitable for use with undergraduates. Initial
testing and evaluation is taking place in undergraduate courses at Purdue, RPI,
and Texas A&amp;M. Dissemination of these exemplary modules is taking place at
special participant Roundtables of the February 2009 TMS Annual Meeting, October
2009 Materials Science and Technology Meeting, and the February 2010 TMS Annual
Meeting. The intellectual merit of this project lies in its promotion of open
source research codes and the transformation of these codes into current,
compelling learning resources for undergraduates. Providing undergraduate
students and faculty with realistic computational materials tools enables the
students to develop the necessary skills in computational materials and helps
faculty to incorporate computational methods more fully into their coursework.
The project's broader impact falls first on the principal target audience of
materials undergraduate faculty and students. But these computational materials
education modules are also broadly applicable across the STEM learning
community. Thus offering the undergraduate community convenient access to
relevant, shared learning resources based on research promises to have a
positive impact on both teaching and learning within materials science and
cognate disciplines.