* 0840570
* ALFRED:  Making Very High Throughput Data Accessible
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Kenneth Kidd, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

An extraordinary explosion of new information on the human genome is becoming
available from scientific research. One of the many facets of this enterprise is
the characterization of the variation in gene frequencies that exists among
human populations. Gene frequency variation among the world's populations has
arisen from the net effect of all the genetically relevant chance and systematic
events in the history of those populations past and present population sizes,
the relative degree of endogamous and exogamous mating practices and how they
varied over time, natural selection dynamics as the disease environment and
climate changed, and the numerous subdivisions and mergers of ancient
populations as humans spread around the world. The knowledge scientists are
accumulating of the extant patterns of genetic similarity among human
populations provides useful information to the many different areas where
researchers are working to understand the roles those diverse factors have
played in human evolution. This includes human relationships with other species
from microbes to the other great apes as well as the more recent relationships
among the human populations of the world as reflected in written histories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Allele Frequency Database (ALFRED), created at Yale
University in 2000 with support from NSF, makes data on human genetic variation
broadly available for research and education. This award will support 3 specific
aims supporting the overall goal of integrating into ALFRED the data just now
becoming available from various research teams studying enormous numbers of
human single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on a few to as many as several
dozen populations from around the world. The number of SNPs studied in these
'very high throughput' or VHT projects ranges from several hundred thousand to
about 2 million SNPs distributed across the human chromosomes. The first
specific aim focuses on greatly expanding the contents of ALFRED by automating
the curation process sufficiently to facilitate the addition of these very large
data sets. Other data from the scientific literature will continue to be
incorporated with priority given to SNP results from populations not already
represented in the database. The second aim of this project enhances the
educational and research value of ALFRED by improving the Geographic Information
System (GIS) interface, especially by allowing greater flexibility in the
graphical display of data. The third aim is to enhance the user-friendly
interface generally in order to help users access the vastly expanded contents.
New and more flexible methods will be created to facilitate assembling and
downloading useful subsets of the huge multi-population and multi-marker
datasets. These improvements will also include expanding the explanatory text
and static graphics for educating the users about the use of the database as
well as background information on the nature of the information contained in the
database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, ALFRED is a fairly large database
with almost 280,000 gene frequency tables based on more than 650 human
populations studied very unevenly on more than 14,700 polymorphisms along with
detailed population and marker descriptions and links to other informative
databases. The addition of the data from the VHT projects will vastly increase
the scale of the database on the polymorphism dimension requiring a variety of
adjustments to help users as outlined in specific aims 2 and 3 in order to take
advantage of the wealth of new information. These improvements and expansions to
ALFRED will magnify the value of this resource for research and education in
anthropological genetics and many other interdisciplinary sciences (such as
archaeology, demography, linguistics, forensics, ethnography, and medical
research) that already make use of the database. ALFRED thus will be
strengthened in the service of a variety of functions for education and for
interdisciplinary research. The enhanced GIS interface will help summarize
information for various emerging new disciplines such as geographical genetics
and existing disciplines such as genetic epidemiology. ALFRED will be able to
provide even more reference gene frequencies for comparison with new data sets
that researchers develop. The database can also assist in the planning of future
studies by helping researchers focus on combinations of genetic markers and
population samples that can test various research questions or to identify gaps
in our knowledge that need to be filled in by collecting new datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the broadest sense, the expansion of ALFRED supports a
wide array of disciplines and educational efforts aimed at providing a better
understanding of our biological history as a species. Additionally, one of the
most effective means to combat the misuse of genetic information is to make data
regarding genetic variation in our species widely available through facilities
like ALFRED.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;