* 0840853
* Physics Education Research User's Guide
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Warren Hein, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 10/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This project is creating a Web-based resource for physics faculty to learn best
practices for the use of teaching and learning techniques and curricula based on
the results of Physics Education Research (PER), so that they can teach physics
more effectively. This resource, called the "PER User's Guide," is helping
educators by summarizing, condensing, and translating the vast web of knowledge
contained in the field of PER into a format that is easily accessible, enabling
educators to quickly find and use the information they need. The development
includes collecting existing resources, writing new content to help educators
understand these resources, and creating a dynamic structure that allows
educators to find what they are looking for as efficiently as possible. Both the
content and the structure of the site are based on research into user needs and
user testing to ensure that it is maximally effective. Built in is effective use
of Web 2.0 technologies, which ultimately allow experts from the PER community
to edit content and educators to rate and comment on content, all without the
need for explicit mediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project improves physics
education at the college and high school levels throughout the world by
providing a free, Web-based resource that delivers comprehensive, accessible,
and pragmatic information about PER, including curricula, educational resources,
pedagogical approaches, and research findings. The Guide gives educators access
to the latest developments in education research and how to apply them in their
classrooms, as well as access to the broad foundation upon which these
techniques are based. The creation of the Guide is coupled with a dissemination
and outreach campaign that takes advantage of collaborations with many well-
known organizations to increase both awareness and use among physics educators
in the United States and beyond. This project is helping the broader science
education research community by contributing to the base of research on user
interface design and outreach to educators, and by building a prototype design
that can be used and adapted for educators in other fields of science. Future
extensions of the project will build on this initial seed to include more
detailed content and to target a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of the project include (1) a well-tested prototype Web site with
content designed to help college and high school educators learn about PER, (2)
a body of research on what educators need to help them use the content and
infrastructure of the site effectively, and (3) a set of software tools and
guidelines that can be adapted by educators who would like to design similar
sites in other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Guide is an extension of
an NSDL Pathways project, the ComPADRE Physics and Astronomy Pathway
(http://www.compadre.org/). The Guide enhances the materials in the ComPADRE
collection by presenting results and curricula of PER in the context of their
application in effective teaching.