* 0840273
* CRIF: MU - Acquisition of a Cyber-Enabled Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization (MALDI) Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lynn Penn, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,801.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), Lynn S. Penn and colleagues Haifeng Ji, Kevin G.
Owens, Yen Wei, and Jun Zi from Drexel University will acquire a acquire a
cyber-enabled matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometer (MALDI/TOF) with post source decay (PSD) capabilities to provide
accurate determinations of molecular weight distribution and average molecular
weights of large, nonvolatile molecules, and to accomplish peptide analyses. The
instrument will be used for understanding size selection criteria by which
polymer brushes act as selective barriers to diffusion, synthesis of
monodisperse electroactive polyanilines, synthesis and study of dendrons of
controlled size, identification and characterization of the specific chemical
sites involved in complexation of selected proteins, synthesis of
polyelectrolytes for use in layer-bylayer formation of ultra-thin films, and
synthesis of designed copolymers for creation of controlled two-phase
microstructures on carbon nanotubes.

MALDI-TOF-mass spectrometry is the technique of choice for obtaining accurate
molecular weights on very large molecules, with extremely high sensitivity. Use
of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer has therefore become a standard technique,
especially in studies involving biomolecules and polymers. This research will
have a significant impact in a number of areas, especially chemistry, materials
and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well
as research.