* 0840811
* i-PICS: Integration of Advance Demand Information with Pull-Type Production Control Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/12/2008,09/30/2012
* Ananth Krishnamurthy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 09/30/2012
* USD 238,003.00

The increase in product variety and sharing of advanced demand information (ADI)
across supply chains are re-defining the fundamental tradeoffs in factory
operations. To obtain quantum improvements in factory efficiencies, the
information available across supply chains must be integrated with the
production inventory control systems (PICS) that determine the production
schedules and inventory quantities for the different products within the
factory. These integrated PICS (i-PICS) can have a significant impact on factory
efficiency (production flow times, capacity utilizations and delivery
performance). This research is to develop new queuing network models for
performance evaluation of PICS in manufacturing systems with product variety and
ADI. These models will be used to (i) quantify the operational improvements
obtained from the integration of ADI with pull-type PICS, (ii) investigate the
impact of quality of ADI on potential benefits of integrated PICS, and (iii)
obtain insights into information sharing strategies (collaboration versus
competition) in supply chains in a game theoretic setting.

The research will lead to new scalable and computationally efficient approaches
to analyze an important class of closed queuing networks with synchronization
stations. The methodology is based on node decomposition and traffic process
approximations that do not require the restrictive assumptions on probabilistic
distributions, thereby enabling their use to analyze realistic models of
manufacturing systems. This research will form the basis of the multiple
doctoral theses and will provide undergraduate student research opportunities at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. A new graduate/undergraduate course will be
designed and additional teaching modules will be developed to enhance existing
curriculum. This research will also provide team-based project experience to
students at local industry. Industry data and implementations will validate this
research and the insights will be disseminated in collaboration with the Center
for Economic Growth in New York and its industry affiliates.