* 0840666
* SGER: Exploring Data-Parallel Techniques for Mega-Scale Agent Based Model Simulations on Graphics Processing Units
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* William Predebon, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 01/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This SGER award is investigating the feasibility of executing large-scale Agent-
Based Models (ABMs) on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). Agent-based modeling is
a method of simulating discrete dynamic systems from the bottom up. It is a
computational representation where the population behaviors result from the
local interactions of the constituent entities (agents) of the system. In
modeling biological systems in particular, these populations can range into the
hundreds of millions. Current generation ABM simulation toolkits are designed to
execute serially on the CPU. Large scale models are intractable on such systems.
We are exploring newer data-parallel architectures, in particular GPUs, to
execute ABMs. The challenge that we are addressing in this project is to develop
novel methods for agent state representation and manipulation that align well
with the computing model of the GPUs. These methods include techniques for
handling collision-free motion, fast parallel memory allocation for agent
replication, and efficient statistic gathering for studying asymptotic
behaviors, all computed in parallel on the GPU. We are applying these methods to
two problems in biomedical engineering, namely, Systemic Inflammatory Response
and Hepatic Drug Disposition and comparing the results of our implementations
for statistical similarity with results from implementations on CPU-based ABM
toolkits such as NetLogo and SWARM.

This research, if successful, will revolutionize agent-based modeling with
significant impact on disciplines such as ecology, medicine, economics, and
homeland security. Our techniques will effectively democratize super-computing
for ABM researchers by providing tools powerful enough to simulate realistic
models on inexpensive desktop computers. With the improved scalability and
speed, scientists will be able to investigate entirely new emergent phenomena.
Previously intractable problems such as simulating the social behavior of entire
countries or simulating complete ecosystems will be possible.