* 0840168
* Collaborative Research:  Intercomparison of Atmospheric Water Vapor Isotope Measurements from Mauna Loa, Hawaii and Implications for Characterizing Subtropical Humidity
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Zachary Sharp, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2010
* USD 62,300.00

Project Summary The stable isotope chemistry of water is a powerful tool for
probing the atmospheric water cycle and has been used to advance our
understanding of water vapor dynamics around the globe. Until recently,
measuring water vapor isotope ratios was a time-consuming and laborious process,
but advances in spectroscopic techniques now allow automated, real-time, nearly
continuous measurements of the 18O/16O and 2H/1H (or D/H) ratios in water vapor.
In addition, advances in remote sensing of Earth's infrared emission spectrum at
high resolution now allow the atmospheric deuterium abundance to be mapped
globally. These new technologies are very promising for climate studies, but we
do not fully understand the biases in these new measurements, nor do we know how
measurements made with these new technologies compare with one another and with
the more traditional and labor-intensive mass spectrometric techniques involving
vacuum flask collection and cryogenic trapping. Before the full potential of the
new spectroscopic methods for water vapor isotope measurements can be realized
in climate research, a program of instrument validation and intercomparison must
be performed.

The PIs will make measurements of water vapor isotopologues at the NOAA
observatory at Mauna Loa, Hawaii using three different laser-based sensors and
two different satellites, which will be validated against traditional mass
spectrometry techniques applied to samples collected on site. The goal of this
study is to compare the different measurement techniques in order to assess of
the fidelity of these new measurement technologies and to provide new data on
the processes that control the humidity of the subtropical Pacific.

This comprehensive set of measurements will be made from October 12-24, 2008, in
conjunction with the AGU Chapman Conference "Atmospheric Water Vapor and its
Role in Climate", which will be held in Kona, Hawaii. The opportunity for this
project has emerged from recent discussions between the PIs and colleagues from
industry, NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL), Université Libre de Bruxelles, and
Service d'aéronomie in Paris. A number of important resources are being made
available for this project at little or no cost to this grant. The timing seems
to be fortuitous as several of the scientists involved are planning to be in
Hawaii for the Chapman conference, and the other resources happen to be
available at the same time.

Intellectual Merit Measurements of atmospheric water vapor isotopologues provide
important information about the Earth's hydrologic cycle, and new technologies
promise to expand our understanding of the use and limitations of such
measurements. The project will help to establish the foundation for climate
studies using these new technologies by providing the first intercomparison
between different ground and satellite-based techniques. The results of this
study will be used to better understand optimal system configurations for
climatological studies of water vapor isotopes and determine biases in emerging
remote-sensing technologies. Moreover, the data from this project will help to
constrain models of the subtropical atmospheric water cycle by providing the
first continuous measurements of water isotopologues from an arid subtropical
mid-ocean site.

Broader Impacts The results of this intercomparison project will be important
for the broader community of atmospheric water vapor isotope researchers as they
begin to make use of the new array of remote sensing and laser-based techniques.
The low humidity conditions atop Mauna Loa will test the limitations of the
surface-based spectroscopic techniques and provide a sound footing for
understanding the reliability of the instruments under extreme but
climatologically important conditions. The results will be disseminated via
publications and presentations at national conferences and will inform algorithm
and instrument development in the United States and in Europe. The project will
promote the training of graduate students by including them in the field program
and data analysis. During the first week of the program, JPL scientists will
make informal presentations to the students from University of New Mexico and
Colorado University on water isotope measurement techniques and algorithms.
During the second week of the program, the students will participate in the
Chapman Conference, and the PIs will invite other graduate students attending
the conference to join them in the field, either before the conference begins,
or during the planned field excursion to the Mauna Loa Lab by conference
attendees, which will also include a presentation about this project. In
addition, this project will foster partnerships with industry (Picarro and Los
Gatos) and with European colleagues associated with the Infrared Atmospheric
Sounding Interferometer instrument.