* 0840673
* SGER:  Impacts of Air Pollution Controls on Primary and Secondary Aerosols during CAREBEIJING
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Qi Zhang, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 08/31/2009
* USD 35,000.00

In this project, the size-resolved composition of non-refractory submicron
aerosol particles will be characterized with an Aerodyne High-Resolution Time-
of-Flight Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (HR-ToF-AMS) during the Campaigns of Air
Quality Research in Beijing (CAREBEIJING) from July to September, 2008.
CAREBEIJING is an international project designed to study the impact of vehicle
restrictions and urban emission controls on air quality in Beijing during the
2008 Olympic Games. The resulting data set of time- and size-resolved ambient
fine particle composition and high-resolution mass spectra should be valuable
for understanding the sources, characteristics, and photochemical processes of
atmospheric aerosols in the high-density urban and industrial area. Because
vehicle traffic will be restricted during the Olympics, there will be a unique
opportunity to examine the impacts of air pollution control on fine particle
chemistry, physics, and secondary formation mechanisms in a large megacity.

Broader impacts include insights into air quality for residents of Beijing and
surrounding regions. Findings from this study will inform the development of air
quality management strategies to reduce the adverse impacts of aerosols on human
health, ecosystems, and climate. Training in operation of instrumentation and
data analysis for collaborators in China will prepare them for future studies of
atmospheric chemistry and air quality.