* 0840684
* Characterization of Nanoparticle-Linked Biomolecule Assemblies for Advanced Bioelectronic Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 06/30/2008,08/31/2010
* Joseph Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2010
* USD 631,466.00

Professor Joseph Wang of Arizona State University is supported by the Analytical
and Surface Chemistry program for the design of detectors of biomaterials with a
focus on the detection of proteins. The group is applying different metal-
sulfides for coding different proteins and analyzing simultaneously different
antigens by the respective coded antibodies. This idea is being extended by
combining magnetic beads/protein-protein complexes/metal labels as
supramoleuclar structures that are magnetically collected on the electrode, and
the collected metal conjugates are electrochemically analyzed. A further topic
is the detection of single base polymorphism by the labeling of individual
nucleotides with nanoparticle labels. Another topic includes the application of
DNA barcodes for the amplified electrochemical detection of protein-protein
interactions. The last topic in the program involves the construction of carbon
nanotubes/enzymes layers on electrodes to increase the enzyme content on the
electrodes, and electrically contact the proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detection of biomaterials (proteins, peptides, nucleic
acids) is of steadily growing interest, e.g. in the diagnostic of disease
markers (tumor markers, viral antigens, therapy control) or the control of food
safety, environmental pollutions or biohazards. Much effort is thus required to
develop reliable, simple, fast and efficient tests to detect as low amounts as
possible. Detecting trace amounts of proteins using straight-forward
methodologies (e.g. electrochemically) is becoming increasingly important.