* 0840965
* CAREER: Spin Transport and Dynamics in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Yaroslav Tserkovnyak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2014
* USD 585,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports an integrated research and education program on spin
transport and related phenomena. Spins play a central role in emergent phases of
matter as well as in nonequilibrium phenomena, the latter fueling interest in
potential applications to device technologies that exploit the spin of the
electron for their operation. The research focuses on several related topics
exploring collective and topological properties of spin transport and dynamics,
which can be separated into two broad areas: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Spin flows and
order-parameter dynamics in magnetic materials and nanostructures. Electron spin
propagating through a magnetic texture experiences a reactive coupling with the
texture. The ensuing ?spin magnetohydrodynamics? produces fascinating phenomena,
such as spin torque and reciprocal electromotive gauge fields, which have
recently ignited vibrant theoretical as well as experimental activities. The PI
will pursue microscopic and phenomenological approaches to dissipative and
stochastic magnetoelectronic phenomena, near and far from equilibrium, with
particular emphasis on nonlinear current-induced dynamics and instabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;(2) Spin orbit coupled quantum transport and correlations. The PI
will develop a geometric description of spin-transport that includes spin-orbit
coupling and will study localization and interference effects in low-dimensional
systems, small rings, ring arrays, and Wigner crystals; edge and interfacial
properties of spin transport; and semiclassical and quantum spin Hall effects.
The PI will also explore more broadly quantum geometric and correlation effects
in nanostructures, with a focus on fictitious gauge fields in solid-state media
and the interplay between spintronic, magnetic, elastic, and optical phenomena.
The PI will collaborate with industry on problems of dissipation, stochastic
dynamics, and current-driven instabilities in magnetic systems, as well as new
magnetoelectronic device concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component
of this award will build on the already successful outreach program run by the
California NanoSystems Institute at the UCLA, which works with Los Angeles
public schools, promoting the ideas and excitement of nanoscience and
nanotechnology in the Los Angeles unified school district. A theoretical
nanoscience component will be developed for the UCLA REU program, offering
students a program where they can study, simulate, and optimize
magnetoelectronic circuits, while also collaborating with experimentalists and
engineers on the UCLA campus. The broad scope of this field is very well suited
for designing a new nanoscience course for graduate and advanced undergraduate
students in physics and engineering. Collaborations with industry will be
initiated on problems of dissipation, stochastic dynamics, and current-driven
instabilities in magnetic systems, as well as new magnetoelectronic device
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports integrated theoretical research and education with an aim to develop a
better fundamental understanding of new phenomena that arise because of the
intrinsic magnetic properties of an electron in a material. In an important
sense an electron is like a tiny spinning top with an electric charge. The spin
of the electron is intimately connected to the electron being also like a tiny
magnet. The ability to manipulate the electron?s spin enables a new kind of
electronic device that utilizes not only the electron charge, like conventional
electronic devices, but also its spin. The research supported by this award
contributes to the intellectual foundation upon which this new technology called
?spintronics? will rest through theoretical research to understand and control
how spin moves through materials and to predict interesting phenomena that arise
as a consequence. Spintronic devices may be more energy efficient and may enable
continued successful rapid miniaturization of devices accompanied by enhanced
performance that has stimulated the American electronics industry for
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component of this award will build
on the already successful outreach program run by the California NanoSystems
Institute at the UCLA, which works with Los Angeles public schools, promoting
the ideas and excitement of nanoscience and nanotechnology in the Los Angeles
unified school district. A theoretical nanoscience component will be developed
for the UCLA REU program, offering students a program where they can study,
simulate, and optimize magnetoelectronic circuits, while also collaborating with
experimentalists and engineers on the UCLA campus. The broad scope of this field
is very well suited for designing a new nanoscience course for graduate and
advanced undergraduate students in physics and engineering. Collaborations with
industry will be initiated on problems of dissipation, stochastic dynamics, and
current-driven instabilities in magnetic systems, as well as new
magnetoelectronic device concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;