* 0840413
* Acquisition of a Cyber-Enabled 600 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Zhongwu Guo, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities:Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Department of Chemistry at Wayne State University (WSU) will acquire a cyber-
enabled 600 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. It will be
employed in research projects that span many areas of chemistry including (a)
the chemistry of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and asymmetric catalysis; (b)
the development of synthetic carbohydrate-based vaccines using zwitterionic
polysaccharides (ZPSs); (c) the development of new, general methods for facile
construction of six-membered and medium-sized ring systems (carbocycles and
heterocycles); (d) applications to total synthesis of a wide variety of
biologically active, structurally challenging natural products; (e) the
development of new strategies for the synthesis of complex oligosaccharides and
glycoconjugates; and (f) total synthesis of pharmacologically active natural
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multinuclear NMR spectroscopy is an essential
analytical tool in synthetic chemistry. NMR spectra enable researchers to
identify their reaction products including unexpected substances and impurities.
They reveal information on the connectivity of the atoms in molecules and
materials - i.e. their structures - by detecting transitions between energy
levels arising from the nuclear spin properties of atoms. The instrument will
have an important and broad-based impact on WSU education and training mission.
It will be used to support research projects of undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers, including traditionally underrepresented
groups (that make up ca. 25% of the enrollment at WSU) as well at smaller nearby
colleges and universities.