* 0840989
* RCN for Genomic and Metagenomic Standards
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2018
* Mark Ellisman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The University of California-San Diego is awarded a grant to create a research
coordination network to promote and integrate standards for genomic and
metagenomic data and metadata within an international community. The network is
based on the existing Genomic Standard Consortium and will be extended under
this award to include ecological data standards such as Ecological Metadata
Language, biodiversity standards such as Darwin Core, and environmental research
programs such as the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network and Long Term
Ecological Research. Genome enabled research has transformed biological sciences
for the entire breadth of scales from molecular to ecosystems. Expanding and
fully incorporating early consensus building, technical standards and the
institutional commitments inspired and implemented by the Genomic Standards
Consortium, the creation of this RCN for the Genome Standards Consortium
(RCN4GSC) will ensure a worldwide, community driven process for establishing
standardized mechanisms for the electronic capture of genomic data and for
obtaining willingness to participate; these are essential to ensure effective
use of the sequence and associated data, to provide access for all biologists to
all of the information, and to create interdisciplinary opportunities for
discovery. &lt;br/&gt; Intense collaborations around the maturation of GCDML,
Genome Rosetta Stone and the Genome Catalogue will be an early focus.
Productivity will be sustained year round by routine A.V. and web-enabled
interactions, including small working group sessions and collaborations via the
RCN's extant web hub at http://gensc.org. The activities will expand ongoing
coordination required for implementation, including the Genome Catalog, GCDML,
Genome Rosetta Stone software, Habitat-Lite and Environmental Ontology, and the
eJournal "Standards in Genomic Sciences". The RCN will also sustain and build
upon the very active, ongoing, two-way exchange between LTER and GSC,
interactions arising from common goals. The RCN4GSC will be an open
organization, welcoming inspired biologists with a commitment to community
service, and will increase participation from Asia and the USA. Coordination
with professional societies and communication to federal and foundation
stakeholders will be among strategies for expanding participation; these will be
managed by the Communications Committee, who will focus on enlisting further
diversity in participation and in reaching out to young biologists.