* 0840732
* SGER:  Water Vapor Measurements from the G-V VCSEL Hygrometer during START08/PreHIPPO
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Mark Zondlo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Eugene Mak
* 08/31/2009
* USD 31,253.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) will conduct the necessary spectroscopic studies
and calibrations to post-process the vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser
(VCSEL) water vapor data from the START(Stratosphere-Troposphere Analyses of
Regional Transport)08/PreHIPPO field campaign that took place in spring 2008
onboard the National Science Foundation (NSF) G-V research aircraft. The VCSEL
hygrometer shows the best precision and lowest limit of detection in upper
tropospheric and lower stratospheric conditions of all the water vapor
instruments onboard the NSF G-V. Water vapor is the most important trace gas
species in the tropopause region from climate, chemistry, and dynamics
perspectives, and accurate measurements will be critical towards assessing the
START08/PreHIPPO science objectives. These studies will occur through the use of
novel constant-temperature, phase-change, organic slush baths which exploit the
small size of the VCSEL hygrometer. Initial studies in the laboratory and at an
international water vapor instrument intercomparison study showed that this
method of calibration is accurate and minimizes residual water vapor and
outgassing common in other calibration techniques. The goal of this project is
to provide a quality-controlled dataset for START08/PreHIPPO and to prepare the
instrument for HIPPO (HIAPER Pole-to-Pole Observations) in January 2009 that can
be used by the PI and others in the Science Team to address chemical, dynamic,
and microphysical properties of the tropopause region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
VCSEL dataset, when combined with other measurements from other hygrometers,
trace gas species, and modeling analyses, will help in the understanding of
global climate change and atmospheric dynamics. The work will involve one REU
(Research Experience for Undergraduates) student in the laboratory studies and
data analysis during the summer of 2008, and there is a strong likelihood of
another undergraduate student working on this project part-time in the 2008-2009
school year. In addition, one female graduate student will also be involved in
the analysis of this data during the 2008-2009 academic year.