* 0840936
* SGER: Semi-Formal Design Validation with Swarm Intelligence
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Michael Hsiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2010
* USD 135,000.00

Proposal ID: 0840936 &lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Michael S. Hsiao&lt;br/&gt;Title: Semi-
Formal Design Validation with Swarm Intelligence&lt;br/&gt;Inst: Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to elicit the swarming power to solve the very difficult problem of
design validation. This is a high-risk, high pay-off investigation on an
approach that has not been done in the past. Individual knowledge acquired
during the search is extracted to benefit collective effort. This is enabled via
cultivation of knowledge exchange, accumulation, and utilization. The
intelligent partitioning and grouping of the state variables allows for the
construction of many effective abstract navigation tracks in large designs. This
is a key breakthrough as the mined tracks naturally provide multiple valuable
abstractions of the design upon which collective and diverse effort can be
conducted. The development of new theories and algorithms will be an original
contribution that will allow for transformative understanding of semi-formal
verification and state space exploration, all in a rigorous
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theories and practice that will result from
this work will not only enable us for a deeper understanding of collective
effort, it will shed light on other intractable problems as well, from closely
related research areas such as manufacturing test to artificial
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly promote the
education of the involved students. In regard to outreach to under-represented
students, the PI currently advises multiple women Ph.D. students (under-
represented in engineering), and this project will continue to encourage
aspiring female students to participate in the research endeavor. In addition,
the PI will actively recruit summer minority interns from programs within
Virginia Tech to take part in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;