* 0840494
* Upgrade of cyber-enabled facility for computational chemistry research and education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* James Weisshaar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 562,307.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin - Madison will acquire an
upgrade to the Chemistry Computing Facility. The upgrade includes a number of
components, including: (1) the purchase of mixed shared-memory and Beowulf
cluster computers; (2) the creation of secure, cyber accessible systems; (3) the
purchase of servers and file storage systems to support the systems; and (4) the
purchase of software to accommodate a large and diverse user group. The chemical
research supported by this infrastructure runs the gamut of modern chemical
research from fundamental studies of bonding to modeling of the reactivity of
materials surfaces. The users of the infrastructure are diverse: high school
students in North Carolina, young women scientists at Wellesley College and
Spelman College, college students at Chicago State University, as well as the
academic users at the University of Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
computer infrastructure allows chemists to do some experiments , virtually,
without the need to use chemical reagents. In addition, checked against
experiment, new, more accurate theoretical methods may be developed. In tandem
with experiment, computations allow chemists to examine, in detail beyond that
of current experimental methods, the molecular ballet that takes place in
complicated chemical processes. The infrastructure made available with this
grant will be used in teaching and training a broad range of young scientists in
computational chemistry -- from high school, all the way through the post-
graduate level.