* 0840233
* Engaging Latino Audiences in Informal Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Susan Bonfield, Environment for the Americas
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Schatz
* 04/30/2013
* USD 416,744.00

Engaging Latinos in Informal Science Education is designed to address the low
participation rate of Latino youth and adults in activities conducted by parks,
refuges, nature centers, and other informal science education venues. The
project objectives are to expand upon existing studies that attempt to identify
barriers to Latino participation, work with communities to identify the tools
needed to overcome barriers, and utilize the tools in established programs.
Surveys and interviews conducted with Latino communities are designed to
identify key measures that will improve participation in informal learning
programs which are then implemented in the International Migratory Bird Day
(IMBD) program. Park Flight international interns from Mexico, Central America,
the Caribbean, and the US will work in Latino communities near seven sites that
host annual IMBD. Deliverables include a comprehensive technical report
resulting from the analysis of surveys and a toolkit to promote the involvement
of Latino communities in informal science education. The multi-stage evaluation
includes the annual evaluation of participation levels at seven treatment and
five control sites, pilot testing of the key strategies for family involvement
identified in the survey results, and formative evaluation of the project
toolkit. Project partners are the National Park (NPS) Service, NPS Park Flight
Migratory Bird Program, Colorado State University, Rocky Mountain Bird
Observatory, PRBO Conservation Services, and six national parks. Strategic
impact will be realized through the development and national dissemination of
the project toolkit to almost 1000 partner offices across the US.