* 0840540
* CONF:  2009 Graduate Research Seminar Catecholamines- August 8, 2009-Biddeford, ME
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Patricio O'Donnell, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,000.00

The goal of this Graduate Research Seminar on Catecholamines is to enhance the
Gordon Research Conference on Catecholamines (GRC-CA) experience for graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows by providing two days of immersion in the
field of Catecholamines prior to the GRC-CA meeting. This will better prepare
students and postdoctoral fellows for the intellectually demanding aspects of
the official GRC, which is guided by senior colleagues later in the week. Gordon
Conferences enable scientific exchange and spark new collaborations. The Gordon
Research Conference on Catecholamines (GRC-CA) was first held in 1973 and has
been held every two years since that time. Successful catecholamine research
requires students to acquire a strong grasp of brain-behavior issues
encompassing neurobiology, neuroanatomy, neurology, pharmacology, molecular
biology, genetics, and behavioral neuroscience. The 2009 Graduate Research
Seminar on Catecholamines has an expected participation of about 55 graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. The seminar will be held in Biddeford, Maine
on August 8-9, 2009. The first evening includes a brief welcoming reception
followed by a poster session. The meeting will be focused on cellular and
molecular aspects of catecholamine transmission as well as catecholamines in
brain circuitry and will highlight topics that will be discussed in the GRC-CA
meeting in order to better prepare the participants. The organizing committee is
comprised of a diverse population of students and postdoctoral fellows and is
about 50% female. Oral presentations will be given exclusively by students and
postdoctoral fellows.