* 0840430
* Collaborative Research: Th-230 as a Sediment Focusing Indicator: constraints from He-3 in Interplanetary Dust Particles
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Jerry McManus, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 02/28/2009
* USD 91,171.00

Recently, the 230Th constant-flux proxy (CFP) profiling method of calculating
sediment accumulation rates (ARs) has become a topic of significant controversy,
especially with respect to the issue of sediment focusing and its
quantification. Depending on whether one derives ARs using age models or CFPs
leads to vastly different interpretations in paleoceanographic studies. Under
this award the PIs will investigate sediment redistribution processes to
determine the veracity of the 230Th CFP. They will measure another CFP with an
independent source term, namely interplanetary dust particles (IDPs), and the
extraterrestrial 3He contained therein. Agreement between 230Th and 3He
variations in varied and well-studied depositional environments in the North
Atlantic would constitute further support for the use of both CFPs for flux
normalization. The data generated on sites with known amounts of sediment
focusing and winnowing will help constrain the influence of abyssal currents on
IDPs and the sediments carrying adsorbed 230Th, and will provide insights into
the extent of hydrodynamic sorting of these particles. When combined with 14C
and paired 3He and 230Th measurement on various separated fractions of the fine-
grained component of the sediment, the PIs will test the hypotheses that 1) 3He
is less sensitive than 230Th to sediment focusing, and 2) the degree to which
sediment redistribution processes fractionate 3He-containing IDPs from the 230Th
containing portion of the sediment. In the future, the proponents hope to
develop a new proxy (3He/230Th ratio) for changes in the strength of deep-sea
currents in association with past climatic changes. This project will involve
students in their teaching, training and learning.