* 0840505
* Upgrade of Computational Facility for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Robert Bergman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 308,147.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the College of Chemistry at the University of
California, Berkeley will acquire a 48 node, parallel computing cluster. The
computing cluster will be used by a large number of experimental researchers to
study a number of problems in the chemical sciences, including synthesis and
reaction mechanisms in organic and inorganic chemistry, soil chemistry and its
relation to complexation of metals, mass spectrometry in the analysis of
macromolecular structure, heterogeneous catalysis and the adsorption of chemical
species at organic-inorganic interfaces, x-ray absorption spectroscopy of
liquids, and electron-nuclear cross relaxation and nuclear spin
hyperpolarization in inorganic and polymeric semiconductor structures. The
computing cluster will be used by more than 40 research groups on campus, and it
will be used in the undergraduate curriculum in the College of Chemistry,
reaching hundreds of undergraduates. In addition, the College will use the
equipment in a number of outreach activities, including the "Expanding Your
Horizons" program, which encourages young women to explore math and science. The
College plans on making the computer cluster available, through remote access,
to local high school and community college teachers through a number of existing
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational chemistry is a tool in the modern
chemist's arsenal. Experimental researchers need access to and training in the
use of this powerful scientific tool. In tandem with experiment, computational
chemistry approaches allow chemists to explore reactivity and structure that can
help make sense of experimental data. The infrastructure made available with
this grant will be used in teaching and training a broad range of scientists in
computational chemistry -- from high school teachers, to post-doctoral
researchers.