* 0840478
* Upgrade and Cyber-Access of Magnetic Resonance Facilities at the University of Oregon
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2012
* USD 275,000.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
Multiuser Program (CRIF:MU), Professor Michael M. Haley and colleague Victoria
J. DeRose from the University of Oregon Eugene will purchase a new console and
cyber-enable an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer that will be
able to collect data at field of 35 GHz (Q-band) as well as at 9 GHz (X-band).
The upgraded spectrometer will be located in the shared instrument facility in
the Department of Chemistry at the University of Oregon, Eugene. The enhanced
spectrometer will include a modern interface, Linux-based operating system,
high-sensitivity X-band bridge and cavity, and a new Q-band cavity. Research
will be impacted in the fields of nanoclusters and main group supramolecular
chemistry as well as RNA structure and function not only at the University of
Oregon but also at neighboring colleges through the establishment of web-based
EPR training activities that will include an introduction to EPR spectroscopy
and examples of different paramagnetic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An EPR
spectrometer yields information on the molecular and electronic structure of
molecules. It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes and
identities of free radicals, short-lived species that are often essential for
the initiation of tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions. These
studies will have an impact in a number of areas, from chemistry to materials
and biological chemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.