* 0840178
* The Origin of Plasmaspheric Hiss
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jacob Bortnik, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 339,947.00

Plasmaspheric hiss is an incoherent, band-limited emission found predominantly
in the dense-plasma region surrounding the Earth, known as the plasmasphere.
Hiss propagates as an electromagnetic plasma wave in the whistler mode, and is
able to resonate with the high-energy electrons in the Van Allen radiation
belts. The importance of hiss in controlling the structure and dynamics of the
radiation belts has long been established, but the origin of hiss itself has
been an open problem for over four decades. This project will develop a newly
discovered mechanism involving chorus waves that appears to be able to naturally
account for the observed frequency band, the incoherent nature, the day/night
asymmetry, and the dependence on geomagnetic activity. An existing numerical ray
tracing code will be used to calculate wave propagation, together with Landau
damping using fluxes measured by the Combined Release and Radiation Effects
Satellite (CRRES). By properly weighting the power distribution of chorus waves
and tracking the evolution of chorus into hiss using ray tracing, the
distribution of hiss intensity, frequency band, and wave normal angle will be
quantified as a function of distance from the Earth, magnetic local time, and
latitude. The effects of geomagnetic activity on the distribution of hiss
characteristics will then be analyzed by recalculating the ray database under a
number of different magnetospheric conditions. In the final year of the study,
the project will determine contribution to hiss from (a) global lightning
activity, (b) the effects of azimuthal propagation, and (c) propagation in
plasmaspheric plumes. The computed hiss distributions will be compared with
observations from satellite measurements.

The research will be done primarily by a young research scientist and a
postdoctoral scholar. Understanding the physics of the radiation belts is
important to understanding and being able to forecast space weather.