* 0840138
* Workshop:  Exploring Science Needs for Predicting Organismal Responses to Rapid Directional Environmental Change
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Donald Ort, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 08/31/2009
* USD 34,295.00

Donald R. Ort IOS-0840138 Exploring Science Needs for Predicting Organismal
Responses to Rapid Directional Environmental Change.

A workshop will be convened in the Fall of 2008 to identify the most pressing
problems and challenges in predicting the response of organisms, and the
communities and ecosystems to which they belong, to rapid environmental change.
Anthropogenically driven climate and environmental change is currently occurring
so rapidly that for most higher organisms new adaptive mutations are powerless
to respond on a relevant time scale leaving these organisms reliant on existing
genetic diversity to support adaptation. Participants have been selected to
represent expertise on different organism types across multiple levels of
biological organization from molecular to ecosystem within an overarching
framework of computational simulations and predictive modeling. The central
goals of the workshop are to increase the awareness of research needs related to
rapid climate and environmental change, identify critical collaborative research
needs, identify synergistic links, and develop a roadmap for research that may
assist federal funding agencies in setting their research priorities in the
context of the rapidly changing global environment. This workshop will provide
an opportunity for a diverse group of participants to help initiate and
prioritize new research that would advance understanding of the responses of
integrative organismal systems to rapid directional environmental change. The
impact of the workshop is found in its three primary objectives: 1. Identify
critical research needs for predicting organismal responses to rapid
environmental change. 2. Identify and prioritize appropriate target organismal
systems, experimental approaches and methods, and integrative activities with
greatest promise for efficient progress. 3. Identify critical model inputs and
model enhancements that will be required to predict how organismal responses
will cause changes at the ecosystem and planet scale. The Broader Impacts of the
workshop, beyond the focus on an environmental issue and impact on biological
systems; this focus has relevance to societal issues, are that scientists from
diverse backgrounds and with a broad range of expertise will participate and
interact.

