* 0840418
* Acquisition of an EPR spectrometer for cyber-enabled research and education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Straub, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 523,468.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
Multiuser Program (CRIF:MU), Professor John E. Straub and colleague Sean J.
Elliott from Boston University will acquire an electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) spectrometer with cryogenic capability to support inorganic and
bioinorganic research carried out by the research groups of Professors
Caradonna, Elliott, Doerrer, and Liu at BU, as well as Armstrong from Boston
College and Rybak-Akimova from Tufts University. This spectrometer will support
research and education in iron-based alkane activation; studies of high-
oxidation states iron, copper and cobalt; multi-heme cytochromes; mechanistic
studies of metalloenzymes; models for photosynthetic processes; and general
inorganic mechanisms. Cyber-enabling will extend the educational experience to
nearby institutions such as Fairfield University, Emmanuel College, and the
University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth.

An EPR spectrometer yields information on the molecular and electronic structure
of molecules. It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes and
identities of free radicals, short-lived species that are often essential for
the initiation of tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions. These
studies will have an impact in a number of areas, from chemistry to materials
and biological chemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.