* 0840224
* Conference Proposal:  Cary Conference on Effective Communication Of Science In Environmental Controversies, May 2009
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Peter Groffman, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 60,000.00

This proposal is for partial support of the 2009 bi-annual Cary Conference,
entitled Effective Communication of Science in Environmental Controversies. Cary
Conferences have focused on discussion and examination of fundamental issues in
environmental science since 1985 and have been attended by over 500 scientists
from 20 countries. The objectives of this conference are to evaluate successes
and challenges in the use of information produced by basic ecology in applied
environmental science, and to produce specific recommendations on how
individuals, institutions and agencies can increase the broader impacts of their
research. Enhancing the flow of information from research to managers and
decision makers is an ongoing challenge in environmental science. This flow is
hindered by multiple disconnects between research, education and outreach,
management and decision-making that arise from differences in time frames,
methodology, language and jargon, treatment of uncertainty, and goals and values
among different communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two questions guide the
proposed examination of why information from basic ecological science is not
used more in education, management and policy: is it because people don?t know?
Or, is it because people don?t care? The conference will address these questions
using a limited number of ecological case studies (e.g., acid rain, endangered
species) as platforms for developing recommendations for four distinct groups:
individual scientists, academic institutions, managers and policy makers, and
organizations a the interface between science and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal is to develop specific recommendations for
how investigators and academic institutions can better articulate and increase
the broader societal impacts of their research. The conference will also include
specific focus on efforts to innovate K-12, undergraduate and graduate education
through NSF?s Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT)
and Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Education (GK-12) programs, with program
leaders and recent graduates from both programs on the agenda.&lt;br/&gt;