* 0840336
* Acquisition of a Cyber-Enabled 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research, Education and Outreach at the University of Arizona.
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Robin Polt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 471,239.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Arizona will acquire a cyber enabled 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometer. The spectrometer will be used to characterize synthetic
intermediates and final products for a wide variety of projects, including:
transition metal cluster-supported supramolecules and materials; magnetic
nanoparticles with functional polymer coatings; liquid crystalline
naphthalocyanines with dendritic side-chains for organic photovoltaics;
amphipathic helical glycopeptides that complex with membranes and micelles;
probes of sulfur radical cation chemistry and catalysts for hydrogen
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
is one of the tools widely used by chemists to analyze mixtures of species
dissolved in solution. It is used to identify unknown substances. It provides
information on the arrangement and connectivity of atoms in molecules and
materials i.e. their structures by detecting transitions between energy levels
arising from the nuclear spin properties of atoms. This spectrometer will
enhance many Arizona programs that promote teaching and learning of
undergraduates and graduate students. The instrument will be used by 14 research
groups in the Department of Chemistry, the undergraduate teaching program, 9
groups in other campus departments, two community colleges in Arizona and a
research institute and a university in Sonora, Mexico. Remote access and
operation (cyber-enabling) will be a feature of the instrument to enhance usage
and productivity.