* 0840366
* Collaborative Research: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR at the University of Southern California
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Mark Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 469,164.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Departments of Chemistry at the University of Southern California (USC) and
California State University - Fullerton (CSUF) will collaborate on the
acquisition and remote control cyber enabling of a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectrometer to be housed at USC. It will be employed in a wide
variety of research projects, supporting structural, reaction, and analytical
studies such as 1) new synthetic routes to inorganic nanocrystals; 2) the
development of new synthetic methods in organic and organometallic chemistry; 3)
studies of biologically important organophosphorus compounds; 4) new synthetic
methods and synthesis of bioactive molecules; and 5) the design of novel RNA
binding peptides.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Multinuclear NMR spectroscopy is a key
analysis and characterization tool in chemistry today. The spectra enable
researchers to track the progress of chemical reactions, identify unknown
substances and provide information on the atomic arrangement and structures in
species ranging from small molecules to large proteins by detecting transitions
between energy levels arising from the nuclear spin properties of atoms. This
instrument will support the education of future scientists at levels from
undergraduate, to graduate student, to postdoctoral research associate. It will
be used in lab courses for both chemistry and biochemistry students at USC and
CSUF. Cyber infrastructure will be developed for both the remote control of the
autosampler enabled instrument, as well as remote access for data
collection/analysis from the instrument with a web based system. A practical NMR
methods course will be developed jointly at USC and CSUF to train students in
the use of the NMR spectrometer.