* 0840035
* The Impact of Rapidly-Varying Heat Fluxes on Air-Sea Interaction and Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Philip Sura, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2010
* USD 123,159.00

The main focus of the research is to study the impact of rapidly varying (on
daily and sub-daily timescales) sea surface heat fluxes on atmosphere-ocean
coupling. Literature indicates that the clear separation between the dynamical
timescales of the ocean and atmosphere allows a simple paradigm for much air-sea
interaction in which the rapidly varying component of surface heat fluxes is
approximated by a stochastic term. However, this heat flux term depends upon not
only the "fast" atmosphere but also upon the "slow" ocean. Thus, the stochastic
noise should not be independent of the oceanic state, contrary to most past
studies. Notably, such state-dependent (multiplicative) noise can alter low-
frequency ocean dynamics through a process known as noise-induced drift.
Accurate representation of this drift is necessary but difficult in climate
models, since noise-induced drift cannot be simply parameterized by constant
terms as its strength depends on the variance of the heat flux variability, a
function of time and space. The aim of this project is to understand how the
multiplicative noise character of the heat flux contributes to climate
variability and predictability on interannual to inter-decadal timescales, and
how it might contribute to biases found in many coupled models. Thus, it is
imperative to study the effect of state-dependent rapidly varying heat fluxes
(including heat advection through ocean currents, surface heat fluxes,
entrainment, and horizontal mixing) using observations and coupled model runs.
Since deviations from Gaussianity, or anomalous statistics, can shed light on
the underlying state-dependent character of the heat fluxes, one of the main
objective of the research is to globally map the non-Gaussianity (e.g., higher
moments: skewness, kurtosis) of oceanic and atmospheric quantities relevant for
atmosphere-ocean coupling from a broad range of observational datasets and a
hierarchy of coupled model runs. Experiments with coupled models will also be
used to understand how details of numerical coupling impact model representation
of this process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A meticulous study of
fast-varying heat fluxes and its impact on air-sea interaction is important
because the fast-varying variability of heat fluxes must be accurately simulated
to correctly model sea surface temperature (SST) and air temperature (TAIR)
variability, and the coupling scheme must be appropriate to capture heat flux
variability on daily and sub-daily time scales. The PI will (1) extend a
systematic stochastic framework that has been developed over the last decade to
understand the interaction of slowly and rapidly varying components of the
climate system, such as SST and TAIR anomalies, and (2) develop improved
coupling schemes and the implementation of stochastic parameterizations in
weather and climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research
will further our understanding on how the ocean interacts with the atmosphere
and vice versa and helps climate diagnostics and modeling communities. The
results will be disseminated as maps of non-Gaussian statistics of various
quantities on the NOAA-CIRES CDC web page.