* 0840220
* Refurbishment of the 600 MHz NMR at the Mississippi Magnetic Resonance Facility at Mississippi State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Edwin Lewis, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 510,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Department of Chemistry at Mississippi State University will refurbish and cyber
enhance a 600 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. It will be
employed in a wide variety of research projects, supporting structural,
reaction, and analytical studies such as 1) the synthesis of anti-cancer plant
constituents; 2) the impact of salt on enzyme stability, activity and
flexibility; 3) the mechanisms by which tachykinin peptides produce signal
activation and desensitization of tachykinin receptors; 4) fuels and chemicals
from fast pyrolysis of biomass; 5) the large-scale synthesis of polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) with carbon frameworks that can be identified on
the buckminsterfullerene surface; and 6) biophysical studies of oncogenes that
form single stranded intramolecular folded structures known as G-quadruplexes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multinuclear NMR spectroscopy is an essential analytical
tool in chemistry and biochemistry research. The spectra enable researchers to
identify unknown substances and to provide information on the atom arrangement
and structures in species ranging from small molecules to large proteins by
detecting transitions between energy levels arising from the nuclear spin
properties of atoms. This spectrometer will enhance many Mississippi State
programs that promote teaching and learning of undergraduates and graduate
students. The instrument will anchor the Mississippi Magnetic Resonance Facility
(MS-MRF) at Mississippi State University. It will be used by 7 departments in 4
Colleges at MSU, several bio-institutes, as well as researchers at the
University of Mississippi, the Mississippi Medical Center and eight other
participating institutions in the region.