* 0840550
* Black Oversample for the American National Election Study
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Tasha Philpot, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2011
* USD 491,054.00

Blacks have been somewhat relegated to the sidelines in recent years by scholars
more interested in America?s burgeoning Latino and Asian populations. Setting
aside the unique experience and place of blacks in American history and
consciousness, this is regrettable for two reasons. First, the black population
is often written off as "monolithic." This has, in our view, never been true but
it is an increasingly troubling myth given the growing diversity of the black
population. Second, many of the political and social events of the past decade
have been particularly relevant for blacks: the 2000 election controversy,
redistricting after the 2000 Census, and the devastation and revelations of
Hurricane Katrina. If scholars are to usefully inform the public debate on
matters such as mass opinion, representation, and the role of race in politics,
we need a comprehensive and reliable source of data. A black over-sample within
the context of the traditional ANES is an extremely effective way to achieve
this. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the ANES has been the dominant source of
data for the classic studies of turnout, partisanship, ideology, congressional
voting, and political sophistication, it has been of limited use for the study
of black opinion and behavior. Our study allows scholars to examine black
opinion across the wide and disparate range of the ANES core instrument, as well
yielding insight into issues that predominantly concern African Americans.
Furthermore, a black over-sample facilitates attitudinal and behavioral
comparisons with other racial and ethnic groups as never before.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is straight-forward: working in cooperation
with the ANES team at Michigan, we have overseen the recruitment, interviewing,
and data collection for an over-sample of African Americans. Based on the
current specifications for the 2008 ANES pre- and post-election sample,
approximately 290 black respondents are interviewed, making stand-alone analyses
of black opinion, attitudes, and behavior problematic. Our study adds another
310 black respondents and uses the expanded number of primary sampling units to
obtain a larger, more representative black sub-sample. In addition, by adding 10
PSUs we are able to increase the number of black respondents from racially mixed
- as opposed to predominantly black - neighborhoods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
2008 ANES black over-sample constitutes a substantial "public good": it
significantly enhances our ability to gauge the range, diversity, and
determinants of African-American political opinion and vote choice. Furthermore,
it facilitates informed comparisons to whites and Latinos at a time when such
comparisons are especially useful to our conceptions of politics and
representation.