* 0840250
* Hidden Universe: A 3D Giant Screen Film and Outreach Project
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Brooke Runnette, National Geographic Television
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,999,765.00

Hidden Universe is a multi-faceted project built around production of a 2D/3D
giant screen film. The goal is to inspire, engage, and excite viewers about the
mysterious worlds hidden around us and the science and technology that reveal
them. The film will illuminate natural wonders that are invisible to the naked
eye, such as objects and processes that are too slow, too fast, and too small to
be seen without advanced technologies. It will include nanoscience and
microbiology research and developing wavelength technologies such as ultrafast
lasers. The project will employ cutting-edge technology to bring arresting
footage of micro- and nanobiology to the giant screen to offer audiences (1)
deeper understanding of natural phenomena that comes through observation and (2)
greater appreciation of modern technology that makes such observation possible.
The film story will focus on demonstrating science as inquiry and underscore the
crucial link between scientific inquiry and technological advances. The film
project will be enhanced with educational outreach materials, professional
development opportunities for educators, and an interactive website. Hidden
Universe will be produced by the large format team at National Geographic's
Cinema Ventures group and its production partner Blacklight Films.

The project brings to the table the extensive resources of the National
Geographic Society. In addition, the project will partner with a select group of
scientific research centers (Chester Carlson Center for Imaging Science at the
Rochester Institute of Technology and the Nanobiotechnology Center at Cornell)
and leaders in informal education (Boston Museum of Science and Girl Scouts) to
extend the reach and impact of the project. The project will add to its list of
partners by working with the D.C. Public Schools and Teach for America to find
new ways to intersect with teachers and students in underserved areas. The
project will employ Multimedia Research and Knight-Williams Research
Communications to conduct the project's formative and summative evaluations,
respectively.