* 0840249
* Synthesis, Structure and Swelling of Polyelectrolyte Brushes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/08/2008,08/31/2011
* S Michael Kilbey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal Number: CBET- 0730696 Principal Investigator: S. Michael Kilbey
University/Institution: Clemson University

Title: Synthesis, Structure and Swelling of Polyelectrolyte Brushes

The goal of this experimental project is to tease apart the intertwined
connections between charge and chain conformation of well-defined
polyelectrolyte (PE) systems. This will be accomplished by investigating the
molecular-level structure of "weak" and "strong" PE brushes as a function of
size and tethering density, and parameters that set the charge state of the
system pH and monovalent salt concentration. As the nanoscale structure dictates
the range and strength of interactions across interfaces, knowledge of how PE
brushes adjust their molecular-level, solvated structure, both normal to and
laterally along the tethering surface, in response to changes in their solution
environment is necessary for the creating PE-modified surfaces with tailored
properties. Results from the research will impact many applications for PEs,
including adhesive, anti-fouling, or lubrication-like coatings, drug-delivery
systems, and biomaterial surfaces. This research is enabled by the development
of a robust method to directly synthesize well-defined PE brushes of
poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) and sodium-poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS) and
access to world-class facilities for neutron science at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL). The molecular-level structure of these weak (PMAA) and strong
(PSS) PE brushes will be studied using specular and off-specular neutron
reflectivity measurements, complemented by atomic force microscopy imaging of
the topology and multi-angle ellipsometry measurements of the average layer
thickness. The research effort is enhanced by collaboration with Dr. John Ankner
of the Spallation Neutron Source at ORNL, and Prof. Jimmy Mays of the University
of Tennessee and ORNL.

Intellectual Merits of the Proposed Activity. The proposed systematic study of
the effect of surface density, size, pH, and salt type and concentration on the
molecular-level structure and swelling behavior of strong and weak PE brushes
will provide a framework for understanding the complex connections between
conformation and charge in PE brush systems. The novel synthetic strategy based
on atom-transfer radical polymerization overcomes limitations associated with
alternative approaches for making PE brushes. In addition to providing a
nanoscale view of how weak and strong PE brushes adjust their structure normal
to and along the surface, results will be used to arbitrate predictions from
theory. The proposed work breaks new ground by examining ion specific effects,
including interactions with a biomolecule key to thromobotic events, and how the
internal salt concentration in PE brushes depends upon tethering density and pH.
The collaborations with ORNL scientists, which build on an established track
record, will help ensure successful outcomes.

Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity. Understanding the structure of PE
brushes is important for a wide range of applications, including adhesive or
anti-fouling coatings, colloid stabilization, and the development of biomaterial
coatings or drug delivery vehicles, sensors and electrorheological switches.
Results from the research may stimulate new ideas about how to engineer
biomaterial or membrane coatings with tailored properties, actuating layers for
sensors or microfluidic devices, or high-affinity separation agents. This
project will enhance interactions between Clemson University and ORNL and
through the collaborations, foster the professional and personal growth of
graduate and undergraduate students. As a result of being some of the first
users of the Spallation Neutron Source, researchers will work with ORNL to
contextualize and communicate to broader audiences the significance of their
research and neutron science in the study of material interfaces. In addition to
providing a training ground for the development of young engineers from
underrepresented groups, a new effort aimed at providing an authentic,
discovery-based research experience for aspiring secondary science education
majors will be launched. This effort is aimed at helping soon to be teachers
become better equipped to incorporate discovery and scientific inquiry
experiences into their classrooms, thereby fueling the interests of future
generations of students.