* 0840930
* Landscape Succession in Lowland Maya Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Stephen Houston, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 235,064.00

With National Science Foundation Support, Dr. Stephen Houston and Dr. Thomas
Garrison, in collaboration with an interdisciplinary team of colleagues, will
conduct three seasons of archaeological field and lab research in north-central
Guatemala. The team brings together experts in archaeology, iconography,
epigraphy, geomorphology, paleohydrography, remote sensing, paleodiet, and human
osteology to address issues of ancient Maya landscape succession from 1000
B.C.E. to 1500 C.E. Landscape succession refers to the ways in which cultural
perceptions of the landscape affect human decision making, particularly with
respect to settlement, and how these perceptions and decisions change through
time depending on historical circumstances. The research area for this project
focuses on three sites located within the San Miguel de la Palotada Biotope in
the central Peten district. From the Late Preclassic Period onwards (c. 250
BCE), the sites of El Palmar, Bejucal, and El Zotz appear to have succeeded each
other in regional prominence. This will be the first project in the central Maya
lowlands to investigate systematically the succession of multiple landscapes
over the course of Maya civilization. The research focuses on how decisions
related to subsistence strategies and settlement location hinged on what the
Maya perceived to be the most influential factors in the surrounding landscape.
The concept of landscape succession will prove useful to archaeologists working
with complex societies throughout the world. The proposed research will situate
the Maya within discussions of landscape dynamics in regions such as
Mesopotamia, India, China, and South America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two major
research hypotheses put forth are: (1) in the Late Preclassic (400 BC-AD 300),
when large-scale communities coalesced in the region, settlements exploited and
their location was conditioned by a resource-rich natural landscape; and (2)
these settlements were succeeded by Classic Period (AD 300-900) settlements that
were strategically established to play a role in the emergent, increasingly
complex geopolitical landscape. To address these proposals, the team will
reconstruct the ancient natural, political, economic, urban, and rural
landscapes through a combination of survey, excavation, paleoenvironmental
studies, and epigraphy. These reconstructions will be used to formulate, test,
and refine a model of landscape succession for the ancient
Maya.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed project are
varied. The research converges on an endangered region of the Maya biosphere
that is in strong need of archaeological research before further looting and
environmental loss destroys significant evidence of the ancient Maya. An
understanding of successful adaptations to the ancient environment will help
craft responses to current problems of population expansion in the lowland
biosphere and contribute to a growing literature on environmental history and
human responses to, and instigation of, such change. The project will maintain
an updatable wiki website to disseminate general findings to the public and
scholarly community. The interdisciplinary nature of the research allows project
members to contribute intellectually to debates in archaeology, environmental
science, geography, remote sensing, and geographic information science.