* 0840794
* MARGINS:  Collaborative Research: Synthesis and Integration of Magmagenetic Controls for Subduction Factory Focus Sites
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2012
* USD 193,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Synthesis and
Integration of Magmagenetic Controls for Subduction Factory focus
sites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The MARGINS program ends in 2009,
and the organization, synthesis, and integration of the most important results
is a high priority for each of the four experiments. This proposal outlines a
3-year collaborative effort (between 5 US and 2 Japanese scientists) to do this
for key aspects of the Subduction Factory experiment. In co-operation with the
LDEO database group, geochemical and isotopic data for fresh, young igneous
rocks from the Izu-Bonin-Mariana and Central America Subduction Factory focus
sites will be compiled and filtered to generate a Subduction Factory Geochemical
Reference Library of high-quality data for each arc system. Forward models to
explain the most important differences between the chemical and isotopic
compositions of lavas erupted from the volcanic front and rear-arc volcanoes at
the two focus sites will be generated and tested against compositions in this
Library. Models will be site-specific, using all available geophysical
observations to generate thermal structure and melt distribution models
appropriate for each focus site. Best estimates for the compositions of
subducted sediments and oceanic crust at each focus site will be used as input
to thermodynamic models simulating equilibrium metamorphic reactions,
dehydration, and melting of subducted sediments and oceanic crust (slab) within
the subduction zone. Interaction of these slab fluids and melts with overlying
mantle peridotite to yield primitive basalt will be modeled using the "Arc
Basalt Simulator" (ABS), an Excel macro that explicitly separates key forcing
functions and is designed to be flexible and accessible. Several improvements to
ABS will also be accomplished during this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project is in response to calls for synthesis and integration
efforts&lt;br/&gt;by the 2004 MARGINS Review Committee. Dissemination of results
and training Earth&lt;br/&gt;scientists to use ABS will be accomplished at two
free workshops at national scientific&lt;br/&gt;meetings. A lesson plan that
uses ABS and the Subduction Factory Geochemical Library to explore the most
important controls on subduction-zone magma genesis will be developed; this will
be aimed at upper division Geoscience majors and beginning graduate students.
Broader dissemination of the most important results to the general public will
be accomplished via development of a Wikipedia entry for "Subduction
Factory".&lt;br/&gt;