* 0840523
* Upgrade of a 300 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Patrick Mariano, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 298,400.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities:Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at the University of New Mexico
will upgrade the console of a 300 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer
that will be used for solids and solution analyses. It will be employed in
research projects that span many areas of chemistry including, a) the
development of reliable protocols for the assessment of structure and bonding in
high-spin Co(II) systems; b) the discovery of new catalytic reactions and
efficient assembly of diverse and medicinally important chemical structures; c)
investigation of Donor-Bridge-Acceptor systems as potential components of
molecular wire devices; d) development of novel synthetic methods for
biomedically interesting targets; e) understanding the mechanism of carbon
dioxide reacting with main group amides to generate organic isocyanates; f)
characterization of early stage molecular precursor chemistry for the
development of new families of "doped" materials that become novel gas
adsorbents, once converted to solid-state forms; g) strategies for the rational
design of inhibitors for enzymes connected to diseases; h) characterization of
carbon fibers used in cathodes of high power microwave sources with potential
military applications; and i) characterization of bacterial communities in cave
pools and their role in formation of caverns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multinuclear
NMR spectroscopy is an essential tool in modern chemical research. NMR spectra
enable researchers to identify reaction products including targeted substances,
reaction intermediates and unexpected products. Structural information, i.e.
information on the connectivity of the atoms in molecules and materials is
obtained by detecting transitions between energy levels arising from the nuclear
spin properties of atoms. The instruments will be used to support research
projects of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers,
including traditionally underrepresented minority groups that make up
approximately half of the enrollment at the university.