* 0840028
* SGER: An Analytical Framework for a Novel Class of Complex Vibration Dampers
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* John McCoy, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 06/30/2009
* USD 29,957.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods for modeling and
design of complex vibration dampers (CVDs). A CVD consists of a large number of
light vibration elements to be attached to a small region of a dynamical system
to mitigate damage that would otherwise obtain because of the action of a
complex forcing. The research will result in an analytical framework to provide
the basis for prediction models, and thereby design strategies, for a broad
range of applications. The research approach progresses from the protection of
relatively simple structural elements, e.g. beams and plates, subject to
idealized external forces to more complicated structural systems, e.g.
structural frames, subject to highly complex and uncertain forces acting.
Deliverables include an increased understanding of the role of CVDs in
controlling the introduction of energy to a dynamical system by a complex
external forcing; a parameterization of the asymptotic regime that defines the
potential uses of CVDs, distinguishing sub-regimes for which the potential is
greatest; and, the identification of system measures for the purpose of design.

If successful, the results of this research will provide an opportunity for the
design of a new class of damage mitigating systems, for a range of structural
systems and forcing conditions. One possible application would be mitigating the
damage of a civil engineering structure, a high-rise building or bridge, subject
to an earthquake force. Another would be enhancing the crash worthiness of
vehicles. Still another would be reducing the severity of the interior of a
military transport vehicle, subject to the blast force of a nearby explosion.
Successful demonstration of the efficacy of CVDs for any and all of these
applications will be disseminated to the appropriate engineering community for
commercial exploitation.