* 0840370
* SGER: Biomimetic Electrospray Vapor Chamber
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Chuan-Hua Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 40,000.00

CBET-0840370&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
exploratory project is to demonstrate the proof-of-concept for an unprecedented
biomimetic electrospray vapor chamber (BEVAC). The proposed vapor chamber has a
beetle-inspired superhydrophobic condenser with embedded hydrophilic patches
where condensate of the working fluid accumulates. The working fluid is returned
to the evaporator by electrospray atomization. This innovative liquid return
mechanism completely eliminates wick structures and enables the direct use of a
microprocessor chip as a wickless evaporator. Numerous scientific and technical
challenges need to be overcome for the successful development of a BEVAC system.
Neither conducting beetle-like structures nor evaporative electrospray cooling
have been reported in the literature, not to mention the physics behind the
phase change processes on the proposed condenser and evaporator. The NSF SGER
grant is appropriate for the early stage of this high-risk, high-payoff research
endeavor with rich physics and broad applicability. In the pilot phase, a
prototypical BEVAC will be developed to prove the concept. Considerable efforts
will be directed toward the development of a condenser that is conducive to both
preferential condensation and electrospray atomization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed research lie in
the development of an original concept for a new class of wickless vapor
chamber. The BEVAC technology combines the merits of high-heat-flux spray
cooling and low-temperature-gradient vapor chamber into an adaptive two-phase
cooling system. Biomimetic condenser and electrospray cooling are important even
as stand-alone components, and have wide-ranging applications in energy systems
such as autonomous water management and hotspot thermal management. The proposed
work will unveil the physics behind preferential condensation and electrospray
evaporation which have been largely unexplored so far, and lay the foundation
for electrospray vapor chamber as a new cooling
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work lie in
its potential to transform heat-spreading technology at the chip level for a
wide spectrum of military and commercial applications. Intel Corporation has
expressed keen interest and enthusiastic support for the proposed technology.
Drawing upon Intel's support and the PI's own success with two licensed patents,
the PI will rigorously pursue opportunities for technological transition of this
transformative work. On the other hand, the BEVAC project is an excellent
showcase for educational outreach with its bioinspired condenser design and
practical cooling applications, both interesting and tangible for K-12 students.
The pilot projects will be converted to science demos for high school students
at the City of Durham with a large African American population.