* 0840916
* Chemical Determinations of Ion Specific Effects on Association Colloid Morphologies, Peptide Topologies at Interfaces, and Reactivity and Component Distributions in Emulsions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Laurence Romsted, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2014
* USD 517,803.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Laurence S. Romsted at
Rutgers University in New Brunswick NJ. He proposes to do three projects that
combine the logic of pseudophase models with the power of his arenediazonium
probe method. These projects will determine the concentrations of weakly basic
nucleophiles, including water, in the interfacial regions of surfactant based
association colloids, and rate constants for reactions with antioxidants in
opaque emulsions. The results should give new insight into the contribution of
ion-pairing and hydration to the balance of forces controlling aggregate
morphology; new information on the conformations and orientations of
polypeptides at membrane mimetic surfaces; and a new understanding of previously
unattainable determinations of antioxidant reactivity and distribution in
emulsions. Completion of the projects will deepen current understanding of the
balance of forces controlling surfactant aggregate structure. They will aid in
refining the "tuning" of the structures of soft materials and enhance their
utility as encapsulating agents, thickeners, and fluids for bulk transport. The
conformation and orientation of the HIV-1 surface glycoprotein, gp41, which is
important in the cell fusion mechanism leading to AIDS, will be viewed at
interfaces from a new chemical perspective. The creation of a scale of
antioxidant efficiency will be of general utility and enhance both nutrition and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader sense, Professor Romsted's research
program includes: (a) advanced training for undergraduate and graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows; (b) scientific collaborations, including student and
faculty exchanges, with colleagues in the US, France, Sweden, and Brazil; (c)
continued participation in national and international meetings and publication
in international journals; (d) strengthening the teaching of a graduate course
in "Supramolecules and Assemblies" and undergraduate organic chemistry; and (e)
laying the conceptual basis for soft materials technologies. Thus, providing new
insight into morphologies of membrane bound proteins, and improving safety and
shelf-life of emulsified foods.