* 0840977
* MARGINS FELLOWSHIP: Fluidization of Very Thick Granular Layers in Ancient Thrust Faults
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Emily Brodsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 11/30/2012
* USD 202,649.00

Seismogenic faults - that is, faults that generate earthquakes of significant
magnitude, are of particular interest because the earthquakes they produce can
cause appreciable damage and loss of life. It is thus very important to
understand the mechanisms by which they fail in the brittle regime - i.e., by
fracture as opposed to flow. Granular layers are ubiquitous features of faults
that form in the brittle regime, and their evolution and behavior have been
shown to be critically related to strength and strain rate relationships. In the
laboratory, the behavior of both synthetic and natural samples has been shown to
be affected by a variety of factors, such as grain size and size distribution,
layer thickness, and fluid saturation. Theoretical mechanisms for dynamic
weakening of these materials have been proposed and explored, but not examined
in the field. Field observations of faults suggest that granular layers fluidize
or deform as a suspension that behaves like a viscous fluid. It is therefore
essential to examine the role of these factors in natural fault settings and
constrain these parameters with observations of in situ granular layers in
faults. This study by two female researchers will compare two large, mature
brittle faults (one in Alaska, and one in Africa) that contain very thick
fluidized granular layers that contain evidence for significant flow during
fault activity. The structure of fluidized granular layers has the potential to
elucidate the rate at which the fault slipped, as well as the changes in overall
strength of faults during the seismic cycle. Among its broader impacts, this
study will advance the career development of a young female researcher, Dr.
Christie Rowe, including her reintegration into the US academic community. In
addition, there will be significant international collaboration with South
African and Namibian scientists. The project has high societal relevance in that
it addresses the causes of earthquake risk.