* 0840098
* URM: American Indian Research Opportunities in Ecology and Environmental Science
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* John Watts, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2014
* USD 282,718.00

Blackfeet Community College, Little Big Horn College, and Montana State
University will collaborate in a project which will provide research experience,
mentoring, and academic enrichment to students at the three schools. A total of
30 students over a five-year period will participate in the project beginning
Summer 2009. Students from the three schools will engage in 2-year cohorts where
they will they will do research in ecology, environmental science and
microbiology projects relevant to their lives and career goals. The Greater
Yellowstone Ecosystem, the Missouri and Yellowstone River systems, numerous
mountain ranges and the Northern Great Plains will provide diverse ecosystems
and opportunities for research. The collaborative network will enhance student
opportunities on all three campuses and will also support graduates of LBHC and
BCC as they transition to MSU for their bachelor?s degrees. The student
participants will be mentored by science faculty and by Native American
professional biologists in developing academic and research skills to prepare
them to complete baccalaureate degrees and continue on in graduate school. The
overall goal of the project is to increase the number of Native Americans
completing bachelor?s degrees and entering graduate programs in ecology, in
environmental science and in biological fields. More information is available
from Cindy Doore (cindy_doore@fbcc.org) at Blackfeet Community College, from
Neva Tallbear (tallbear@lbhc.cc.mt.us) at Little Big Horn College, and from John
Watts (jwatts@montana.edu) at Montana State University. The website address is:
http://www.montana.edu/wwwai/