* 0840702
* Collaborative Research: Core Database Technologies to enable the Integration of AToL Information
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2008,09/30/2010
* Nico Cellinese, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2010
* USD 201,215.00

The AToL (Assembling the Tree of Life ) is a large-scale collaborative research
effort sponsored&lt;br/&gt;by the National Science Foundation to reconstruct the
evolutionary origins of all living things. Currently 31&lt;br/&gt;projects
involving 150+ PIs are underway generating novel data including studies of
bacteria, microbial eukaryotes, vertebrates, flowering plants and many more. The
data being generated by these projects include and are not limited to: (i)
Specimens and their provenance including collection information, voucher
deposition, etc.; (ii) Phenotypic descriptions and their provenance; (iii)
Genotypic descriptions and their provenance; (iv) Interpretation of the primary
measurements including homology ; (v) Estimates of phylogenies and methods
employed; and (vi) Post-tree analyses such as character evolution
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;While the data collection, storage, and dissemination
within each projects are well coordinated, there is a critical need to develop
the infrastructure to integrate all ATOL data sources, allowing the individual
efforts to become multipliers for global hypotheses. Furthermore, as the
projects continue to expand and address diverse corners of the Tree of Life,
efficient project management will be greatly aided by workflow and data
management tools targeted towards the ATOL problem domain. The project will
develop new, compact, abstract data models for phylogenetics, leveraging use
cases from a broad survey of empirical projects. The integration system will
develop novel mappings between different phylogenetic data domains, and allow
individual projects to join a network of integrated databases in an incremental
manner. The data provenance system, which allows tracking of how each data
object was created, will be unique to&lt;br/&gt;systematics data management. The
provenance system will not only allow tracking of what kinds of decisions were
made in producing a particular tree or a particular column of a data matrix, but
will also allow tracking of alternative data lineages such that, for example,
different opinions on character homology might be tracked. The results of the
research will be delivered in robust software tools that can be used by the
entire evolutionary biology community. The study will develop a community-based
formal model of data objects used in systematics, primarily through a continuing
set of workshops. This activity will not only develop new data management tools,
but will also have the effect of synthesizing disparate views of the
phylogenetics research domains. The results of the system will be extensible to
other domains of evolutionary biology, thereby contributing to the broader
mission of evolutionary synthesis. The project will also provide training for
the general systematics community in latest database technologies. Finally, by
leveraging existing outreach efforts at the Penn Center for Bioinformatics, the
project will link to other biological database efforts in genomics and
biomedical sciences, disseminating phylogenetic information to the broad
biomedical research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;