* 0840297
* Interconnections: Revisting the Future
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Charles Hughes, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,476,967.00

The University of Central Florida Media Convergence Laboratory, New York Hall of
Science, and the Queens Museum of Art are developing a 3-D, multi-user virtual
environment (MUVE) of the 1964/65 New York World's Fair. Virtual fairgoers of
all ages will be immersed in an accurately modeled historical world with more
than 140 pavilions on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines and an array arts and humanities exhibits. The virtual world can be
freely explored through self-designed avatars, and avatar-led guided tours.
Discovery Points throughout the virtual environment will afford opportunities
for in-depth engagement in STEM topics that will empower participants to explore
the broader consequences of technological innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
centerpiece of user-generated content is FutureFair, an area where online users
can create and share their personal visions of the future. Interconnections
reaches beyond its virtual component through its partnership with the New York
Hall of Science and the Queens Museum of Art, which are both situated in the
heart of Queens in Flushing Meadows Corona Park, a 1255 acre urban park that
hosted the 1939/1940 and 1964/65 Fairs. The New York Hall of Science will
provide face-to-face youth workshops that employ problem-based learning. Single
and multi-session programs will connect adolescents to STEM content presented at
the Fair through the virtual world environment. Participants will create
multimedia content for inclusion in the project's website. Multi-touch
interactive stations at the Queens Museum of Art will enhance their NY World's
Fair Exhibit Hall by empowering visitors to individually or collectively explore
various STEM topics and the symbiotic relationships between STEM and the
humanities, and by serving as an attractor for visitors to the online Fair
exploration. The project will be completed in time for the 50th Anniversary
celebration of the 1964 World's Fair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon prior
research on learning in virtual worlds, the project team will investigate how
STEM concepts are advanced in a simulated multi-user virtual environment and
studying the effectiveness of using Virtual Docents as enhancements to the
informal learning process. The research and development deliverables have strong
potential to advance the state of informal science education, research on
modeling and simulation in virtual world development, and education research.
Michigan Technological University will conduct the project formative and
summative evaluations.