* 0840574
* MARGINS:  Collaborative Research: Synthesis and Integration of Magmagenetic Controls for Subduction Factory Focus Sites
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Carr, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2013
* USD 69,001.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Synthesis
and Integration of Magmagenetic Controls for&lt;br/&gt;Subduction Factory focus
sites&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The MARGINS program ends in 2009, and the
organization,&lt;br/&gt;synthesis, and integration of the most important results
is a high priority for each of the&lt;br/&gt;four experiments. This proposal
outlines a 3-year collaborative effort (between 5 US and&lt;br/&gt;2 Japanese
scientists) to do this for key aspects of the Subduction Factory
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;In co-operation with the LDEO database group, geochemical
and isotopic data for fresh,&lt;br/&gt;young igneous rocks from the Izu-Bonin-
Mariana and Central America Subduction&lt;br/&gt;Factory focus sites will be
compiled and filtered to generate a Subduction Factory&lt;br/&gt;Geochemical
Reference Library of high-quality data for each arc system.
Forward&lt;br/&gt;models to explain the most important differences between the
chemical and isotopic&lt;br/&gt;compositions of lavas erupted from the volcanic
front and rear-arc volcanoes at the two&lt;br/&gt;focus sites will be generated
and tested against compositions in this Library. Models will&lt;br/&gt;be site-
specific, using all available geophysical observations to generate
thermal&lt;br/&gt;structure and melt distribution models appropriate for each
focus site. Best estimates for&lt;br/&gt;the compositions of subducted sediments
and oceanic crust at each focus site will be&lt;br/&gt;used as input to
thermodynamic models simulating equilibrium metamorphic
reactions,&lt;br/&gt;dehydration, and melting of subducted sediments and oceanic
crust (slab) within the&lt;br/&gt;subduction zone. Interaction of these slab
fluids and melts with overlying mantle&lt;br/&gt;peridotite to yield primitive
basalt will be modeled using the "Arc Basalt Simulator"&lt;br/&gt;(ABS), an
Excel macro that explicitly separates key forcing functions and is designed
to&lt;br/&gt;be flexible and accessible. Several improvements to ABS will also
be accomplished&lt;br/&gt;during this project.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project is in response to calls for synthesis and integration
efforts&lt;br/&gt;by the 2004 MARGINS Review Committee. Dissemination of results
and training Earth&lt;br/&gt;scientists to use ABS will be accomplished at two
free workshops at national scientific&lt;br/&gt;meetings. A lesson plan that
uses ABS and the Subduction Factory Geochemical&lt;br/&gt;Library to explore the
most important controls on subduction-zone magma genesis will&lt;br/&gt;be
developed; this will be aimed at upper division Geoscience majors and
beginning&lt;br/&gt;graduate students. Broader dissemination of the most
important results to the general&lt;br/&gt;public will be accomplished via
development of a Wikipedia entry for
"Subduction&lt;br/&gt;Factory".&lt;br/&gt;NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:0840794 PI Name:Stern,
Robert&lt;br/&gt;Printed