* 0840538
* SGER: Collaborative Research: Contextual Machine Translation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Joyce Chai, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2010
* USD 80,000.00

SGER: Collaborative Research: Contextual Machine
Translation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant progress in
machine translation, little work has been done to address large-scale
translation of natural multi-party human interactions in real-world contexts.
Multi-party interactions typically take place in a context where multimodal
events such as hand gestures, head gestures, gaze, body movements, etc. are
available and utilized by participants to interpret human language and establish
common ground. This observation leads to the hypothesis that modeling multimodal
environment and interaction discourse can improve automated language
interpretation for the purpose of machine translation. Based on this hypothesis,
this exploratory research investigates the role of multimodality in machine
translation of multi-party conversations using a subset of the AMI meeting
corpus. An appropriate level of multimodal representation is identified focusing
on user gestures and presentation slides. Correct referents to referring
expressions and correct senses to ambiguous words are annotated and used to
evaluate whether and how multimodal context improves reference resolution and
word sense disambiguation. The enhanced semantic processing utilizing multimodal
information is incorporated in statistical machine translation for English-
German. The objective is to conduct proof-of-concept experiments exploring the
usefulness of multimodal and discourse information for statistical machine
translation in real-world contexts. The results from this exploratory study will
provide insights on algorithms and systems for automatic extraction of
multimodal information, language interpretation using multimodal information,
and incorporation of this information into statistical machine translation. The
annotated data will be made available to the research community to facilitate
the development of translation technology that produces more natural, human-like
translations in real-world interactive
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;