* 0840906
* An Integrative Approach to Elucidate Systemic RNA Trafficking
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Biao Ding, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 01/31/2012
* USD 486,000.00

How basic processes in individual cells within a multicellular organism are
integrated to enable development, function and response to the environment is a
central issue in modern biology. Cell-to-cell trafficking of RNA is a recently
discovered mechanism that controls gene regulation, viral infection, cellular
antiviral responses, and cell-to-cell communication. This project investigates
how an RNA produced in a cell is selected for transport into neighboring cells
and even to distant organs in a plant, a basic mechanistic question of
fundamental importance to understand trafficking regulation for all RNAs. Potato
spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd) infection will be used as a simple experimental
model to test the hypothesis that an RNA has distinct structural motifs to
interact with cellular factors to potentiate trafficking across successive
cellular boundaries from the plant surface to the centrally located vascular
tissue for long-distance transport. Specifically, the project will (1) analyze a
series of trafficking-defective mutants of PSTVd to identify the RNA motifs
mediating trafficking through different cellular boundaries, (2) test the
predicted three-dimensional structural model of a trafficking motif through
extensive mutational analyses, and (3) determine the role of a plant protein in
PSTVd trafficking. Results from the project will provide groundbreaking insights
about how an infectious RNA has evolved distinct structural elements to use
cellular machinery to establish infection, and help develop a conceptual
framework to study the mechanisms of RNA trafficking underlying many biological
processes. This project will include training of undergraduate and graduate
students. This training will expose students to cutting-edge cross-disciplinary
research approaches to study fundamental biological problems. The project will
also enhance science education for elementary/middle/high school students and
secondary school teachers, including traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;