* 0840565
* SGER: Exploring Sustainable Engineering Design Metrics through Cell Biology Analogy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Delcie R. Durham, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,974.00

The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research is to investigate the
feasibility of developing metrics for sustainable engineering design of discrete
products through an analogy with cell biology. The basis for this work is to
extend the concepts of industrial ecology and biomimicry to accommodate the
principles of optimization in engineering design. Industrial ecology is modeled
on the biological metabolism that occurs across a system of organisms, where
input-output analysis or exergy and materials flow analysis are used to
establish the degree of effectiveness of the system. Engineering design metrics
are necessary so that design optimization tools that include sustainability
objectives can be developed. The novel aspect of this project is that the focus
will extend to the scale of the biological cell, where the model for efficient
cell behavior based upon available (free) energy will be related to the design
of sustainable products. The fundamental hypothesis of this high risk, high
potential project is that the thermodynamic Maxwell relationships can represent
the connectivity between the cell (product) and the metabolism (industrial
ecology system). Since these relationships are based upon the derivatives of
free energy, it is expected that algorithms can be established and tested for
the product, identifying state variables that can serve as metrics for the
sustainable product design. The significant risk in this project lies in the
uncertainty that while exergy (availability) and free energy are the
thermodynamic foundations for ecology and cell biology (effectiveness and
efficiency), it is not known whether such a bridge can be established between
industrial ecology and sustainable product design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
greatest potential for this research lies in the broader impacts that would be
achieved when metrics for sustainable product design could be integrated with
the principles of industrial ecology and design for the environment. Once these
metrics are identified, engineering design tools could be modified and new tools
developed that would provide engineers with the ability to design and
demonstrate the veracity of ?green: products. Setting sustainability as a
preference for the design of products would then become an achievable
objective.&lt;br/&gt;