* 0840643
* Joint German-American Conference on Land Use and Climate Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* DANIEL BROWN, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2010
* USD 80,000.00

Although global in origin, climate-change impacts vary strongly across regions.
Coping with these changes therefore requires local action in an internationally
coordinated way that acknowledges inequities in impacts regionally and locally.
Awareness is growing of the need for a portfolio of mitigation options that
local regions can use to develop effective strategies for reducing energy
consumption and carbon dioxide emissions, to increase the efficiency of energy
use, and to store consumed carbon and make energy production sustainable.
Furthermore, organizations, communities, and regions need to identify
opportunities to reduce their vulnerability to climate-change impacts and
increase their capacity to adapt their land-use and livelihood strategies to the
changing climate. In this context, land resources like the biosphere, soils, and
water and their interaction with people and the climate system play an
increasingly important role. Although limited in its areal extent, land
resources are an important component of the global carbon cycle, and they can be
used to produce renewable energy and to sequester carbon. This potential,
however, is constrained by existing demands on land resources to provide for
human settlement, food and fiber production, and other ecosystem services like
maintenance of water quality. To address these topics and bring together the
complementary expertise of U.S. and German scientists, this award will support
the participation of U.S. scientists in a binational conference on the
challenges of understanding and managing land-use dynamics under a changing
climate. The conference is to be held in Berlin, Germany, in early October 2008.
The conference will bring together 35 scholars from United States with about 100
from Germany to discuss the current state of the art in land-change science as
it relates to climate change, to identify priorities for research, to provide
opportunities for participation of young scholars, and to develop new
collaborations between U.S. and Germany-based
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help facilitate greater
scientific understanding of the complex interactions among people and land
resources in the face of climatic change. It will facilitate international
collaboration between U.S. and German scholars. Because roughly half of the U.S.
participants will be at early stages in their professional careers, the long-
term potential for future international collaborative findings is especially
great. The project also will advance understanding of the complex dynamics
between land resources and climate change, thereby fostering more effective
strategies for mitigating and adapting to the impacts of climate change in a
range of different terrestrial environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;