* 0840804
* New GK-12: Partnership between Educators and Researchers for Enhancing Classroom Teaching (PERFECT)
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Kam Tang, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2015
* USD 2,736,518.00

For this new GK-12 project the Virginia Institute of Marine Science will partner
with four secondary schools in the Chesapeake Bay region serving students from
15 school districts, from urban to suburban and rural areas. The partners
include schools with traditional STEM curricula, as well as schools with a
special focus on marine and environmental sciences. A high percentage of the
students are from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The
project will allow graduate fellows and faculty to incorporate state-of-the-art
science and technology into K-12 STEM education, and use Chesapeake Bay as a
locally relevant example to inspire the graders. Each GK-12 graduate fellow will
team with an in-service teacher throughout the year. This buddy team format
allows the fellow and the teacher to mentor and learn from each other. Teachers
will gain valuable hands-on research experience by participating in fellows?
research projects. In return, teachers will guide fellows to develop appropriate
teaching materials and conduct classroom teaching. Special courses and workshops
will be offered to further enhance fellows? and teachers? content understanding
and communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project graduate
fellows will gain valuable pedagogical skills and teaching experiences that are
not available in traditional graduate training. More importantly, they will
cultivate a life-long interest to contribute to K-12 science education via
formal and informal means. The project will also strengthen the partnership
between researchers and educators in the Chesapeake Bay region, and produce new
teaching materials that will benefit the broader K-12 science education
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;