* 0840601
* SGER: Collection of Data on Fire at Faculty of Architecture Building, Technical University at Delft
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Brian Meacham, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 04/30/2009
* USD 11,377.00

0840601&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide travel
support to a research team to collect data on the fire-induced damage of a
multistory building in Delft, the Netherlands. On May 13, 2008 an internally
started fire caused a significant part of the Faculty of Architecture Building
at the Technical University of Delft to collapse. The research team will visit
the site and meet with university personnel, government officials, fire
fighters, eyewitnesses, and other people concerned with this event to collect
data of scientific importance. The collected data will include structural plans,
material specifications, architectural layout and compartmentation plans,
information on combustible contents, fire safety management procedures, and
system test, inspection and maintenance procedures. Information will also be
collected on fire initiation, growth and spread of fire, response of building,
and response of the occupants and fire fighters, including emergency response
procedures in place and decisions made during the evacuation prior to the fire
spread. The data collected for this event will provide highly important
information for future research studies needed to improve the understanding of
fire-structure response and building performance, evacuation planning, and other
broader questions related to building fire safety regulations and public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;