* 0840960
* Industry/University Collaborative Research Center for Advanced Cutting Tool Technology (ACT2)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Hyungson Ki, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 168,515.00

Full Center Proposal (Phase I) for an I/UCRC for Advanced Cutting Tool
Technology (ACT2) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0840960 Michigan State University;
Patrick Kwon &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to start a
new I/UCRC entitled "I/UCRC for Advanced Cutting Tool Technology (ACT2)" to
develop the fundamental science and technology necessary for the advancement of
cutting tool technology. The proposed center consists of a single academic
institution and industrial partners, including cutting tool manufacturers and
manufacturing companies to resolve unsettled and new challenges through long-
term synergistic partnerships. The proposed center addresses some of the
fundamental issues in advanced machining. The research expertise of the proposed
team will enable them to identify wear mechanisms under various machining
conditions, develop wear-resistant compositions and geometries of cutting tools,
apply tool wear models for selection of optimum tool materials for specific
machining situations, and find new ways to realize minimum quantity lubrication
(MQL). The proposed center, led by Michigan State, will have the assistance of
Georgia Tech; and will be an important contributor to the knowledge base in
cutting tools and tool materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects outlined in
the proposal will significantly advance the know-how of the researchers. The
developed science and technologies will enable cutting tool and component
manufacturers to effectively design and produce components more efficiently. The
students involved in the industry relevant research projects will certainly
benefit from the industrial interaction. The results of the proposed research
will be disseminated in conference presentations, journals, and an online
database will be created to assist researchers worldwide. The PIs plan to
recruit students through the Michigan State University (MSU) ENGINEERING
Minority Office, and the McNair-SROP program, in order to encourage
participation from underrepresented and economically disadvantaged groups.