* 0840492
* Social Reasoning, Subjective Group Dynamics, and Children's Evaluations of Exclusion
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Melanie Killen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 422,253.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has shown that being excluded
from social groups is endemic to peer interactions, relationships, and groups
from early childhood through adulthood. In fact, exclusion constitutes a basic
feature of group dynamics that derives from the processes underlying the
development and maintenance of social groups. To preserve one's group identity,
however, individuals will often exclude others who do not fit the group
expectations. While developing a group identity is adaptive, exclusion based on
expectations about group norms can lead to prejudicial and discriminatory
outcomes. How does this process emerge in childhood? While prior research on
moral reasoning has demonstrated that children evaluate exclusion from groups as
wrong and unfair, other findings indicate that children display ingroup
favoritism and outgroup bias in intergroup dyadic contexts. These discrepant
perspectives on group inclusion and exclusion will be investigated by drawing on
two complementary theoretical models in developmental social cognition. First,
social cognitive domain research has generated findings regarding children's
social and moral norms, and has documented the norms children use to include and
exclude others and evaluate the 'act' of exclusion. Second, developmental
subjective group dynamics research has documented relationships between group
identity, group loyalty, and deviant norms used in group interactions, measuring
judgments regarding children's evaluations of the 'target' of exclusion. The
current research project will investigate how acts and targets of exclusion are
evaluated in the context of intragroup and intergroup peer dynamics. Do children
prefer an outgroup member (likeability of the target) who espouses a moral norm
(evaluation of the act) over an ingroup member who rejects a moral norm? How do
judgments about act/target relationships vary as a function of the type of norm,
the age of the child, the target of exclusion, and other variables? These
questions will be addressed by conducting three empirical studies in which
children and adolescents at 9 and 13 years of age will be interviewed and
surveyed. Three targets will serve as the focus for each study: gender,
race/ethnicity, and school affiliation. A set of measures to be implemented
includes children's evaluations of the act of exclusion and inclusion,
favorability of the deviant target, evaluation of ingroup/outgroup
relationships, and use of social and moral reasoning. These measures will be
analyzed with respect to the group identity, age, gender, and ethnicity of the
participants as well as to the type of social norms and group loyalty norms
presented to participants for their evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this research lies with understanding the origins of inclusion
and exclusion, which reflect the foundations of moral reasoning as well as
prejudice and stereotypes. When exclusion based on prejudice and stereotypes
manifests in the workforce, productivity as well as positive social
relationships are at risk for tension and disruption. By adulthood, biases and
stereotypes are deeply entrenched and difficult to change. Thus, successful
intervention must be implemented in childhood and adolescence when attitudes
about ingroups and outgroups in the form of inclusion and exclusion are
emerging. The basic research to be derived from this project will be
disseminated to educational and media outlets as well as to educators,
psychologists, social scientists, and professionals working with children and
adolescents. One anticipated outcome of this project is to help address societal
concerns regarding prejudice through facilitating inclusive perspectives based
on fairness in the context of group dynamics and peer interactions in childhood
and adolescence.