* 0840407
* Collaborative Research:    The Magnetic Properties of Disordered Rare-Earth Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/03/2008,07/31/2010
* Diandra Leslie-Pelecky, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2010
* USD 172,850.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale disorder is a common thread
in very different classes of technologically important materials such as those
used for permanent magnets and information storage. This collaborative project
uses model rare-earth-alloy systems to understand the dependence of magnetic
properties on nanometer-scale structural and chemical disorder. The model
systems will be prepared by different fabrication methods and structurally
characterized using x-ray diffraction, electron microscopy and synchrotron
techniques. Atomic-level and macroscopic magnetic measurements will be
correlated to specific types of disorder. These results will improve our
understanding of the relationship between nanoscale disorder and magnetic
properties in more complex materials, thus allowing us to develop improved
materials for existing and future applications. This collaborative project
involves researchers from the University of Nebraska at Lincoln and the
University of Northern Iowa, the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National
Laboratory, and Los Alamos National Laboratory. The project provides
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduate students with
interdisciplinary training (including the use of facilities at national
laboratories) in an area of critical national need. Workshops and summer
activities with Upward Bound math &amp; science students, middle and high school
teachers, and high-school students will help educate the future workforce about
the importance of nanoscale
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale inhomogeneity underlies many of the fundamental
properties of systems such as colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) materials and
high-Tc superconductors. This collaborative project uses nanostructured rare-
earth (RE) systems to investigate the relationship between magnetic properties
and atomic-level disorder. In particular, disordered RE Laves-phase materials
will be prepared by mechanical milling, inert-gas condensation, and melt
spinning. RE Laves-phase materials have magnetic characteristics similar to CMR
and high-Tc materials, but are structurally simpler. Disorder (coordination
number, mean interatomic distances, and variations in the interatomic
distances), will be determined by x-ray diffraction and X-Ray Absorption Fine-
Structure Spectroscopy (XAFS). Atomic-level and macroscopic magnetic
measurements, including magnetic XAFS, XMCD, and ac and dc magnetization, will
be correlated to specific types of disorder. Understanding how extrinsic
properties such as coercivity depend on disorder will improve materials such as
those used for permanent magnets and information storage. Sample fabrication, DC
magnetic measurements, and structural characterization will be done at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, while the University of Northern Iowa will be
responsible for ac susceptibility measurements and analysis. The broader impacts
of this award include interdisciplinary research training for postdocs, graduate
students and undergraduates. Middle and high school teachers and high-school
students will be impacted through workshops and summer programs that illustrate
the role materials play in society. &lt;br/&gt;