* 0840464
* Acquisition of a Cryoprobe for a NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Singleton, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 07/31/2013
* USD 247,238.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Chemistry Department at Texas A&amp;M University Main Campus will acquire a
cryoprobe for a 500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. The
increased sensitivity provided by this acquisition will advance a variety of
research projects, including: 1) Analysis of natural product molecules from
aquatic organisms, obtained only in small amounts; 2) Investigations of reaction
mechanisms by quantitative NMR spectroscopy, requiring a high signal-to-noise
ratio even of dilute samples, to achieve the necessary precision; 3) Studies of
small amounts of unstable organometallic compounds and catalytic transition
states; and 4) Investigations of enzyme-bound intermediates and membrane
transport experiments employing isotopically enriched protein samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMR spectroscopy is a very powerful analytical technique
for the analysis of materials in chemistry, biochemistry and biology research.
The spectra enable researchers to identify and characterize their substances
including transient intermediates from reactions. They provide information on
the arrangement and connectivity of atoms in molecules and materials, i.e.,
their structures by detecting transitions between energy levels arising from the
nuclear spin properties of atoms. The cryoprobe will have a significant impact
on education both intra- and extramurally. At Texas A&amp;M, graduate and
undergraduate research students will benefit from the ability to obtain data
from state-of-the-art instrumentation. In addition, to enhance regional impact,
the instrument will be cyber enabled. Off campus users will be able to send
their samples, and will have the choice of having spectra obtained by staff, or
of performing the experiments themselves by remote control of the spectrometer.
Faculty at the University of Texas-Pan American, Texas A&amp;M University Corpus
Christi, Texas A&amp;M University Kingsville, Tarleton State University, and the
University of Texas of the Permian Basin will have access to the spectrometer.
Many of these institutions have high Hispanic enrollments making this
acquisition available to significant numbers of underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;