* 0840526
* CRIF:MU - Tunable UV-Vis and IR Laser System for Spectroscopy and Chemical Dynamics Research
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Matthew Asplund, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 02/29/2012
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at Brigham Young
University will acquire two optical parametric oscillator (OPO) laser systems
for a new shared laser facility. The laser systems will be used by chemistry
department researchers (faculty, graduate and undergraduate researchers) to
study a number of problems in the chemical sciences. These include: (1)
photochemical dynamics of organometallic species and retinal; (2) the gas-phase
structure and bonding of supramolecular ions; (3) gas-phase radical kinetics via
cavity ring-down spectroscopy; and (4) ro-vibrational energy transfer in gas-
phase species. The laser systems will be used by large numbers of undergraduate
and graduate students, both in research as well as in the laboratory curriculum.
Access to the instrument will be widened, via a university program aimed at high
school students from underrepresented groups. High school students in the
outreach program will visit the laboratory as a part of an enrichment program,
and some students will use the equipment in collaboration with BYU undergraduate
and graduate student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pulsed laser systems,
like the one purchased under this award, allow chemists to probe matter in
interesting ways. Chemical reactions and molecular processes (e.g. collisional
exchange of energy) can be studied with collision-by-collision detail. With this
level of detail, chemists can build physical models to describe chemical and
molecular events which can be generalized to as-yet-unstudied chemical systems.
The infrastructure made available with this grant will be used in teaching and
training a broad range of young scientists, in important, cutting-edge,
experimental methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;