* 0840889
* New, GK-12 Program at the University of Houston: Innovations in Nanotechnology and Nanosciences using a Knowledge, Applications, Research, and Technology (KART) Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Eugene Chiappetta, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,963,931.00

?Innovations in Nanotechnology and Nanosciences? using a Knowledge,
Applications, Research, and Technology (KART)
Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will (i) provide engineering
graduate students engaged in state-of-the-art nanotechnology related research to
learn the articulation of complex scientific and engineering issues in a GK-12
classroom environment through direct immersive interaction with students and
teachers (for example, via interactive modules based on science behind Harry
Potter), (ii) provide GK-12 teachers with recent knowledge and innovative
learning activities in nanotechnology that are subsequently shared with GK-12
students to enable a deep understanding of the fundamentals of physical
sciences. Special features of the program include: (i) active hands-on learning
activities using the KART approach for GK-12 students and teachers led by
graduate fellows, (ii) summer research experiences for teachers through current
NSF funded RET: ?Innovations in Nanotechnology?, and (iii) joint participation
by teachers and graduate fellows in journal publications and conferences. Thus,
the intellectual merit of the proposed program lies in its unique approach to
inculcate, communication skills, alternate career paths, community citizenship,
and visionary educator qualities among highly motivated and dedicated graduate
fellows conducting research with internationally recognized faculty in
nanotechnology and nanosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this program is that it will draw participants from a variety of schools across
the Houston area with student bodies rich in diversity. Graduate fellows and
teachers will disseminate the results of their teaching modules through
appropriate conferences and journals. This grant is anticipated to significantly
enhance the diversity and number of future research and development-oriented
technological leaders thus helping to fill our nation?s need to establish and
maintain a diverse, technological workforce. &lt;br/&gt;