* 0840860
* SGER: Nursery areas, natal origin, and natural elemental signatures: implications for connectivity and conservation of shark and ray populations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Selina Heppell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2010
* USD 149,913.00

The use of nursery areas is widespread among elasmobranchs (sharks and rays).
The segregation of juvenile and adult habitat creates the potential for
distinctive elemental compositions to be incorporated into the calcified
structures of growing individuals as a result of the differing physical and
chemical characteristics of these nursery areas. Distinctive ratios and
combinations of elements may serve as naturally occurring markers, commonly
referred to as elemental signatures, providing insight into natal origins,
habitat use, dispersal, connectivity, and the extent of population mixing.
However, these tools have not yet been applied to cartilaginous fishes. The
objective of this investigation is to determine if elemental signatures
incorporated into the vertebrae of young-of-the-year elasmobranchs reflect
discrete, site-specific markers. This investigation may establish a powerful,
alternative approach for research into the life history and population dynamics
of this group of fishes. Elasmobranchs lack the calcified structures, known as
otoliths, which are typically used for studies of dispersal and natal origin in
bony fishes based on distinctive elemental signatures. The potential for
metabolic activity within calcified vertebrae has raised questions about the
chemical stability of these structures. Resorption or physiological reworking of
this cellular matrix may alter vertebral chemical composition during the course
of a lifetime and limit their usefulness as records of past physiochemical
environments in which the organism lived. Before broader ecological questions
may be considered based on differences in the chemical composition within
cartilaginous vertebrae, key assumptions underlying the application of these
techniques must be addressed.

Complementary field and captive laboratory investigations will be applied to
assess spatial and temporal variability of vertebral elemental signatures,
relationships between water and vertebral chemical composition, and stability of
these signatures through time. Specimens will be obtained from fishery landings
from nursery areas along the Pacific coast of Mexico (including the Gulf of
California) and Costa Rica during August-November 2008 and 2009. The
distribution of the sampling locations will enable an assessment of spatial
variability in elemental and isotopic signatures on the scale of 10s, 100s, and
1000s of kms across contrasting environmental and geological gradients. Study
species will be opportunistically targeted to represent different life history
strategies and ecomorphotypes (e.g. benthic, pelagic), but an emphasis will be
focused on the collection of the commonly landed, circumglobally distributed
scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini). The extent to which elements are
discriminated against or selected for within vertebrae will be described by
partition coefficients, thus enabling comparisons of vertebral chemical
composition with ambient environmental concentrations.

Relationships between water and vertebral chemistry and temporal stability of
elemental signatures will be assessed through manipulative experiments with
captive juvenile sharks or rays. Experimental treatments will include a control,
and replicated conditions of three constant salinity-temperature levels.
Following a period of approximately nine months, salinity-temperature treatments
will be altered in each tank to simulate change into a new, contrasting
environment. At the time of transfer, one tank will be assigned reduced food
rations. This will provide a means of determining if physiological stress, such
as an irregular or insufficient food supply, drives reworking of elements within
the vertebral matrix. After nine additional months have passed, experimental
specimens will be sacrificed in accordance with Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee protocol. Elemental and isotopic analyses will be conducted using
Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry for vertebral
samples and a combination of Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission
Spectroscopy and High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry
for water samples.

This project represents the first inquiry into the potential application of
multi-elemental analysis of cartilaginous vertebrae to studies of natal origin
and population connectivity. If the technique is successful, this study will
propel and direct future research and provide critical details for improved
management and conservation of this historically vulnerable group of fishes.

