* 0840507
* Purchase of a Transmission Electron Microscope: a Regional Cyber-User Facility for Materials Chemistry and the Northern Plains Undergraduate Research Center
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Ranjit Koodali, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2012
* USD 475,806.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at the University of
South Dakota will acquire a Cyber-enabled Transmission Electron Microscope
(TEM). The microscope will be used by researchers at the University of South
Dakota, and other institutions in the Great Plains region, including the members
of the Northern Plains Undergraduate Research Center. The projects that
acquisition of this instrumentation will enable include: (1) study of the
surface sensitization of Ln-doped lanthanum trifluoride nanoparticles; (2)
investigation of the potential for metal-surface enhancement of upconversion
luminescence from Lanthanide-doped nanoparticles; (3) TEM studies of noble metal
containing titanium dioxide aerogels; (4) the synthesis of well-defined
nanocrystals for catalysis; (5) exploration of the relationship between
morphology of carbonaceous materials and their catalytic activity toward
alkylation, benzylic oxidation and phtooxidation; and (6) study of the
properties and self-assembly of nanocomposites for surface enhanced Raman
scattering in sensing applications. The microscope will be used by large numbers
of undergraduate and graduate students, both in instructional settings as well
as in research. Access to the instrument will be widened, via cyber-enabling and
other means, to student researchers in the Great Plains region, including
students at Sinte Gleska University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transmission electron
microscopes, like the one purchased under this award, allow chemists to see
atomic-level details of materials that they make in their laboratories. This
level of detail is especially needed when probing the chemical properties of
nanoscale materials, where chemical heterogeneity changes at precisely these
length scales. Without this level of detail, the progress towards new kinds of
nanoscale materials will be made much more slowly. The infrastructure made
available with this grant will be used in teaching and training a broad range of
young scientists, including significant numbers of Native American scientists,
in important, cutting-edge, experimental methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;