* 0840099
* Ice Cores, Transluscent Truths from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2010,02/28/2010
* Anna McKee, McKee                   Anna           K
* Standard Grant
* Peter West
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1.00

Early career artist Anna McKee proposes to spend two weeks at the field camp of
the NSF-funded WAIS Divide Ice Core Project, a deep ice core that will provide
one of the most detailed records of atmospheric conditions ever obtained.

Her sketches and photographs of field work and the landscape will be used to
create a series of contemporary etchings and drawings. This work will add to a
rich tradition of graphic arts from the early days of Antarctic exploration. The
artist will create an exhibition catalog of these images with an essay
describing her experiences, the scientific research and its contribution to the
climate change story.

She will examine a variety of metaphors and visual themes as part of project,
including the aesthetics of ice cores; memory (the existence of atmospheric
gases in the cores as planetary memories); scale, place and time; parallel
places (contrasting the conditions of 20,000 years ago on the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet with those in the Puget Sound Basin, where she is based); and contribution
to environmental awareness and understanding

Among her efforts to achieve a broader impacts for her project, she will make
presentations throughout Seattle in libraries, high schools, after-school
programs and an art school. A proposed gallery exhibit and presentations will be
advertised throughout the library system, arts organizations and on a Seattle
cable channel arts program. She is also collaborating with an inner-city public
middle school science teacher to develop a multi-disciplinary presentation in
coordination with their environmental studies curriculum, which can eventually
be shared with other schools.

She also will maintain an Internet journal documenting her travel to Antarctica,
the challenges of working on the ice and WAIS Divide field activities to share
the artwork and its context nationally and abroad and she is planning
presentations with TechREACH, an NSF-funded educational program that targets at-
risk middle school students throughout Washington.