* 0840847
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Costly Signaling in the Archaeological Record: A Case Study in Western North America
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Jacob Fisher, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 14,964.00

Men and women often behave in ways that put their own interests first even when
their decisions appear to be in conflict with one another. This has become
increasingly apparent as researchers try to explain how people cooperate to form
the sexual division of labor present in most social groups. The traditional
explanation of this basic unit of cooperation suggests that men hunt and women
gather in order to provide their families with food. This explanation has been
questioned because it does not account for known human behaviors, such as the
hunting and widespread sharing of risky and unpredictable resources like large
game. Instead of providing for his family, the successful hunter appears to
receive more indirect benefits by having more spouses, children, and allies.
Costly signaling theory argues that these acts serve as honest signals of
underlying attributes, and receivers gain from these signals by knowing who the
best mates and allies are in the community. This suggests that it is self-
interest and not cooperation that is motivating foraging decisions among
signalers and receivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr.
Donald Grayson, Jacob Fisher will investigate how male costly signaling behavior
impacted the social and natural environment of the Fremont, a cultural group
practicing both horticulture and foraging lifeways in the eastern Great Basin
and Colorado Plateau of North America between AD 400 and 1300. The degree to
which men were making hunting decisions based on costly signaling motivations
instead of immediate economic returns will be determined by the kinds of animal
remains found within a site and their distributions between households: the
signaling value of a species will be determined by the costs invested in
capturing the animals. Those species that are the most effective signals are
predicted to be distributed widely between households. The costs involved
include transportation, as hunters motivated by costly signaling may travel
farther to capture rare, more valued game. Transportation will be detected using
strontium isotope ratios (87Sr/86Sr), an innovative approach that allows one to
source skeletal materials to specific geographic
localities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Costly signaling theory is critical for
understanding variability in human behavior. As such, the proposed research has
the potential of advancing our understanding of gendered foraging strategies,
sexual division of labor, and inter-household cooperation that are so critical
to our understanding of past and present social relationships and human impacts
on the biotic landscape. Ultimately, this will have significant impact on our
understanding of how gender is constructed, a major topic throughout the social
sciences and of major importance to the general public where issues of gender
are continually discussed. The information gained from this project will be
disseminated through a website that describes the research in a public-oriented
fashion. Public talks will be conducted at the Fremont Indian State Park museum
in Utah and the Burke Museum in Seattle. Lastly, undergraduate students will be
integrated into the research process, both during the faunal analysis and
through teaching materials in future courses taught by the Co-PI.