* 0840651
* Doppler Radar Observations and Ensemble-Based Data Assimilation for Cloud-Resolving Hurricane Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Fuqing Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anna Hallar
* 05/31/2013
* USD 550,146.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant progress in short-
range hurricane track forecasts, over the past decade there has been virtually
no improvement in predicting hurricane intensity and amount of precipitation,
and very limited skill exists in the numerical prediction of tropical cyclone
formation, rapid intensification or decay. It remains unclear whether the lack
of numerical forecast skill derives from imperfect initial conditions,
inadequate data assimilation techniques, imperfect forecast models, or from
intrinsic predictability limits due to chaotic dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use ensemble-based data assimilation
(EnDA) to explore the initialization and prediction of tropical cyclones as well
as the fundamental limits to the predictability of hurricane structure and
intensity. The research will utilize special data sets collected on three 2005
hurricanes (Katrina, Ophelia and Rita) during the Rainband and Intensity
Experiment (RAINEX). The RAINEX was a joint NSF/NOAA field project that employed
multiple aircraft with Doppler radars and dropsonde capabilities to investigate
the hurricane intensity changes that are associated with eyewall-rainband
interactions. Other cases to be examined include Emily (2005), Wilma (2005), and
Humberto (2007). All of these selected cases have extensive and unique Doppler
radar observations that were collected over the lifecycles of the hurricanes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major objectives of the research include: (1) assess the
impacts on predictability of assimilating ground-based and airborne radar
observations in addition to regular and experimental in-situ and remotely sensed
observations; (2) explore the role of the large-scale environment and internal
dynamics, including moist convection, on the predictability of hurricane
structure and intensity change; and (3) evaluate the impact and effectiveness of
different observing platforms and targeting strategies on hurricane prediction
through observing system numerical experiments with both simulated and actual
observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The combination of the
EnDA technique with field observations constitutes a potentially significant
advance in data assimilation and understanding of dynamics, intensity,
structure, prediction, and fundamental limits of predictability of tropical
cyclones. The work will also may provide guidance for future observing network
design and observing strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
research will provide educational benefits through the extensive participation
of a doctoral graduate student and a postdoctoral scientist. Research findings
will be used in advanced educational courses and undergraduate research
projects. Knowledge gained about the predictability of hurricanes potentially
will benefit the operational communities and the general public. The EnDA
techniques and computer codes will be made freely available online with ample
documentation to benefit the larger academic community.