* 0840708
* A Workshop on Undergraduate Education in Emerging Technologies at The 15th International Meeting on DNA Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Russell Deaton, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 8,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology may be a foundation for the economy of the future. A
potential way for new materials and devices to be constructed at the nanoscale
is to use DNA molecules to assemble them. DNA, the primary genetic component of
our cells, has a convenient, template-matching property that allows two DNA
molecules to bind, and thus, assemble whatever components with which they are
associated. Moreover, this template-matching reaction with DNA can be programmed
to build complicated structures from the bottom-up. The 15th International
Meeting on DNA Computing is a forum that brings together researchers from
Computer Science, Mathematics, Molecular Biology, Chemistry, and Physics to
discuss the molecular scale manipulation of matter through computational
paradigms using DNA and other biological material. Thus, it is helping to
establish the scientific foundations of a potentially important technology for
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The population of Arkansas has one of the
lowest percentages of people with undergraduate or graduate degrees in the
United States. In order to compete in the future economy, Arkansas students,
particularly, undergraduates, need to participate in research and study of
emerging technologies, like DNA Computing and Bionanotechnology. In addition,
work in these emerging technologies is highly interdisciplinary, which is not
the norm for traditional undergraduate education. A workshop at the 15th
International Meeting on DNA Computing will bring together top researchers in
this emerging technology, and teachers and students from Arkansas undergraduate
institutions to discuss and foster the involvement of undergraduates in this
field. Topics will include undergraduate research, curriculum development, and
opportunities for both faculty and students to participate in funded
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;