* 0840442
* CAREER: Advanced Computational Multi-Body Dynamics for Next Generation Simulation-Based Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Dan Negrut, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 02/28/2014
* USD 408,911.00

As the computer microprocessor industry rallies behind a new design paradigm
that emphasizes massively parallel architectures, today?s Computational Multi-
Body Dynamics methods are gradually becoming obsolete and ill-positioned to
answer the ever growing challenges posed by Simulation-Based Engineering. This
Career proposal is motivated by the opportunity to reshape the existing
Computational Multi-Body Dynamics landscape through new simulation methods.
Specifically, the developed methods will tackle complex dynamics applications
from new algorithmic perspectives that draw on affordable high performance
parallel computing hardware. From the motion of atoms to the flow of granular
material (sand, gravel, etc.) and on to predicting/understanding/optimizing the
dynamics of heavy duty machinery such as a 1,500 ton electric excavator, three
efficiency barriers that currently limit the potential of Simulation-Based
Engineering are identified as follows: (i) numerical solution methods are rooted
in sequential algorithms, (ii) numerical methods do not scale to handle very
large systems efficiently, and (iii) numerical integration methods are limited
to very small integration step-sizes. Under this research, advanced numerical
methods leveraging emerging massively parallel commodity computer hardware will
be identified, investigated, and demonstrated to effectively overcome these
efficiency barriers. Specifically, (a) relying on explicit numerical
integration, an iterative solution framework will be investigated for its
potential for parallel simulation, (b) drawing on a differential variational
inequality approach, scalable complementarity methods will be investigated for
their potential to use tens of thousands of parallel computational threads to
solve billion body dynamics problems with frictional contact, and (c) relying on
implicit numerical formulas, symplectic methods will be investigated for their
potential for larger integration step-sizes in Molecular Dynamics simulation. If
it is a domain decomposition technique, a multigrid methodology, or a new
variational implicit integrator, the approaches investigated under this project
ultimately draw on Applied Mathematics and leverage emerging trends in Computer
Science to advance/accelerate discovery in Engineering. In specific economic
terms, this research effort will (1) translate into immediate productivity gains
in Simulation-Based Engineering as a result of existing technology transfer
arrangements with several federal government and industry partners, and (2)
assist NASA researchers with simulation technology required to design the next
generation of Lunar and Mars rovers. In educational/outreach terms, this effort
will (3) increase minority enrollment in the College of Engineering at the
University of Wisconsin through an ongoing annual summer Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) program with clearly stated goals and
success metrics, (4) promote a graduate/undergraduate Mechanical Engineering
educational track at Wisconsin that emphasizes Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science as fundamental building blocks in the technical formation of new
Engineers, and (5) increase public awareness of the Computational Multi-Body
Dynamics topic in particular and the potential of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science disciplines in general.