* 0840964
* RCN:   Forecasts Of Resource and Environmental Changes: data Assimilation Science and Technology (FORECAST)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2017
* Kiona Ogle, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 06/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

There is an urgent need to develop the capability to forecast changes in our
living environment and natural resources. This is a period marked by rapid
climate change, profound alteration of biogeochemical cycles, excessive
depletion of natural resources, extensive proliferation of exotic species,
changes in frequency and spread of disease, and severe deterioration of air and
water quality. Human populations are increasing at an alarming rate and society
is becoming more dependent on extraction and utilization of natural resources to
support regional and global economies. Continuous and accelerated supply rates
of food, fiber, freshwater, and clean air are necessary to maintain healthy
human societies. To effectively mitigate climate change impacts, manage natural
resources, and curb environmental deterioration, we need to develop robust
methods for forecasting ecosystem services. This project promotes networking
activities that will develop, apply, and promote ecological forecasting using
techniques that assimilate information from process-based models, prior
knowledge, data and other sources (in short, data assimilation). The FORECAST
network will organize a series of conferences and working groups to achieve
those objectives. Overall, FORECAST has the potential to develop a multi-
disciplinary community of scientists with expertise in data assimilation and
ecological forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological forecasting is critical
for resource management and climate change mitigation. The ability to forecast
changes in natural resources and ecological properties, such as ecosystem
production, biodiversity, and infectious diseases, will directly benefit the
society. In addition, the FORECAST network will (i) involve many students, post-
docs, and early-career scientists to enhance the development and propagation of
new methodologies, (ii) develop web-based data portals for scientists to share
techniques and ideas, (iii) stimulate interactions among ecologists, computer
scientists, statisticians, and mathematicians, and (iv) provide broad
multidisciplinary training for minority students and post-docs on data
assimilation and ecological forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;