* 0840171
* SGER:Portable In-situ Wind ERosion Lab (PI-SWERL): Testing and validation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Vicken Etyemezian, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2009
* USD 23,798.00

The Portable In-situ Wind ERosion Lab (PI-SWERL) is a relatively recent
instrument that is used to study windblown dust emissions from natural and
artificial soil surfaces. Initial experiments with the PI-SWERL indicate that
the traditional models whereby dust emissions increase monotonically with shear
stress applied to the surface are overly simplistic and ignore issues of
sediment supply, crusts, and layering. Data collected during field studies
indicate that the behaviors of many soil surfaces stray from their idealized
representations in dust emissions models. This project will undertake a set of
preliminary measurements and related data analysis on a series of constructed
soil test plots. The first goal is to relate data collected with the PI-SWERL to
specific physical aspects of the soil surface. A second goal is to characterize
the response of a new type of saltation sensor under these controlled
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind erosion and transport is a major problem
in many parts of the world, especially those with semi-arid or seasonally arid
climate. The effects of wind on soil has very significant implications for the
proper management of agricultural land. This approach for extracting information
on the physical aspects of a soil surface from PI-SWERL data would enable a new
technique for mechanistically understanding eolian dust emissions, and the
resultant information could significantly improve the fidelity of model
representation of wind erosion of soils in arid regions.&lt;br/&gt;