* 0840265
* Collaborative Research: RUI: A Study of the Solution-Based Synthesis  of N-Doped ZnO, Mn- and Co-Doped ZnO, and (N,Mn)- and (N,Co)-Codoped  ZnO
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Jerry Harris, Northwest Nazarene College
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 209,823.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Zinc oxide is an important material
because of its electronic properties, ease of synthesis, low cost of synthesis
and for being more environmentally friendly than some alternatives. These
properties make it the material of choice for such applications as
photovoltaics, gas sensors, ultraviolet transceivers for the military, and when
transition metals are added to the zinc oxide, it is a potentially useful
material for developing spin-based electronics (spintronics). Spintronics
employs the magnetic property or spin of electrons to carry signals and process
information where conventional electronics uses only the charge of the
electrons. Spintronics has been proposed as the future replacement for
conventional electronics, which is approaching its limit of miniaturization,
because it would allow more information to be processed with less material. For
the development of spintronics to be realized, a better understanding of how the
synthetic, compositional and structural details determine the materials
electronic and magnetic properties is essential. This joint proposal with
Northwest Nazarene University, Boise State University, and Rochester Institute
of Technology seeks a solution-based route to zinc oxide containing magnetic
elements. A particular emphasis of the project will be to systematically relate
synthetic and process conditions to structural and compositional details and to
electronic and magnetic properties of the materials. Synthesis and thermal
characterization of the materials will be done at NNU, structural and magnetic
characterization will be done at BSU, and electronic characterization will be
done at RIT. The project will involve high school, undergraduate and graduate
students. A particular emphasis will be placed on selecting students who are
early in their academic careers, with the expectation that involving them in
mentored research projects will motivate them to graduate and pursue careers in
areas of science and technology. Aspects of this project are being incorporated
into three classes and three laboratories at NNU. Instrumentation purchased for
this project is being made available to local high school classes to come and
use. The project is expected to directly impact at least 114 undergraduate,
graduate and high school students each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;This joint proposal with Northwest Nazarene University,
Boise State University, and Rochester Institute of Technology seeks a solution-
based route to thin films and bulk powders of high quality ferromagnetic
semiconductors, based on zinc oxide. Ferromagnetic semiconductors have been
proposed as a future replacement for conventional semiconductors as the
electronics industry rapidly approaches the limits of miniaturization, since
these materials would have a greater processing and storage capacity while using
less material. Each year, seven high school, undergraduate and graduate students
will be directly involved with this research. These students will learn and use
a variety of characterization techniques, including thermogravimetric
analysis/differential scanning calorimetry with mass spectroscopy (TGA/DSC/MS),
X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, Hall effect and magnetic measurements.
Synthesis and thermal characterization will be done at NNU, structural and
magnetic characterization will be done at BSU, and electronic characterization
will be done at RIT. Since aspects of this research are being incorporated into
three classes and three laboratories at NNU and local high school chemistry
classes will be encouraged to come to NNU to characterize materials using the
TGA/DSC/MS, it is anticipated that this proposal will directly impact at least
114 high school, undergraduate, and graduate students each year.