* 0840788
* Ask a Biologist- answering questions and developing content for a community-based web generation
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Charles Kazilek, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project moves the Ask-a-
Biologist (AAB) web site into a dynamic content management system (Drupal -
drupal.org), adds Web 2.0 tools to provide a collaborative web content
development environment; and includes the appropriate metadata for inclusion
into the NSDL repository. The current AAB web site has over 1,400 static web
pages, an extensive array of content, and datasets used in learning activities.
The Drupal-enhanced site adds value to the current materials by providing a
content management system (CMS) as well as Web 2.0 tools. The added features
permit development and growth of existing and new content by experts in science,
communications and graphics not trained to use web development software. As part
of the conversion, NSDL metadata tags are added, allowing the content to be
brought into the NSDL repository. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new Drupal version
of AAB promotes participation in content development by an expanded group of
people. In this format, scientists, writers, and graphic artists can collaborate
on articles and learning activities, and connect more directly with pre-K-12
students, teachers, home schoolers and life-long learners. In addition, AAB can
add an option for translating content into other languages, thus expanding the
impact of the AAB site. Drupal also includes standard modules for RSS feeds,
wikis, blogs, and other community-based tools to further enhance the learning
experience of the visitor and expand the audience of the web site. &lt;br/&gt;