* 0840410
* Acquisition of A Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF)  Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Bradley Nilsson, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 279,643.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Chemistry Department at the University of Rochester will acquire a matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass
spectrometer for the study of large molecules such as biopolymers, regular
polymers and polymer-like materials. The acquisition will be used in a variety
of research studies including: a) the study of conformational changes and
dynamics of heme proteins; b) exploration of unsaturated, reactive catalytic
complexes of iron; c) understanding the principles of molecular recognition that
give rise to the structure and function of proteins; d) investigations of the
photophysical properties of novel semiconductor nanometer scale materials; e)
mechanistic studies of the secondary structure of nucleic acids leading to
selective adsorption on surfaces; f) investigations to rapidly predict RNA
structure from sequence information; g) studies to obtain molecular mass
information on non-volatile ligands to construct natural substances such as
apoptolidin and nakadomarin A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MALDI-TOF-mass spectrometry
is the technique of choice for obtaining accurate molecular weights on very
large molecules, with extremely high sensitivity. Use of a MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometer has therefore become a standard technique, especially in studies
involving biomolecules and polymers. This research will have a significant
impact in a number of areas, especially chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research, including
use by undergraduate and high school teachers who participate in summer research
programs.