* 0840762
* SGER:   Death by Starvation:   An Hypothesis Based Approach for Addressing White Nose Syndrome in Temperate-Zone Hibernating Bats
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2010
* USD 34,999.00

White-Nose Syndrome has been linked to unprecedented morbidity and mortality
among five of the nine species of bats in the northeastern United States, first
observed in six hibernacula in New York State in the winter of 2006-2007, and
subsequently reported from at least 33 caves and mines in four states (New York,
Vermont, Massachusetts, and Connecticut) in the winter of 2007-2008, with
mortality reported as high as 95% at some sites. The hypothesis being tested is
that a reduction in the quantity and quality fat deposited by bats during the
pre-hibernation period in autumn may compromise successful hibernation, and
their ultimate reproductive success. White adipose tissue (WAT) is the primary
source of energy that sustains bats (and other hibernators) throughout the
winter when they have no access to food. Over-winter survival and subsequent
reproductive success requires a sufficient quantity and quality of WAT deposited
during the pre-hibernation period, and sufficient fat reserves to sustain deep
torpor and periodic arousals throughout the winter, and a final arousal in
spring. Because insectivorous bats cannot synthesize polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs), deficiencies in dietary PUFAs during the pre-hibernation period in
autumn may reduce the duration and depth of torpor during hibernation. Frequent
arousals during hibernation may result in premature depletion of WAT before the
end of the hibernation period. Moreover, depleted WAT at this time may
contribute to a decrease in leptin production (necessary for ovulation and
successful reproduction by females), or, in the worst cases, the inability to
arouse from torpor or inability to mount an immune response to possible
pathogens.

Analyses of body composition (including PUFAs) of bats of little brown myotis
(Myotis lucifugus) during the pre-hibernation period will be conducted at sites
affected by and unaffected by WNS to test three hypotheses that may help reveal
or rule out causes of premature deaths or compromise reproductive success in
these hibernating bats. Body composition analysis provides the most accurate and
reliable estimates of total body water, WAT, and lean dry mass, and analyses of
PUFAs in WAT collected from bats during the pre-hibernation fattening period.
These data promise to provide valuable insight for testing proposed hypotheses
to help explain why hibernating bats are dying prematurely at hibernacula in the
northeastern US, and in turn suggest directions for future study to better
understand WNS.

The proposed research will facilitate cross-disciplinary research between an
ecologist, biochemical ecologist, and an endocrinologist to address an urgent
environmental problem: unexpected mortality in hibernating insectivorous bats in
the northeastern US. The proposed research will provide new insight into the
mechanisms that influence winter survival and reproductive success in bats.
Moreover, this research will provide an excellent opportunity to highlight the
ecological and economic importance of bats in temperate ecosystems through print
media, radio, TV, and web-based Internet blogs.