* 0840356
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: Spatial Economies Of Precontact Exchange In Greater Monterey Bay Area, California
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Diane Gifford-Gonzalez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2011
* USD 11,837.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Diane P. Gifford-Gonzalez, Charlotte Sunseri will
explore the nature of prehistoric economic systems and trade relationships among
hunter-gatherers of the greater Monterey Bay area of California. This project
will synthesize archaeological data from Cultural Resource Management
investigations at 55 sites in a 115 km x 65 km transect from the Monterey Bay
inland to the Santa Clara Valley and produce original analyses of animal bones
and stone tools from three major residential sites in this zone. These data will
elucidate social and ecological aspects of economic decisions (e.g. trading
partner selection and commodity production), expressions of territoriality over
resources, specialization of goods, and wealth accumulation by individuals.
Since these sites date to the Middle Period (600 BC-AD 1000) through Middle-Late
Transition (AD 1000-1250), the material signatures from the onset of the
Medieval Climatic Anomaly (AD 800-1400) allow this project to monitor initial
responses of precontact Californian populations to environmental stress. Methods
of this project include: analysis of food remains and evidence for pelt or
leather production, direct radiocarbon dating of faunal remains and shell beads
for temporal control of economic decisions, source determination of shell beads
and obsidian as potential exotic materials, and analysis of the spatial patterns
of trade items and resource use. Spatial analysis of the distribution of
different material types throughout the region will help elucidate who was
involved in trade relationships (elites versus non-elites), how the exchange was
facilitated (e.g. central place exchange, redistribution, etc.), and which
materials were prestige goods or wealth items.

This project tests long-standing hypotheses of economic strategies among middle
range, hunter-gatherer societies living in environmentally unpredictable
contexts. In this way, it addresses one of the enduring stereotypes of
California, the Myth of Paradise, by suggesting that this region did not always
have stable and comfortable climatic conditions, but rather may have had
stressful climatic events that had significant impacts on culture change. The
intellectual merit of this research lies in its contribution to substantive
syntheses of archaeological knowledge of the greater Monterey Bay area, and
theoretical approaches to understanding processes which initiated and maintained
exchange in prehistory. It will produce GIS-based datasets of settlement
patterns, resource distributions, and trade networks, which will be disseminated
to California archaeologists as an online resource. Beyond the datasets and
conclusions produced in this project, it broadly impacts the education of
archaeology undergraduates at UC-Santa Cruz. The project provides one-to-one,
intensive training to undergraduates in laboratory methods and data
interpretation. This hands-on analysis experience supplements classroom
knowledge and contributes to the management and dissemination of archaeological
information through the role of UC-Santa Cruz as a regional archive of
archaeological data.