* 0840791
* Building Capacity for Determining the Content Alignment and Instructional Quality of K-12 NSDL Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Karon Kelly, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/2011
* USD 600,000.00

NSDL Pathways personnel are being trained to determine the content alignment and
instructional quality of their K-12 resources using the criteria developed at
AAAS Project 2061. The training workshops cover the essentials of the processes
for alignment and evaluation of a resource's instructional quality as a measure
of the likelihood that student learning is promoted when the resource is used as
designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resources that are aligned with content standards
and provide students with varied phenomena are essential to the understanding of
key science ideas. K-12 NSDL resources vary greatly in the grain size and
quality of their alignment to standards. Coupled with the existence of little
information about the resources' instructional quality, this creates difficulty
for educators trying to locate the most effective resources. The analysis
procedure that the NSDL Pathways personnel are being trained to use is based on
a substantial corpus of research and was developed over many years in
consultation with hundreds of K-12 teachers, materials developers, scientists,
teacher educators, and cognitive researchers. By applying analysis criteria
derived from the best available research on learning and teaching, the project
is improving the cataloging of educational digital resources enabling improved
selection for classroom use to be made with respect to content alignment and
instructional quality.