* 0840375
* SGER: Foraging Patterns of Elephant Seals in the Vicinity of the WIlkins Ice Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 04/30/2010
* USD 61,856.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-lived animals such as elephant
seals may endure variation in food resources over large spatial and temporal
scales. Understanding how they respond to these fluctuations requires knowledge
of how their foraging behavior and habitat utilization varies over time.
Advances in satellite-linked data logging have made it possible to correlate the
foraging behavior of marine mammals with their physical and chemical environment
and provide insight into the mechanisms controlling at-sea movements, foraging
behavior and, ultimately, reproductive success of these pelagic predators. In
addition, these technological advances enable marine mammals to be used as
highly cost-effective platforms from which detailed oceanographic data can be
collected on a scale not possible with conventional methods. The project will
extend the four-year-time-series collected on the foraging behavior and habitat
utilization of southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) foraging in the Western
Antarctic Peninsula. It also will extend the oceanographic time-series of CTD
profiles collected by the elephant seals foraging from the Livingston Island
rookery. Seals have been collecting CTD profiles in the vicinity of the Wilkins
Ice Shelf (WIS) since 2005. We thus have a 4 year data set that preceding and
during the breakup of the WIS that occurred during March 2008. Deployment of
additional tags on seals will provide a unique opportunity to collect
oceanographic data after the ice shelf has collapsed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;