* 0840580
* SGER:  Seismic Monitoring of Active Rock Fall Source Areas in the Yosemite National Park
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Nicholas Sitar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 07/31/2009
* USD 54,576.00

The unique setting of Yosemite National Park and the Yosemite Valley brings with
it a significant risk of rocks falls impacting on major facilities and pathways
used by thousands of visitors every year. A preliminary geophone and
accelerometer deployment last winter captured a rock fall event demonstrating
that of real time monitoring of rock falls is feasible. The objective of this
project is to rapidly deploy a denser array of instruments in close vicinity
(<30 m) of this active source area in order to asses the feasibility of being
able to monitor rock noise associate with rock fall initiation and to determine
if the instrument records can be used to localize the source of the noise, as is
done in other seismic applications. This work has to be done in the summer in
order to get safe access to the site. In addition, as time passes the
probability of additional events decreases and, therefore, timely response is
essential for success. Overall, this is a very high risk and high potential
payoff effort that, if successful, could significantly change the way rock fall
hazards are identified and monitored.

The project has a significant broader impact in many aspects of public safety,
since rock fall hazards are not confined just to national parks and Yosemite, in
particular. The demonstration of the feasibility of rock fall hazard
identification using real time instrumentation will have application in other
areas such highway safety. In addition, not much is known about the real time
behavior of fractured rock masses and the data should provide an excellent
insight into long term rock mass behavior to climatic (temperature, humidity,
pressure) changes. Also, having active science project in Yosemite National Park
will provide an opportunity to educate the general public about the geology,
seismology, and natural evolution of this spectacular landscape.