* 0840525
* Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectrometer for Research and Teaching at a Large Minority Serving Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Jorge Gardea-Torresdey, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2012
* USD 286,500.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
Multiuser Program (CRIF:MU), Professor Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey and colleague
Katja Michael from University of Texas at El Paso will acquire a liquid
chromatography mass spectrometer (LCMS) with two exchangeable soft ionization
devices, namely a direct analysis in real time (DART) and an electrospray
ionization (ESI). The spectrometer will be used at a service facility at
Department of Chemistry and support additional researchers from other
departments and programs such as Geology, Environmental Science and Engineering,
Health Sciences, Biology, and Physics. The instrument will also serve students
from UTEP and faculty and students of the nearby El Paso Community College and
Universidad Autónoma de Ciudad Juárez. Major research projects describe studies
of phytochelatins, phytochelatins-related compounds and phytosiderophores in the
uptake and transport of metals in desert plants, photochemical synthesis of
glycopeptides and (glyco)peptide-alpha-thioesters, human exposure to polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, organometallic chemistry, supramolecular materials in
aqueous systems and development of small molecule chaperone analogues for
alleviating misfolding-related diseases.

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to probe intimate structural details
and to obtain the molecular compositions of a vast array of organic, bioorganic,
and organometallic molecules. This research is also expected to have a positive
effect on the environment. MS is one of the fastest growing and most widely used
analytical instrumentation techniques. Because of this, it is important for
graduate and undergraduate students to be exposed to the technique and this
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.