* 0840274
* CYBERCHASE SEASON 8: Take the Summer Math Challenge!
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Michael Templeton, Educational Broadcasting Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 04/30/2011
* USD 1,500,000.00

Thirteen/WNET New York requests funds to develop and produce five new Cyberchase
episodes, a multi-media Summer Challenge math initiative, plus serialized Web
games and an online Cartoon Maker to involve kids in active, creative
mathematical thinking. Now in its seventh production season and sixth year of
daily PBS broadcast, Cyberchase has helped millions of children acquire a
stronger foundation in mathematics. Cyberchase's content spans the 3rd-5th grade
standards of the National Council of Mathematics, and targets children aged
8-11. The series goals include: 1) reinforce mathematical knowledge especially
during the summer months; 2) expand opportunities for kids' involvement with
Cyberchase math activities; 3) and inspire all children to approach math with
enthusiasm and confidence. Ancillary materials, outreach, and a highly popular
Web site extend the learning and help make Cyberchase the sole mathematics media
project available for the target age group. The new season will build on the
successful format to model effective problem-solving processes, expand the math-
rich Web site and bring Cyberchase to today's new-media platforms to prompt
children to do math. Season 8 will especially target the summer, when children's
TV viewing goes up, informal educators provide special offerings, and children,
especially the under-served, are at risk of losing math growth made during the
school year. The Summer Challenge will create a first-ever math summer campaign
for PBS Kids. Cyberchase is watched by four million viewers each week. The
audience is 40% minority and includes equal numbers of girls and boys.
Cyberchase Online receives 1.9 visits a month. The project summative evaluation
will study the outcomes and impact on (a) the target-age children (conducted by
Multimedia Research) as well as (b) 8 PBS stations and local partners,
culminating in a white paper on best practices for presenting informal STEM
education in the summer (conducted by RMC Research). Season 8 initiatives will
strengthen existing partnerships and forge new collaborations. Existing
partnerships include museums, 50 chapters of Girls Inc., National Engineers Week
Foundation, PBS stations, Sally Ride Science, Ernst &amp; Young, and new
partners MANA (a national Latina organization) and the Girl Scouts.