* 0840764
* AMSER Phase II:  Expanding the Applied Math and Science Education Repository
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Michael Lesiecki, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 09/30/2011
* USD 724,826.00

The Applied Math and Science Education Repository (AMSER) is a collaborative
NSDL Pathways project designed to help meet the resource and service needs of
community and technical colleges and forge a link between these communities and
the NSDL. AMSER consists of a customized portal, a resource collection, and a
variety of integrated tools and services for enhancing the learning experiences
of community college students and the teaching capabilities of instructors at
those institutions. Services include e-mail and online resource updates for
students and faculty, an online foldering system that helps users organize and
share resources found on AMSER, and personalized resource bulletins. In this
NSDL Pathways - Stage II project AMSER is expanding the resource collection to
cover new vocational tracks, adding interactive learning modules combining web-
based resources with material from journal publishers, adding new taxonomy
metadata to match resources to key concepts in applied STEM education, and
conducting workshops and other outreach efforts to increase awareness of AMSER
and NSDL. The project's intellectual merit rests on the contributions it is
making to the education community, the digital library community, and the NSDL
as a whole. In particular this Stage II expansion is introducing innovative and
creative ways to reach students and faculty in the two-year college community
and connect them with the NSDL, including the integration of a variety of Web
2.0 technologies into AMSER and the evaluation methods proposed for this
expansion of the project. Through its focus on the community college sector, the
project is exercising broader impacts since a large percentage of the nation's
workforce enrolls in coursework and degree programs through this sector.
Community and technical colleges also serve high percentages of minorities and
other underserved populations meaning that AMSER is connecting NSDL to a broader
array of underserved users. Finally, given the high rates of adjunct faculty at
these institutions, the use of AMSER promises to free up time for such faculty
to engage in more classroom innovations and exchange pedagogical best practices
with colleagues, by promoting the reusability of resources already created by
others.