* 0840493
* A Cluster for Cyber-Enabled Research and Education in Computational Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Lionel Poirier, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 525,325.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at Texas Tech
University will acquire a 10.8 TeraFlop, parallel computing cluster. The
computing cluster will be used by researchers to study a number of problems in
the chemical sciences, including (a) the hydrolysis of cellulose as an efficient
route to biofuels; (b) simulations of electrochemical surface reactions; (c)
accurate quantum dynamical calculations for chemical reactions; (d) the role of
non-adiabaticity in the chemistry of the early universe; (e) dynamics of
protonated peptide ion surface-induced decomposition; and (f) studies of
electronically non-adiabatic dynamics using a coherent-states model. The
computing cluster will be used in a number of ongoing activities carried out by
the department targeted to groups which have been traditionally underrepresented
in the sciences. Software will be developed and freely-disseminated.
Cyberinfrastructure will enable researchers at other schools (i.e. Eastern New
Mexico University, and University of Texas, Permian Basin) to use this
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern computer infrastructure allows chemists
to do some experiments , virtually, without the need to use chemical reagents.
In addition, checked against experiment, new, more accurate theoretical methods
may be developed. In tandem with experiment, computations allow chemists to
examine, in detail beyond that of current experimental methods, the molecular
ballet that takes place in complicated chemical processes. The infrastructure
made available with this grant will be used in teaching and training a broad
range of young scientists in computational chemistry -- from high school, all
the way through the post-graduate level.