* 0840111
* Development of Higher Order Cognitive Processes in Adolescence and Young Adulthood: Social, Behavioral, and Biological Influences on Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Valerie Reyna, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,961.00

The Workshop on Development of Higher-Order Cognitive Processes in Adolescence
and Young Adulthood: Social, Behavioral, and Biological Influences on Learning
will advance basic science in higher-order cognition and its development in
adolescence and young adulthood by focusing leading scientists on key problems
that are ripe for groundbreaking discoveries. The workshop will bring together
separate but overlapping research communities. These communities include those
with basic research expertise in learning (e.g., cognition, development,
neuroscience) with those who have expertise in more applied research, especially
education. Themes of the workshop will focus around the following areas: 1)
Metrics of Meaning (devising valid measures of meaning, a construct that is at
the heart of research on comprehension, reasoning, and information processing
generally), 2) Reasoning and Judgment, and 3) Neuroscience of Reasoning,
Representation, and Retrieval. Special attention will be given to acquisition of
mathematical knowledge and skills, and their application in reasoning (e.g.,
scientific reasoning) and judgment (e.g., economic judgments). The workshop is
also expected to facilitate development of new metrics and methods for studying
higher-order cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will enhance mutual
understanding among research communities and stimulate fruitful collaborations.
It will foster the translation of research on the basic science of higher-order
cognition to solve pressing problems in education, economics, and workforce
development, especially the development of mathematical knowledge and reasoning
skills essential for competitiveness in the 21st century in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.