* 0840862
* MARGINS:  Mariana Forearc Geology and Early Arc Volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* William McClelland, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2014
* USD 153,613.00

Mariana Forearc Geology and Early Arc
Volcanism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Funding is requested to carry
out geochemical analyses of early subduction-related volcanic rocks from the
Izu-Bonin-Mariana (IBM) arc collected via recent Shinkai 6500 diving or on-land
investigations by the lead PI near Guam. The goal is to develop a comprehensive
understanding of the early evolution of the southern portion of this arc system
so that magma sources and melting processes can be compared through time and
space, spanning from a proto-arc to a fully developed volcanic arc. Analyses
will include major element, trace element, and Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf isotope compositions
of whole rocks and pillow glasses, and major, trace, and volatile element
concentrations in glassy melt inclusions from olivine and other minerals. The
ages of eruption will be constrained by 40Ar/39Ar and U-Pb
geochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For subaerial proto-arc samples volatile
element contents can be determined by analysis of mineral-hosted glass
inclusions. Submarine igneous rocks collected deepest and closest to the trench
southeast of Guam comprise fine-grained gabbroic rocks and quench textured
basalts. These lavas are resemble mid-ocean ridge basalts, but have geochemical
signatures suggesting that they are subduction-related. These forearc basalts
are overlain in turn by low-Ca boninite and magnesian andesites. Major element,
trace element, and Sr-Nd-Pb isotope analyses are complete for all three rock
types. Still needed are Hf isotope analyses. The andesites have been dated at
30-32 Ma, which places their eruption at about the same time as the original IBM
arc rifted. The ages of the older rocks, however, are presently only constrained
by stratigraphy and comparison to ages of similar rocks from elsewhere in the
IBM arc. Further diving will be done in this region during July, 2008. Most of
the funds requested here will be used to analyze rocks from these dives, and to
complete the geochemical analyses and radiometric age dating. Based on the work
accomplished to date, it is postulated that the forearc basalts are the first
volcanic rocks to erupt after subduction begins. Their genesis largely involved
decompression melting of upwelling mantle as it ascended to fill space left by
the catastrophic initial sinking of the slab. It is further hypothesized that
continued melting of this now-shallow harzburgitic mantle residue in the
presence of a robust flux of water-rich slab-derived fluid resulted in the
genesis of the boninites. Beginning with the 45-46 Ma rhyolites on Saipan and
41-42 Ma arc tholeiites on Guam, lavas with relatively normal arc signatures
started being generated. Thus the changeover from proto-arc mantle upwelling to
first-arc mantle counterflow appears to take 4-7 Ma depending on location. The
research is potentially transformative because it could redefine the succession
of magmas resulting from subduction initiation, which will contribute to an
understanding of why subduction starts and how the mantle responds to the
sinking slab. This work will provide improved estimates for mass fluxes of
elements from the slab to the surface over the life of the
arc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results from this study will
contribute to identifying an alternate site for a proposed IODP "Project IBM"
drill hole. This work will continue fruitful collaboration between Japanese and
US scientists involved with several dive cruises of the RV Yokosuka/Shinkai
6500, possibly leading to tangible economic and political benefits. The project
also will involve graduate and undergraduate student research.&lt;br/&gt;