* 0840406
* Renovation and Computerization of the Diatom Herbarium at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Marina Potapova, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/29/2012
* USD 324,235.00

An award has been made to the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia (ANSP)
to renovate ANSP Diatom Herbarium and to provide on-line access to its
resources. This Herbarium is the largest in North America and second largest in
the World collection of diatoms, microscopic algae that play key role in
biosphere?s carbon and silica cycles and are important environmental indicators.
The Herbarium houses approximately 210,000 diatom slides, 30,000 samples, and
5000 types of diatom species. This project will make the Herbarium easily
accessible to researchers worldwide: the updated Herbarium database and images
of type specimens will be available on-line, data for 25,000 samples will be
digitized, and several important collections will be incorporated into
Herbarium. Approximately 5,000 samples will be re-housed in new
cabinets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better access to the resources of the ANSP Diatom
Herbarium will support research in taxonomy, systematics, biogeography, and
ecology of diatoms and increase public awareness of environmental change and
biodiversity conservation. Curatorial assistants and students involved in this
project will be trained in collection management and diatom taxonomy. Diatom
Herbarium website will serve educational purposes and will be useful for biology
students, teachers, and general public as an information source on diatoms and
ecology of aquatic systems.&lt;br/&gt;