* 0840950
* RCN: A  Research Coordinaton Network for X-ray Motion Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Elizabeth Brainerd, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 02/28/2015
* USD 510,061.00

Newly developed x-ray technologies can now reveal the rapid, three-dimensional
(3D) movements of bones during running, swimming, flying, breathing, and feeding
activities of diverse animals. X-ray Motion Analysis (XMA) and X-ray
Reconstruction of Moving Morphology (XROMM) are poised to transform the way
biologists investigate how muscles and bones interact to produce rapid and
complex movements in animals. The goal of this project is to develop a Research
Coordination Network of scientists and students working with these new
technologies. This RCN-XMA will: (1) offer technical training to reduce barriers
to XMA/XROMM use for scientists and students, including those from colleges and
universities with limited resources for research; (2) make it possible to share
data and work together by developing community consensus on data formats; (3)
create a centralized computer storage system and database for XMA/XROMM
research. With the x-ray facilities at Brown University and University of Nevada
at Las Vegas as training and collaborative research centers, the RCN-XMA seeks
to advance and extend XMA/XROMM technology to a national and global community of
zoologists and biomechanists. The RCN-XMA will contribute to broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups by bringing high-school science
teachers from Providence Public School system (demographics of PPS students: 81%
from groups underrepresented in the sciences, 80% free or reduced-price lunch)
into this highly collaborative and interdisciplinary research enterprise.
Teachers will gain first-hand research experience and develop learning modules
that integrate biology with math/physical sciences, one of the goals of the
Rhode Island's "Physics First" educational initiative. This project has the
potential to transform research in the field of comparative biomechanics by: (1)
introducing a new and powerful set of x-ray measurement technologies; and (2) by
developing new data management standards that could vastly increase the value of
all existing and new comparative biomechanics data, not just XMA/XROMM data, by
making them available in databases for data mining and collaborative research.