* 0840761
* Metabolic Engineering VII Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Patrick Cirino, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,200.00

Patrick C Cirino&lt;br/&gt;Polytechnic University of New York/Engineering
Conferences International, Inc.
&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0840761&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Metabolic Engineering Conference is one of the
first among several conference series related to biotechnology sponsored by the
Engineering Foundation (now ECI) and started 20 years ago with the original
title "recombinant DNA technology". It has been the first conference with
explicit focus of the application of recombinant DNA technology to the
engineering of microorganisms for industrial microorganisms and processes. The
format is designed to maximize interactions and to stimulate discussion among
attendees. Because of the reputation of past conferences, scientists and
engineers from industry and academia from many countries oversubscribe the
conference. The last ten years (past 4 conferences), the conferences have been
attended on the average by more than 170 attendees from 15 countries, with 40%
of attendees from industry and the rest from academia and non-profit research
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Metabolic Engineering conference serves
as the premier meeting for the metabolic engineering community. The focus of
this conference will be on the application of metabolic engineering on
Sustainability and Health. The research areas are biofuels and biobased
materials, nutrition and agriculture, cell and tissue engineering, and metabolic
and infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolic Engineering (ME) has grown dramatically over the
last 20 years and has a leading role in the applications of biological systems
to human health, production of chemicals, food and biologicals, and solving
environmental problems. Metabolic Engineers have always embraced new challenges
and modern biology with high energy and enthusiasm. The scope of this
international conference is to bring together influential established
researchers, young investigators, industrial researchers and practitioners, and
graduate students from both sides of the aisle (engineering and biology) to
assess the contributions and future opportunities of metabolic engineering in
the global areas of health and sustainability. In addition to plenary
presentations, oral sessions, and poster sessions, ME VII will also employ
workshops/tutorials that will aim to identify the needs of industry and how
metabolic engineering research can better address these needs. Attendance by
graduate students and industrial researchers is highly encouraged.