* 0840887
* Collaborative Research: Formation, Reworking and Accumulation of Sedimentary Deposits, Waipaoa River Shelf, New Zealand
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Andrea Ogston, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 07/31/2014
* USD 339,081.00

Walsh/Harris/Ogston &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided to the PIs to
collect data on the Waipaoa continental shelf to build on results of prior work
in the area. The objective of the study is to use bottom tripods to record data
relevant to sediment processes along an apparent transport route, and to collect
cores and, at some sites, measure critical shear-stress. The study will consider
locations where cores were collected during a prior study, and one major focus
of the study is the comparison of cores collected in different years to
determine if additional layers have been deposited. Radiochemical studies will
also be undertaken at these sites to help quantify the deposition of sediments.
The bottom tripods will be placed along a line on the shelf, near the shelf
break and on the upper rise in areas that appear to be transport pathways or
sites of deposition. The tripods would be deployed for a year. The third
component of the study is the creation and use of a model with the objective
hindcast sedimentation events in the area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
includes student involvement and training and will lead to an understanding of
the relationship of shelfal processes to resultant stratigraphic architecture
which is an important challenge in stratigraphy and has the potential to aid
exploration for resources in the future.&lt;br/&gt;