* 0840911
* RCN-UBE: Preparing to Prepare the 21st Century Biology Student:  Using Scientific Societies as Change Agents for the Introductory Biology Experience
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Richard O'Grady, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* christopher meyer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 520,064.00

The University of Oklahoma and the American Institute of Biological Sciences, in
collaboration with key national biological societies, will articulate a shared
vision of how best to prepare biology students and scientifically literate
citizens. This project, entitled Preparing to Prepare the 21st Century Biology
Student, will use a series of networking meetings over a five-year period to
mobilize leading faculty in undergraduate biology education. Primary goals of
these meetings will be to develop a model of introductory biology experiences,
to develop an online communication network that connects biologists, biology
education projects, and biological societies actively engaged in undergraduate
biology education, and to help faculty reform their basic biology courses with
the help of scientific societies to which the faculty belong. The project has
three major components: 1) small face-to-face meetings to promote innovation in
reform activities aimed at the Introductory Biology experience; 2) larger face-
to-face meetings to coordinate disparate approaches in Introductory Biology and
to increase the use of existing best practices throughout scientific societies;
and 3) a communication network linking scientific societies and their members to
promote widely both innovation and adaptation of best practices and research in
biology education. The network also will provide answers to questions from
instructors as they attempt to implement biological education reform strategies.
Hundreds of faculty members who teach thousands of students will participate in
the face-to-face meetings, and these participants will lead professional
development activities for their colleagues during annual meetings of their
scientific societies. The intellectual merit of the project arises from the
likelihood that it will catalyze significant improvements in undergraduate
biology education. The broader impacts of the project will result from a broad
distribution of best practices through the network, by participating scientific
societies, and by participating faculty at their home institutions.