* 0840946
* (RCN-UBE) Open Science:   An education network in Ethnobiology to coordinate the development of a new culture in the undergraduate science classroom
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Will McClatchey, Botanical Research Institute of Texas
* Continuing Grant
* christopher meyer
* 02/29/2016
* USD 368,173.00

The Botanical Research Institute of Texas will develop an interdisciplinary
network of scientists and other professionals to explore the use of emergent
web-based technologies to facilitate continual exchange of educational
techniques, materials, and experiences in ethnobiology. The Research
Coordination Network (RCN) will integrate the diverse works of multiple
researchers into a coherent set of educational materials to share with other
faculty and with students. Initial materials developed by the RCN core
participants will be made generally available through a unified portal/database
system with open-network, open-access structures, such as wikis. New and
existing technologies will be incorporated into the RCN web portal, including an
open courseware management system, several established biodiversity and
botanical research databases, videos, and adaptation of common devices (such as
cell phones) for scientific inquiry. The resulting web resources will serve both
as a repository of knowledge and as a developing system that can grow and evolve
as the community of users provide new contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RCN will hold two summit meetings each year, one in conjunction with the annual
meeting of the Society for Economic Botany and the other via video conference.
Eight working groups will be assigned tasks related to specific stages of
curriculum development, including assessment. These working groups will each
meet four times per year. Plans to expand the community of users of the web
portal, as well as to expand the core research coordination network include an
initial workshop and direct invitations to the members of several professional
societies and to science faculty at relevant minority-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in
the likelihood that it will catalyze significant improvements in undergraduate
biology education, especially in the emerging area of ethnobiology, and in the
development of an "open-philosophy" model for the teaching of biology. The
broader impact of the project results from the development of an open-access
system for widely sharing educational materials in an emerging interdisciplinary
area. The curricular materials and the lessons learned will be distributed
widely via the professional affiliations of RCN members.