* 0840932
* Nematode-Bacteria Symbioses Research Coordination Network:   Promoting Multidisciplinary Research and Expanding Educational Curricula
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* S-Patricia Stock, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 02/29/2016
* USD 441,575.00

Nematode-Bacteria Symbioses Research Coordination Network: Promoting
Multidisciplinary Research and Expanding Educational Curricula&lt;br/&gt;
(Proposal IOS-0840932)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: S. Patricia Stock, University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: David Bird, North Carolina State University&lt;br/&gt;
Elodie Ghedin, Pittsburgh School of Medicine&lt;br/&gt; Heidi Goodrich-Blair,
University of Wisconsin Madison &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intimate associations
between microbes and 'higher' organisms are widespread in nature, occurring in
every type of ecological niche. The interactions in these associations range
from highly integrated obligatory symbioses to 'loose' assemblages. Given the
importance of microbial symbioses to the functioning of virtually all earth
ecosystems, and to gain insights into fundamental processes underlying
symbiosis, researchers in this project will focus on one of the most common
microbe-animal interactions: that between nematode worms and bacteria.
Associations between nematodes and bacteria range from fortuitous to obligate
and from beneficial to pathogenic. The ubiquity and diversity of nematode-
bacterium symbioses make them an excellent model to understand the key questions
in symbiosis. However, while scientists worldwide from disciplines as diverse as
medicine, agriculture, ecology, and genetics are currently studying associations
between these two groups of organisms, they do not interact. To address this
critical need for crossing disciplinary lines, the four PIs involved in this
project will promote the intellectual discourse among scientists studying
bacteria-nematode associations by organizing a Research Coordination Network on
'Nematode-Bacteria Symbioses'. Specific goals are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Foster interdisciplinary collaborations between scientists;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Encourage scientists engaged in basic and applied research to explore how cross-
talk and networking can enhance and advance science in this field,&lt;br/&gt;3)
Develop and distribute educational materials to scientists and educators to
promote the study of nematode-bacteria symbioses as model systems in science and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no other group in the United States or
elsewhere that is similar to the proposed research work group in its broad scope
of nematode-bacteria interactions. Investigators leading this network will
interact with other societies to disseminate knowledge and dovetail with
established meetings. Efforts will be made to include postdoctoral associates,
graduate students, and undergraduates into this enterprise, along with
international colleagues.