* 0840895
* Complex-Valued Signal Processing and its Application to Analysis of Brain Imaging Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Vince Calhoun, The MIND Research Network
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,202.00

Collaborative Research: Complex-Valued Signal Processing and its Application to
Analysis of Brain Imaging Data Complex-valued signals arise frequently in
applications as diverse as communications, radar, and biomedicine, as most
practical modulation formats are of complex type and applications such as radar
and magnetic resonance imaging lead to data that are inherently complex valued.
The complex domain not only provides a convenient representation for these
signals but also a natural way to preserve the physical characteristics of the
signals and the transformations they go though. The complex domain, however,
also presents a number of challenges in the derivation and analysis of signal
processing algorithms, and as a result, the vast majority of algorithms
developed for the complex domain have taken shortcuts limiting their usefulness.
This research establishes a framework for complex-valued signal processing such
that the full potential of complex-valued signal processing can be realized. It
allows for all computations to be carried out in the complex domain eliminating
the need for many simplifying assumptions, such as the circularity of signal,
both in the derivation and the analysis of the algorithms. It also allows for
the use of fully complex functions rather than the more commonly utilized
bounded but non-analytic functions. These functions provide attractive
alternatives for performing independent component analysis (ICA) by efficiently
generating higher-order statistical information. Using this framework, a new
class of efficient algorithms are derived for performing ICA in the complex
domain, in particular, for studying brain function using the medical imaging
data in its native, complex form.