* 0840338
* Planning Activity: Using contemporary evolution to teach about the nature of science to underserved audiences
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Michael Webster, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul W. Jennings
* 02/29/2012
* USD 75,000.00

Washington State University, the University of Puget Sound, the University of
Washington, a consortium of three museums, and a state-wide charter school
system that assists home-school teachers in the Northwest are collaborating to
develop new strategies to educate and inform the public about evolution through
interactive museum exhibits. Background information and baseline knowledge will
be garnered through focus group discussions and surveys. Information will be
sought from parents and students in home-school environments and teachers of
faith-based groups. The planning work is the prelude to development of the
actual exhibition and is needed to inform the PIs how most effectively to help
the public best learn key concepts of evolution. The same groups that supply the
baseline information and knowledge of concepts will be used to judge museum
development in an iterative manner.

A second objective in this endeavor is to catalyze collaboration among regional
museums. Participants in the project will be staff from the Burke Museum of
Natural History and Culture in Seattle, Conner Museum in Pullman, Washington,
Slater Museum of Natural History in Tacoma, Washington, Nebraska State Museum,
and Idaho Distance Education Academy. An advisory committee includes
evolutionary scientists, philosophers of science, and members of the clergy.

This project will derive baseline perspectives on evolution from the unique
home-school and faith-based communities, piloted interactive exhibits describing
contemporary evolution stories, comparative knowledge on whether these
participating groups provide useful strategies in the exhibit development, and
whether contemporary content exhibits are better at explanations of evolution
than the more traditional examples.