* 0840787
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Chemical Reach of the Madden-Julian Oscillation: Satellite/In-Situ Data Analysis and Chemistry/Transport Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Yuk Yung, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 05/31/2012
* USD 26,971.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is the dominant form of atmospheric
intraseasonal variability in the climate system. It interacts with and
influences a wide range of physical weather and climate phenomena (e.g., monsoon
onsets and breaks, El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation, and hurricanes). However, the
impacts of the MJO on the chemical component of the climate system are not
understood nor even well documented. This project studies the MJO's impacts on
atmospheric ozone and aerosols, two important atmospheric constituents. First,
the investigators will utilize a rich set of atmospheric ozone and aerosol data
from a number of satellite sensors and in-situ observations to characterize the
spatial and temporal patterns of intraseasonal variability of atmospheric ozone
and aerosols as well as the dynamical and hydrological (e.g., rainfall, winds,
and water vapor) patterns associated with these variations. Second, they will
compare the intraseasonal variations of atmospheric ozone and aerosols between
satellite/in-situ observations and chemistry/transport model (CTM) (e.g.,
Community Atmosphere Model with chemistry) simulations in order to quantify the
fidelity of the CTM's representation of intraseasonal variability of atmospheric
ozone and aerosols. Where possible, they will use the model and observations
together to more fully understand the dynamical and chemical processes behind
the intraseasonal variations of atmospheric ozone and aerosols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to better documentation and
understanding of the intraseasonal variations of atmospheric ozone and aerosols
and their connection to the MJO in both observations and models. It will
contribute to a graduate student training at Cornell, a summer undergraduate
training at Caltech and multidisciplinary interactions among various academic
and laboratory institutions, including UCLA, Caltech, Cornell, Jet Propulsion
Lab and Goddard Space Flight Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;