* 0840613
* US-Africa Workshop:   Building Collaborations in Freshwater Fish Biodiversity Research in Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 02/28/2011
* USD 48,400.00

This award funds a November 2008 workshop at the South African Institute of
Aquatic Biodiversity (SAIAB) in Grahamstown, South Africa, that aims to build
collaborations between U.S. and African fish biologists and to promote research
on freshwater fish biodiversity across the continent of Africa. The workshop is
being organized by Dr. Henry Bart of Tulane University, one of the US
investigators in the NSF-funded Cypriniform Tree of Life Project, and Dr. Paul
Skelton at SAIAB. Although the African continent supports a rich diversity of
freshwater fishes, there has been little research conducted to document and
understand much of that diversity. The proposed workshop will bring together
experts from the U.S. and Africa to identify those fish taxa and geographic
regions where the potential for collaboration is greatest. The workshop will
feature panel discussions, presentations and working meetings to address both
the most exciting areas of scientific advancement, as well as the challenges of
field collecting, establishing research collections, gaining access to computer
and information tools for taxonomic research, training fish taxonomists from
African countries, and securing funding for such activities in African.
Representatives from African biodiversity organizations have been invited to the
workshop to discuss opportunities for funding research stimulated by discussions
at the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will include at least 8 U.S.
participants and 7 participants recruited from African countries other than
South Africa, as well as researchers and students from South Africa. U.S.
students (undergraduate and graduate) and postdoctoral researchers, including
women and underrepresented minorities, will be given the highest priority for
participating in the workshop. The five days of scientific presentations,
discussion sessions and field excursions will provide workshop participants with
many opportunities to develop a strong network for advancing international
collaborative research on Africa freshwater fish biodiversity.