* 0840474
* Acquisition of a Cyber-Enabled Multi-User Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* A. Alan Pinkerton, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 546,386.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Toledo will acquire a cyber-enabled, cold cathode field emission scanning
electron microscope, with an energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy unit, three
electron detectors for surface topography and/or Z-contrast imaging, and
electron beam-induced-current imaging capability. The microscope will be used by
researchers at University of Toledo, as well as by neighboring institutions in
Ohio to study the properties of technologically advanced materials. These
studies include: (1) the properties of composite negative thermal expansion
materials; (2) the properties of amorphous and nanocrystalline silicon
photovoltaic (PV) materials and devices, as well as thin film PV materials; (3)
the characterization of electrochemical sensors; (4) the characterization of
microextraction sampling devices; and (5) studies of nanostructured materials.
The miroscope will be used by large numbers of undergraduate and graduate
students, both in instructional settings as well as in research. Access to the
instrument will be widened, via cyber-enabling and other means, to students in
neighboring colleges and high-schools, including a number of home-schooled
students.

Scanning electron microscopes, like the one purchased under this award, allow
chemists to probe the structure of materials with extraordinarily high spatial
resolution and with additional chemical and electronic characterization
capabilities. This level of detail is especially needed when probing the
chemical and physical properties of nanoscale materials, where the chemical
heterogeneity changes at precisely these length scales. Without this level of
detail, the progress towards new kinds of nanoscale materials will be made much
more slowly. The infrastructure made available with this grant will be used in
teaching and training a broad range of young scientists in important, cutting-
edge, experimental methods.