* 0840431
* Purchase and Development of a Cyber-Enabled Broadly Tunable kHz Femtosecond Laser System
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Florencio Hernandez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Central Florida will acquire a
broadly tunable kHz femtosecond laser system. The laser system will be used by
researchers at University of Central Florida, as well as by partner institutions
to study the ultrafast dynamics in chemicals and materials. These studies
include: (1) studies of multi-photon absorbing materials; (2) multi-photon
spectroscopy and nano-photonics; (3) characterization of large-area 3D metallo-
dielectric nano-photonic materials; and (4) the ultrafast dynamics of
photovoltaic organic composites. The laser system will be used by large numbers
of undergraduate and graduate students, both in instructional settings as well
as in research. Significant numbers of the graduate student users are members of
groups traditionally underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast laser systems, like the one purchased
under this award, allow chemists to probe the dynamics of chemical and physical
processes at precisely the time scales for important chemical and physical
processes, from the making and breaking of chemical bonds, to the vibrations of
individual atoms and the relaxation of excited electrons. The ability of
chemists to observe these processes allows them to develop a better
understanding of how molecules and materials work. This kind of knowledge can be
used to make new or better materials or devices.&lt;br/&gt;