* 0840521
* Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer for Small Molecule Analysis with Cyber Enabled Remote Access for Research, Education, and Outreach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Alec Wodtke, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 333,705.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), Alec M. Wodtke from the University of California
Santa Barbara will acquire a gas chromatograph time-of-flight (TOF) mass
spectrometer (MS) for the Mass Spectrometry Facility of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry. The high resolution instrument will have several
ionization sources such as electron ionization (EI), chemical ionization (CI)
and field desorption/field ionization (FI/FD) suitable for small molecule
analysis. In addition to supporting researchers at this institution, cyber-
enabling of the spectrometer will support remote data access for scientists and
students in other campus departments and area institutions such as Cal Poly-San
Luis Obispo, Westmont College-Santa Barbara, Cal State University-Channel
Islands, Cal State-Sacramento. The cyber infrastructure will also support
educational and outreach initiatives via real-time remote instrument access in
both college and high school chemistry courses. Research areas that will be
impacted by this spectrometer include among others: the study of marine natural
products with wound healing properties, total synthesis of natural products,
optoelectric properties of organic materials, the development of new transition
metal mediated chemical processes and environmentally sustainable chemical
synthesis.

TOF-mass spectrometry with ionization capabilities is an excellent technique
for obtaining accurate molecular weights on small and large molecules. Use of
this type of mass spectrometer has become a standard technique, especially in
studies involving labile organic and organometallic molecules. This research
will have a significant impact in a number of areas, especially chemistry,
biochemistry and materials. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.