* 0840376
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Classic Maya Ceramic Technology and Political Dynamics in the Central Peten Lakes Region, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Ellen Spensley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

The nature of political power and its origins in ancient states and empires is
consistently among the most debated topics in the archaeology of complex
societies. Under the supervision of Dr. William Saturno, Ellen Spensley will
conduct an investigation designed to assess the critical linkages between local
economy and political power, focusing on the Late Classic Maya polity of Motul
de San José in the department of El Petén, Guatemala. Between approximately A.D.
700 and 850 a newly emergent dynasty at Motul established political hegemony
over an area based on the northern shores of Guatemala's Lake Petén Itzá,
incorporating several smaller pre-existing settlements in the surrounding area.
Similar events were occurring contemporaneously throughout the southern Maya
lowlands and the emergence of the Motul dynasty thus constitutes a microcosm of
larger developments.

This research project will assess the impact of the emergent Motul dynasty on
the economy of the local area (and the degree of control they exerted over it)
through an intensive study of ceramic production and distribution. As the most
ubiquitous type of artifact recovered at Maya sites, ceramics are well-
positioned to provide a window on economic structures. Analysis will be
conducted on ceramic collections from 7 previously excavated sites in the Motul
de San José area, including Motul itself, and a variety of settlements that pre-
dated dynastic expansion (ranging from farming hamlets to a lakeside port). Ms.
Spensley will also conduct excavations to broaden this sample at 4 as-yet
uninvestigated sites in the area that face destruction from modern urban growth.
Drawing on this comprehensive sample, she will undertake stylistic,
mineralogical, and chemical ceramic analyses in order to define production
groups and to chart their distribution throughout the area during the interval
of political consolidation. By documenting whether or not various production or
distribution systems changed (for utilitarian as well as luxury ceramics) with
the emergence of the Motul dynasty, this research will contribute to an ongoing
dialog in the archaeological and anthropological communities concerning the
origins and nature of political power in ancient societies.

While this research is designed to address a key issue in Maya archaeology
today, and will also address fundamental questions relevant to the study of
complex societies in general, this project is intended to have a broader impact
in several areas. In the modern community of San José, Guatemala, publication
(in Spanish) of results in community newsletters and public presentations
targeted at both children and adults are intended to increase awareness and
conservation of the area's rich archaeological heritage. Guatemalan archaeology
students will also receive practical training in field work and ceramic
analysis, as will the author. Following completion of analysis, the compilation
of a web database will provide a rich reference tool for archaeologists
interested in ceramic data from Guatemala. Finally, results will also be
presented to the archaeological community through publication in peer-reviewed
journals and presentations at professional meetings in both the United States
and Guatemala.