* 0840440
* U.S.-South Africa International Undergraduate Research Opportunities:   Ecological Research in Kruger National Park, South Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 09/30/2011
* USD 109,696.00

This award supports the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) to conduct a
pilot project for an international research experience program for
undergraduates in Kruger National Park, South Africa. This program will be
constructed as an extension to the current OTS/Duke University South Africa
Semester Abroad Program as an innovative and efficient way of attracting
undergraduate students to international research experiences. In each of two
years the project will allow six U.S. students who have gained considerable
expertise in ecological theory, research methodology, and knowledge of local
ecosystems through the OTS semester program to stay on at Kruger National Park
to conduct more in-depth ecological research. OTS scientific staff and
collaborators from South African National Parks and South African universities
will mentor the independent research projects, which will also be linked to
conservation management priorities of the park. This pilot project will allow
OTS to evaluate the impact that an in-depth undergraduate research opportunity
has, beyond the study-abroad experience, on retaining and advancing
undergraduates in the sciences and into graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot program is designed to guide undergraduate
students toward independent field-oriented research in biology. While students
will have already conducted some short-term research projects as classwork in
the OTS semester abroad program, this six-week research experience requires
students to engage in advanced hypothesis development, research design,
implementation, analysis, and dissemination. At the end of the project, students
will write up their findings and also present them to Kruger National Park
scientists and managers.