* 0840870
* Animal Behavior Society Meeting, Brazil, June 2009: Integration of Behavioral Research across the Americas
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Molly Morris, Animal Behavior Society
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 11/30/2009
* USD 30,000.00

The average impact of internationally co-authored research, measured through
published papers, is significantly higher than the overall average.
Establishment of international collaborations requires international exposure,
and such exposure is likely to be most effective when it occurs early in one's
education and scientific career. However, for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, the cost of international travel can be prohibitive. This award will
provide supplementary travel support for 30 graduate students/postdoctoral
fellows working in the area of Animal Behavior to attend the 2009 Animal
Behavior Society (ABS) meeting in Brazil. There are several aspects of the
meetings that will provide students with exposure to international scientists,
including 5 mini-courses (6 hours each) that will be conducted by invited
international researchers. Criteria for selection will include quality of the
science, likely potential for developing future collaborations, progress in
graduate school (students in the last two years of their programs and first two
years of postdoctoral fellowships will be given priority), and representation
from under-represented groups. Students who receive funds for travel will be
asked to complete an evaluation of their experiences at the ABS meetings in
Brazil. The broader impacts of this proposal will be the exposure of 30
scientists early in their careers to global initiatives and cultural
differences, with the goal of promoting future international collaborations.