* 0840045
* Synthesis and Accelerated Testing of Oxynitride Films for High Temperature Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Rosemary Smith, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need for new protective
ceramic coatings that can operate in harsh environments with service
temperatures in the 1000-1500oC range. These ceramic coatings must exhibit
excellent heat resistance, chemical stability, fracture toughness and wear
durability so they can be reliably be used in applications such high performance
engines, shrouds, rotors, seals, slides, and bearings. A major problem is that
conventional ceramic coatings crack and delaminate during thermal cycling in
reactive gases at extreme temperatures. This project focuses on developing and
testing Si-Al-O-N and Si-Zr-O-N thin film coatings and tailoring their
properties to achieve high performance in terms of corrosion resistance, wear
resistance, and fracture toughness. To efficiently test and evaluate the
performance of the ceramic coatings in high temperature harsh environments, a
microfabricated test platform is being developed, upon which the ceramic films
are strategically deposited, to carry out accelerated testing under conditions
that mimic those that are encountered during service. The project trains a
graduate student and two undergraduate students in the areas of high temperature
materials, thin film technology, and microfabrication, and K-12 students are
being educated about high temperature materials science. Collaborations with
industrial partners are being used to evaluate the effectiveness of the new
coatings that are developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;Ceramic thin film coatings that can withstand harsh
environments with service temperatures of 1000-1500oC must exhibit excellent
heat resistance, chemical stability, fracture toughness and wear durability.
Conventional ceramic coatings crack and delaminate during service because of
interdiffusion phenomena, chemical reactivity, and stress generation during
thermal cycling in reactive gases at extreme temperatures. This project focuses
on developing and testing SiAlON and SiZrON films that are precisely fabricated
using magnetron sputtering and ECR-plasma-assisted e-beam evaporation. Nanoscale
architectures are being investigated including gradient and multilayer
compositions in order to achieve high performance in terms of corrosion
resistance, wear resistance, and fracture toughness. To efficiently test and
evaluate coating performance under thermal cycling conditions, a microfabricated
MEMS test platform is being developed that consists of microheaters, temperature
sensors, oxidation sensors, stress indicators, and microsliding fixtures. The
project trains a graduate student and two undergraduate students in the areas of
high temperature materials, thin film technology, and microfabrication, and K-12
students are being educated about high temperature materials science.
Collaborations with industrial partners are being pursued to evaluate the
effectiveness of the SiAlON and SiZrON coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;