* 0840910
* Collaborative Research: Limits and Drivers of Metazoan Distributions in the Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* W. Berry Lyons, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2012
* USD 46,374.00

Ice sheet models of the Last Glacial Maximum, and previous glaciation events in
the Miocene, suggest that current low altitude, ice-free surfaces in Antarctica
were completely covered with ice. If so, the terrestrial biota of Antarctica
today would result from recolonization events after each glacial maximum.
However, there is emerging evidence that much of the terrestrial Antarctic biota
are of ancient origin and have somehow survived these glaciation events. The
Transantarctic Mountains TRANsition Zone (TAM-TRANZ) plays a pivotal role in
understanding the evolution and biogeographic history of today's Antarctic
terrestrial biota, primarily because it contains numerous inland areas that
could have served as refugia during glacial maxima. Due to its remote location,
the TAM-TRANZ has not been systematically surveyed for animal biodiversity.
Although an exhaustive survey of the region requires a multi-discipline, multi-
year and multi-region effort, the research herein combines ecological,
evolutionary and geophysical expertise to conduct an exploratory investigation
of the extreme southern limits of biotic communities. The project will examine
the historical geophysical requirements for the colonization and maintenance of
functional ecosystems by multicellular organisms, and the feasibility and
desirability to implement more systematic biogeographic studies in the future.
Broader impacts include graduate and undergraduate student ownership of
important subprojects that will provide research, presentation and publication
opportunities. The investigators also will contribute to ongoing public
education efforts through relationships with K-12 teachers and administrators in
the public school districts where the project personnel reside. Finally, the
project is leveraged by opportunistic collaboration with scientists associated
with Antarctica New Zealand.