* 0840995
* Fundamental Chemistry of Carbenes and Diazirines
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Robert Moss, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 674,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Robert A. Moss of Rutgers
University who will study carbenes, diazirines, and other reactive species by
fast and ultrafast spectroscopic methods. These studies are intended to
correlate molecular structure with the reaction channels of highly reactive,
short-lived organic intermediates. Novel syntheses will also be developed for
diazirine precursors of carbenes. Target areas will include the measurement of
activation parameters for carbene-alkene additions and the interplay of enthalpy
and entropy in these additions; spectroscopic studies of carbene solvation; and
the chemistry of incarcerated carbenes. Difluorocarbene will be generated from
difluorodiazirine, and the absolute kinetics of its additions to alkenes will be
determined. Activation parameters for alkene additions will be measured by
nanosecond laser flash photolysis (LFP) for phenylchlorocarbene,
dichlorocarbene, fluorochlorocarbene, methoxychlorocarbene, phenylfluorocarbene,
difluorocarbene, methoxyfluorocarbene, methylmethoxycarbene,
phenylmethoxycarbene, and dimethoxycarbene. A fundamental and synoptic picture
of carbene-alkene addition reactions will be constructed and parallel
computational studies will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by
Professor Moss in the previous award period has contributed to the training of
five undergraduates (2 females, 3 males), three graduate students (2 females and
one African American), and six postdoctoral students (one female, 5 males). In
addition to the training of a diverse group of students, Professor Moss has
produced scholarly reviews that permit amplification of his NSF-sponsored
research and thus reach a wider segment of the chemical community. During his
most recent grant period, he published two well-received, co-edited books on the
chemistry of reactive intermediates. In addition, he authored four reviews
dealing with the chemistry of singlet carbenes; the synthesis of diazirines; SNi
fragmentation reactions; and new mechanisms in carbene and diazirine chemistry.
The publication of scholarly reviews will continue, with future topics to
include the fragmentation of carbenes, the interplay of enthalpy and entropy in
carbene-alkene additions, and the synthesis of dihalodiazirines.&lt;br/&gt;