* 0840110
* SGER: Feeding Behavior and Food Material Properties Among Cercopithecid Monkeys in the Tai Forest, Ivory Coast.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Scott McGraw, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 16,996.00

This research seeks to establish the feasibility of collecting data on food
material properties, ingestive behavior and masticatory behavior in wild
primates in a field setting. These data will be used to investigate ecological
and behavioral correlates of species-level differences in jaw morphology in a
large assemblage of cranio-dental specimens from a population of monkeys living
in the Ivory Coast's Tai Forest. Data on food hardness and toughness, ingestive
behaviors, and sex-specific feeding profiles will be collected. Nuances of
masticatory preparation (anterior vs. postcanine processing, chewing cycle
rates) will be recorded as they co-vary with foods of differing material
properties. Video cameras will be used to quantify chewing behavior and portable
durometers to assess hardness and toughness properties of foods consumed by the
four cercopithecines and three colobines inhabiting the Tai Forest. Generation
of these data sets presents a number of methodological hurdles and thus the
research is high risk. However, the potential payoff is significant and has a
high probability of being transformative.

Feeding ecology is assumed to have had a significant influence on skull
morphology in primate evolution. The relative abundance of fossil mandibles has
prompted a large body of research into the functional significance of mandibular
variation in living primates. Success in establishing functional linkages
between jaw morphology and diet has been mixed, in part due to inadequacy of
structurally-focused models of jaw strength. The data gathered under this
proposal will be used for the expressed purpose of framing hypotheses designed
to link specific trophic features with their morphometric counterparts. Ultimate
success of this approach requires that the skeletal and dietary data be derived
from a single population. Such a design is available here, however the requisite
field data have yet to be collected. The activities described in this proposal
provide the data sets necessary to inform species-specific hypotheses. The
combination of field data on food mechanics with laboratory-based models of
biomechanical performance represents a synthetic approach for establishing
linkages between ecological and morphological variables in primate communities.
The research is transformational because 1) identical source populations for
collection of ecological and skeletal mechanical data are utilized, 2) the
skeletal samples are in possession of the PI and can be modified for essential
biomechanical tests of material and structural properties, and 3) the field data
collected will involve variables with known and direct impacts on masticatory
physiology and function. Opportunities for the convergence of such data sets are
exceedingly rare, and no such study has been implemented previously.

There are multiple broader impacts from this research: (1) development of
nondestructive means to assess mechanical competence in the skeleton, (2)
educational opportunities for students at the PI's university, and (3) continued
protection of the flora and fauna present in the Ivory Coast's Tai Forest.