* 0840608
* SGER: Collaborative Research: Exploring the Role of Word Senses in Subjectivity Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Rada Mihalcea, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 69,445.00

Title: SGER: Collaborative Research: Exploring the Role of Word Senses in
Subjectivity Analysis

Approaches to subjectivity and sentiment analysis often rely on manually or
automatically constructed lexicons. Most such lexicons are compiled as lists of
words, rather than word meanings (senses). However, many words have both
subjective and objective senses, which is a major source of ambiguity in
subjectivity and sentiment analysis.

The goal of this exploratory research project is to address this gap, by
investigating novel methods for subjectivity sense labeling, and exploiting the
results in sense-aware subjectivity analysis. Specifically, the project targets
two research objectives. The first objective is to develop new methods for
assigning subjectivity labels to word senses in a taxonomy. The second objective
is to explore contextual subjectivity disambiguation techniques that will
effectively make use of the word sense subjectivity annotations. By achieving
these objectives, the project is expected to contribute to the understanding of
the connections among subjectivity, word senses, and contextual subjectivity
analysis, which will serve as a stepping stone for continued research efforts in
this area.

The resources created in this project will be made available to the research
community, which will help advance the state of the art in automatic sentiment
and subjectivity analysis.