* 0840869
* RCN: Enzymes in the Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2016
* Richard Dick, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 524,420.00

Enzyme RCN Abstract

Extracellular enzymes produced by bacteria and fungi are involved in innumerable
biogeochemical processes and are central to providing services to terrestrial
and aquatic ecosystems. One very important process is the biological
decomposition of organic matter in soils and sediments, which is a critical
component of the global carbon cycle. Furthermore, the natural attenuation of
polluted soils and waters depends on the activities of extracellular enzymes.
However, our ability to understand and manage biogeochemical processes for
beneficial outcomes such as carbon sequestration, optimizing ecosystem
productivity, and bioremediation is constrained by our limited knowledge of the
diversity and functional capabilities of extracellular enzymes. The overall goal
of this Research Coordination Network is to advance our understanding of enzymes
in the environment through improved communication, collaboration, and spurring
new initiatives. The network will accomplish this goal by organizing workshops,
data synthesizing, standardizing methods, and through maintaining a project
website.

This Research Coordination Network addresses a need to advance our understanding
of the controls on the production of enzymes by different microbes, their
stabilization and turnover, and their in-situ activity. Currently, our
understanding is constrained by (1) limited methods for measuring actual enzyme
activities in various environments, (2) limited discourse across disciplinary
and ecosystem boundaries, and (3) limited synthesis of current research into an
integrated conceptual framework that feeds into ecosystem models. New advances
in genomics and other molecular approaches will allow for rapid advances in this
field. This network will enhance collaboration and communication between the
international community of scientists involved in various aspects of this
research. Broadening participation of underrepresented groups in science will be
promoted by active recruitment, participation in a lab exchange program to gain
research experience, and by promoting participation of a diverse group of
researchers in various network activities.