* 0841853
* Roles of E. coli DedA proteins in lipid synthesis and cell division
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* William Doerrler, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2013
* USD 650,375.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Membrane proteins constitute 25-30% of the
predicted proteins encoded in all genomes so far sequenced. However, even in a
well-characterized organism such as Escherichia coli, the functions of nearly
half of the predicted membrane proteins are only poorly understood. By the use
of genetics to isolate novel mutants, the laboratory has acquired the tools to
understand the roles of a previously uncharacterized but widely distributed and
conserved gene family in lipid biosynthesis and cell division, the dedA family.
DedA is a large family of inner membrane proteins found widespread in eubacteria
and some Archaea. Genes for these proteins are also present in the genomes of
certain green algae but have not been identified in other eukaryotic genomes.
Currently, there are more than 1000 genes in the online database annotated as
being dedA family members or possessing significant amino acid identity to E.
coli DedA. To date, no function has been assigned to the DedA protein family.
This is due largely to the inability to study the proteins genetically, as each
single deletion mutant that has been made in E. coli is without an observable
phenotype. A new temperature sensitive mutant, BC202, with alterations in
membrane phospholipid composition and defects in cell division was isolated.
BC202 has targeted deletions of two related dedA family genes (yqjA and yghB)
and growth is restored by expression of either of these genes. YqjA and YghB
have 61% amino acid identity so the proteins are expected to have redundant
functions. BC202 is a powerful tool to study the roles of lipids in bacterial
cell division and the functions of the conserved DedA superfamily of membrane
proteins. The specific aims of this project are (1) to determine the lipid and
cell division defects in the yghB, ygiA double mutant; (2) to determine the
function(s) of YghB and YqjA; and (3) to determine the functional conservation
of DedA family members from divergent bacterial species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Results from the project will
lead to a deeper understanding of the roles of lipids in both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells. In an effort to enhance scientific and technological
understanding, the results from these studies will be promptly published in
peer-reviewed scientific journals. Materials obtained, including cloned genes
and bacterial mutants will be made available for broad dissemination free of
charge. The PI is keenly aware of the need to promote teaching and training of
graduate and undergraduate students and will train students in the research
laboratory and also will integrate the research in instruction by including
aspects of the project in his teaching assignment in Microbial Physiology. The
PI is also committed to broadening participation to include members from
underrepresented groups in biology in his research. The PI maintains an
ethnically diverse laboratory and coordinates collaborations with faculty and
student researchers from Louisiana State University and Southern University.
&lt;br/&gt;