* 0841199
* New, GK-12 Project in Water Resources for Middle and High Schools in Rural Northern Idaho and Eastern Washington
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Paul Allan, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 05/31/2015
* USD 2,941,030.00

The goal of the University of Idaho GK-12 program is to improve graduate Fellow
communication, teaching, collaboration, and teamwork skills, while increasing
inquiry-based science taught in rural middle and high schools in Idaho and
Washington. Graduate Fellows will be from interdisciplinary degree programs:
Waters of the West - Water Resources, Environmental Science, and Environmental
Engineering. The STEM theme will be water resources and the environment as a
context for learning physical, Earth, and life sciences. The theme and
interdisciplinary approach will raise working knowledge of water resources, one
of the most compelling and complex topics facing the world today. Fellows will
use their research to convey scientific concepts to students, linking the
science content to local water resource issues (e.g. aquifer depletion, floods
and droughts, or the inter-relationship of salmon, hydropower dams, and Indian
Tribes) that are relevant to the teachers, students, and
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will serve seven rural school
districts, including the Lapwai (Nez Perce Tribe) district, which is 82% Native
American; all schools are within river basins subjected to integrated analysis
by the Waters of the West program. Five specific impacts are: (a) Fellows will
effectively communicate scientific concepts in classroom and public contexts,
(b) Fellows will successfully apply collaboration and teamwork skills in
teaching and research (c) Fellows will demonstrate inquiry-based teaching
skills, (c) STEM teachers will demonstrate increased content knowledge,
mentoring skills, and confidence and competence in inquiry-based teaching, and
(e) grade 7-12 students will demonstrate increased scientific knowledge,
excitement, confidence and career awareness.&lt;br/&gt;