* 0841864
* Collaborative Research:   Consequences of consumer adaptation for ecosystem responses to fertilization and food-web perturbations
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Orlando Sarnelle, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2014
* USD 286,183.00

Increased nutrient input, from fertilizer and other sources, to aquatic systems
(eutrophication) leads to degradation of water quality as a result of increases
in algae (phytoplankton), and in particular, phytoplankton species that produce
toxins. These toxins are a serious threat to human and livestock uses of surface
waters in both freshwater and marine environments. One strategy for improving
water quality is to manage the food web by increasing the abundance of small
animals (zooplankton) that eat phytoplankton. Laboratory studies have suggested,
however, that food-web manipulation may fail because of the strong negative
effects of phytoplankton toxins on zooplankton growth and reproduction. Previous
research has demonstrated that individuals of a common species of zooplankton
(Daphnia pulicaria) vary greatly in their ability to grow on a diet of toxic
phytoplankton. This project examines the consequences of adaptation to toxins
for water quality in lakes in Michigan. In addition to the obvious potential
impact of this research on the management of surface waters, the project focuses
on two little-studied general phenomena in community ecology: how predator
adaptation and trait variation within species affect species interactions.
Consequently, the field experiments to be conducted will advance both basic and
applied ecology. The project will also provide hands-on training in experimental
ecology to graduate and undergraduate students at Michigan State University and
Auburn University and provide related outreach activities to middle and high
school students.