* 0841636
* Discovery and Prediction of Hidden Biodiversity in Black Flies (Diptera: Simuliidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John McCreadie, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,863.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black flies are a worldwide group of
more than 2,000 species of medically important, blood-feeding insects that breed
in flowing water. They are structurally similar and many species, known as
cryptic species, defy distinction under the microscope. An integrated approach
will be used to reveal and predict hidden biodiversity in black flies of the
widespread Simulium jenningsi group. Cytogenetic, structural, and molecular
analyses will be applied to detect cryptic species in the group, characterize
the niche breadth of all species, use these characterizations to predict hidden
biodiversity, and infer a phylogeny to illuminate evolution of the group?s
biological traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the widespread existence of
cryptic species, this multidisciplinary approach provides a model applicable to
many groups of organisms. Ecological traits will provide powerful probes to
detect biodiversity that otherwise might be missed, thereby avoiding a cascade
of errors in understanding and managing biological systems. Expertise in
morphology, cytogenetics, molecular systematics, and ecology will be taught as
an integrated package of skills to the next generation of biodiversity
scientists. The project will provide fundamental research essential to managing
black flies, and will involve the public through dedicated web pages,
cooperation with state-sponsored management programs, and ongoing
dialogue.&lt;br/&gt;