* 0841134
* Metabolic Engineering Workshop 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Robert Shelton, World Technology Evaluation Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,977.00

CBET-0841134&lt;br/&gt;Robert D Shelton, World Technology Evaluation Center,
Inc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes organization of a grantee
workshop on research activities in metabolic engineering to be conducted by NSF
with support from the World Technology Evaluation Center, Inc (WTEC). This topic
is the focus of an Interagency Announcement of Opportunities published by NSF's
Directorate for Engineering. The purpose of the workshop, to be held in early
2009, is to gather facts and opinions from the U.S. research community on how
this emerging area of research is progressing. WTEC will compile the information
presented at the workshop into a report for NSF and the professional community
in hardcopy and electronic media. WTEC will also update and maintain the
interagency metabolicengineering.gov website during the term of this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop provides a forum for presentation of
the latest research results in this field by grantees of the eight agencies that
participate in the Working Group on Metabolic
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This contribution to research in metabolic processes will
help to better understand cellular pathways for chemical transformation, energy
transduction, and supramolecular assembly. The hardcopy and electronic reports
will communicate these findings to the broader community.