* 0841654
* Relative importance of genetic variability for predicting parasitism
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Lori Eggert, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2014
* USD 302,406.00

Diseases do not affect all individuals in the same way. Why does one animal get
sick, when another, exposed to the same environmental conditions, remains
healthy? Answering this question offers a central challenge in disease ecology.
The answer may lie in differences in genetic make-up of individuals. Some
individuals have a greater diversity of alleles than other individuals do.
Evidence from inbred populations suggests that an individual's genetic diversity
might be associated with reduced levels of parasitism, but this relationship has
never been examined in a large, natural population. This research will address
two questions. Does genetic diversity enhance an individual's ability to resist
parasites? How important is the effect of genetic diversity relative to the many
other factors that are also known to be strong predictors of parasitism? These
questions will be addressed by generating genetic and parasite profiles for
individual animals from a large, well-studied, animal population. Statistical
models will be used to assess the importance of genetic variability in
determining parasite burdens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human welfare depends in a
way that is truly fundamental on a basic understanding of the factors that
control disease. This research will enhance understanding of the role of
genetics in controlling resistance to parasitism. A post-doctoral student and
undergraduate students will be trained.