* 0841161
* Acquisition of an Electron Microprobe for the MIT User Community
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Timothy Grove, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2010
* USD 442,320.00

0841161&lt;br/&gt;Grove&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding of ~$369K to purchase a refurbished JEOL JXA-8200 electron microprobe.
The probe will allow significantly enhanced operation over the current probe
offering an LaB6 electron gun - offering higher beam currents with smaller spot
size and better step resolution, enhanced optical auto-focusing - allowing
higher step resolution and reproducibility, automated electron optics, faster
motors, better WDS scanning, a cathodoluminescence (CL) system - allowing better
phase characterization, enhanced control and imaging software, and remote
control capabilities. The co-PI (Chatterjee) will continue to be the prime
operator and maintainer for the probe facility. A recent promotion gives him
salary support for one year. The co-PI will continue to offer training for
students, researchers and faculty. The MIT probe facility operates as a soft-
money entity but retains possible departmental support if needed. Rate structure
depends on the level of support. Experienced users can opt for less-expensive
"off hours" times. The system will be put to immediate use replacing an older
probe for studies in petrology - understanding high temperature and pressure
igneous and metamorphic rock characteristics. Additionally the water impacts on
melts and associated mineral dynamics during geologic time will be studied. The
probe will be critical in assessing primitive basalts and contributions from
subduction fluids and melts in source magma. These data will feed into the MELTS
algorithm. Lunar mare magmas, Martian mantle evolution and asteriodal parent
bodies will be assess melting source regions and elucidate melt processes.
Preliminary analyses will also be conducted which will help elucidate distinct
regions suitable for TIMS U-Pb series analysis. Zircon and monazite localization
and U-Th-Pb dating will be used to help trace continental positions and
alignments over geologic time. Electron backscattering will be used to analyze
minerals whose orientation and stratigraphic (if applicable) position(s) will be
determined prior to high-precision dating. Basalts from mid-ocean ridges,
convergent plate margins and oceanic "hotspots" will be analyzed to determine
age and migration over geologic time. Trace element analysis will also be
performed to refine compositional information. Additional projects within the
department will study early planetary formation, paleomagnetism, lithospheric
evolution, oceanic lithospheric and mantle geochemistry, and hydrothermal
systems. The probe will be an essential component of research and teaching
activities within the Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences at
MIT. The new probe will be incorporated in an electron microprobe course. Class
notes are available over the web. Three undergraduate courses use the microprobe
and the probe will be heavily used in graduate research efforts. Research
results will be disseminated through the peer-reviewed literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***