* 0841394
* The role of sediments in the maintenance of biodiversity in freshwater marshes:  Implications for global environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Robert Gardner, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 09/30/2014
* USD 659,308.00

Freshwater marshes, transition areas between land and water, are critically
important in the functioning of watersheds and estuaries. The existence of these
ecologically important areas is threatened by rapid environmental changes that
disrupt the feedbacks between the physical and biological processes critical to
marsh formation. Remote sensing of marsh surface elevations, extensive field
observation of the interactions between elevation, sediment dynamics and
vegetation, and spatially explicit modeling will be used to forecast the impact
of global environmental change on freshwater marsh plant diversity, sediment
deposition and erosion, and, hence, the maintenance of complex marsh surfaces in
a changing world. The development of coupled geomorphic-ecological models of
marsh surface evolution, models which are still uncommon and do not explicitly
consider the biological complexity of marsh ecosystems, will be advanced by the
interdisciplinary nature of the research. In addition, consideration of spatial
processes (landscape heterogeneity, disturbances, and local dispersal of plant
propagules), and their impacts on plant biodiversity, will contribute to
biodiversity theory. The simultaneous consideration of biodiversity theory and
geomorphology is a unique integration of two traditionally separate disciplines
that should offer tremendous advances in both fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
a tidal freshwater marsh in the Potomac River estuary as a natural laboratory,
results will be used to inform ongoing efforts to restore the study site and
freshwater marshes in general. Resource managers and restoration practitioners
working to preserve and restore an important marsh ecosystem near the nation's
capital will be engaged as partners in this project. Additional outreach will
result from participation in a teacher internship program, and training will be
provided for graduate students and for young scientists working with senior
investigators.