* 0841988
* Collaborative Research:  Comparative Investigation of Incipient Sex Chromosome Evolution in the genus Asparagus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* James Leebens-Mack, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2012
* USD 90,000.00

While distinctive sex chromosomes are a conspicuous feature of the nuclei of
diverse organisms, the evolutionary processes responsible for the origins of
separate genders and sex chromosomes in animals, plants and fungi remain largely
unknown. The independent origin of separate sexes (that is, male individuals and
female individuals) in many flowering plant lineages provides biologists with an
opportunity to investigate various stages in the evolution of gender
determination and sex chromosomes. For example, separate sexes have evolved
within the last two million years in the genus Asparagus and the genes
responsible for gender determination have been mapped to a relatively small
region on otherwise recombining chromosomes. PIs, Leebens-Mack and Pires will
sequence across the newly evolving female (proto-X) and male (proto-Y) forms of
this region in garden asparagus in order to test hypotheses concerning the early
evolution of incipient sex chromosomes and to identify candidate genes that may
be responsible for gender determination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By investigating
the mechanisms that promote repression of recombination between genes
influencing male and female function in flowering plants, the results from this
project will have implications for crop improvement and the fundamental
processes that shape genome structure. Undergraduate students will also be
trained in genome annotation and comparative genomics.