* 0841602
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory and Ground-Based Studies Addressing Unresolved Aspects of Atmospheric Ice Nucleation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sonia Kreidenweis, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 05/31/2013
* USD 782,407.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on advancing
understanding of critical issues in atmospheric ice nucleation, one of the most
basic processes affecting precipitation and impacting the radiative properties
of cold clouds. Incomplete understanding of ice initiation processes in clouds
results in large uncertainties in the ability to model clouds and precipitation.
Under prior support, the Principal Investigators (PIs) have made advancements in
the area of real-time measurement of heterogeneous ice nuclei (IN) and in
understanding the role of different aerosol particle types capable of initiating
ice formation in the atmosphere. These measurements highlight significant
remaining questions. For example, atmospheric studies have emphasized the
importance of mineral dust as a significant IN source, but laboratory studies of
natural dust particles up to 1 micron in size have shown no evidence for IN
activity warmer than about -15 degrees Celsius. The second most prevalent IN
composition that has been identified in the atmosphere are carbonaceous
particles, but their sources are unresolved. Biological aerosols represent
potential sources for primarily carbonaceous IN, but their number concentrations
are poorly observed by existing measurement methods. Finally, apparent
degradation of IN efficiency in polluted air has been observed but there is
little fundamental basis for understanding the impacts of atmospheric processing
on IN activation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators will use
laboratory studies to investigate ice formation by natural dusts at sizes up to
5 microns to quantify the relation between IN activation temperature and mineral
dust particle size for different mineralogical types. They also will quantify
the changes in IN activation properties after exposure to realistic degrees of
atmospheric processing. Examinations of supermicron-sized particles as ice
nuclei in the PIs' continuous flow ice nuclei instrument is made possible by
application of a new particle phase-discrimination detector (PPD) that
identifies ice crystals and aerosol particles by their spatial scattering
patterns rather than optical size alone. Use of the PPD will permit exploration
of the impact of evaporation of IN containing droplets on ice nucleation, of
interest due to inferences that this process spawns primary or secondary ice
nucleation. The PIs will investigate the number concentrations of biological ice
nuclei through studies that utilize a real-time IN detector and application of
real-time mass spectrometric or post-application of microbiological methods (DNA
analyses) on activated and collected IN. Using this approach, IN-active bacteria
are identified at specific temperature and humidity conditions, enabling an
assessment of their role across the full temperature regime of tropospheric
clouds. After refining procedures through laboratory studies, The PIs will apply
these methods to quantify the proportion of ambient IN, as a function of
temperature, that are of biological origin. The opportunity also exists to
identify heretofore unrecognized biological IN. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the opportunity to confirm and augment
present understanding and quantification of ice initiation in clouds and its
relation to the specific properties of key atmospheric source populations of ice
nuclei. The PIs will quantify ice formation by IN across their atmospherically-
relevant size and temperature range, apply advanced techniques for detecting IN
composition, determine the impacts of atmospheric processing on IN activation,
and explore ice formation mechanisms. Nucleation parameterization development
for numerical modeling studies may be advanced using results from this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have broader impacts through promoting
graduate education and training, enhancing research infrastructure, development
and testing of new instrumentation and methods, application of results toward
global climate change issues through associated numerical modeling studies, and
fostering cross-disciplinary research between the atmospheric and biological
sciences. The PIs will encourage application of results through related modeling
studies, collaboration with other researchers, and participation in working
groups. Graduate students and a postdoctoral scientist will participate and the
work will involve collaborations across multiple disciplines and universities.
Results will be disseminated via a project web site, publications, and
participation in conferences. Finally, these data are of critical importance to
unresolved impact of aerosols on ice clouds and global climate.