* 0841659
* RUI:  Two- and Three-Dimensional Coordination Polymers Self-Assembled from Platinum Group Metal Thiacrown Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Gregory Grant, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2013
* USD 210,000.00

This RUI award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports the work of Professor Greg Grant at the University of Tennessee
at Chattanooga. The research focuses on a systematic investigation of the
preparation of two- and three-dimensional metallosupramolecular complexes formed
by transition metal mediated self-assembly. The project is specifically
interested in using vertices based upon transition metal complexes with
thiacrown ligands as subunits to direct the self-assembly of the supramolecular
structure. The project is preparing two-dimensional structures such as squares
and hexagons as well as proceeding to cubic three-dimensional structures. In
particular, most platinum group metal complexes with these ligands show a rich
electrochemical activity which can then be built into the polygons and
polyhedra. Multiple oxidation states for the metal ions of the molecular square
or cube can be accessed, enabling the overall charge of the square or cube to be
fine-tuned. Controlling the overall charge of the self-assembled material has
important consequences for its utilization in storage applications. The project
has an ideal role in the education and training of young chemists to be future
professionals. A two-year postdoctoral position modeled after the Dreyfus
Foundation's Scholar/Fellow Program for Undergraduate Institutions is included.
The postdoctoral Fellow is involved not only in the research project, but also
in part-time teaching and research activities involving the undergraduate
students. Nine undergraduate researchers including two at other undergraduate
institutions, Covenant College and the College of St. Catherine, will be
involved in the project. The PI, the postdoctoral Fellow, and the undergraduate
students supported by the NSF RUI Grant are all members of a research team
engaged in the study of these metallosupramolecular complexes. Self-assembled
structures such as these are important in applications such as artificial
molecular machines, strategic gas storage, heterogeneous catalysis, and an array
of host-guest interactions. The ability of two-dimensional and three-dimensional
metal organic networks, which can form porous, yet crystalline solids, has been
exploited in fields such as hydrogen and methane storage.