* 0841011
* Travel Support to the 2009 Macromolecular Materials GRC and GRS; Ventura, CA; January 10-15, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Darrin Pochan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 10/31/2009
* USD 4,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0841011 PI: Pochan, Darrin ORG: University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2009 Macromolecular Materials Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) and Graduate Research Seminar
(GRS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The organizers of the
Macromolecular Materials Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and complementary
Graduate Research Seminar (GRS) will supplement the available funds for travel
support to enhance participation of biomaterials-focused post doctoral and
senior graduate students at this meeting. Although not devoted entirely to
biomaterials, a significant portion of the program is of direct relevance to the
areas supported by the Biomaterials program. An innovative feature of this GRC
will be a two-day Gordon-Kenan Graduate/Postdoc Research Seminar that will
precede the GRC itself. This event will introduce new investigators to the GRC
experience and give them a chance to participate in ways not normally available
to beginning investigators. A quarter of the requested funds will be used to
support attendance at the GRC by five of the approximately 30 students and
postdocs expected to participate. Special emphasis will be placed on using the
funds provided by NSF to support female and minority junior faculty, students,
and postdocs, who will apply for this support to the organizing
committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impacts lie in the
cultivation and development of tomorrow?s leaders in the biomaterials field and
related interdisciplinary fields and to further diversity in the scientific
workforce performing this interdisciplinary research. In keeping with the past
tradition of the Polymers West GRC, the Programmatic Themes of this year?s
conference cover a range of important and timely topics spanning the range from
biomaterial synthesis to physics and engineering, including industrial trends in
polymer science. These programmatic themes include polymer thin film mechanical
properties and patterning, polyelectrolytes for DNA complexation and cellular
delivery, charged polymers for biomaterials, complex micelle assembly, polymer
nanoparticles and nanotechnology, and the theory of charged polymer
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;