* 0841764
* Understanding a major global divergence in tropical life history strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Thomas Martin, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Life history attributes such as rates of birth, death, growth, and development
typically are related in predictable ways that support distinct, but successful,
life styles. Typically, birth rate and adult longevity are negatively correlated
and development time and life-time survival are positively correlated. Slow
development and low fecundity are thought to be essential to a life history that
includes long maximum life spans and are thought to have their effects through
improving the health and survival of offspring. However, tropical birds of Asia
appear to violate this pattern, being similarly long-lived to the birds of the
New World tropics, but having higher fecundity and development rate. Therefore,
low fecundity and slow development may not be necessary for high offspring
quality and long life. This study will use extensive and detailed comparative
surveys, complemented with some field experimentation, to examine possible
environmental causes of the higher fecundity and faster development of 25-30
bird species in Sabah, Malaysia. Additionally, the work will examine the extent
to which fecundity and development rate determine offspring immune function and
thereby determine adult longevity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide
new insight into the roles of development rate and fecundity in the ability to
fight pathogens through immune function and of the influence of this and other
indicators of offspring quality on longevity. It also will improve understanding
of the environmental causes of variation in rates of birth, death, and
development and their interrelationships. These rates greatly influence the
vulnerability of populations to environmental change and can significantly aide
our ability to sustain biodiversity in North America, as well as world-wide.
Finally, this work includes substantial scientific training of many
undergraduate and graduate students, including members of groups currently
underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;