* 0841530
* High Risk Research in Anthropology: Testing the Archaeological Potential of the Wasiriya Beds, Rusinga Island, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Christian Tryon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 11/30/2009
* USD 15,653.00

Supported by the National Science Foundation, Christian Tryon (New York
University), Kieran McNulty (University of Minnesota), and colleagues from the
National Museums of Kenya will conduct one season's fieldwork on Rusinga, a
small Equatorial island near the Kenyan shores of Lake Victoria, investigating
archaeological sites first noted by Louis Leakey in the 1930s. Although Rusinga
is best known for its important Miocene fossils showing the evolution and
diversity of apes some 18 million years ago, the present project is the first
systematic research effort to focus on younger deposits on Rusinga (geologically
defined as the Wasiriya Beds), likely &lt; 300,000 years old. The Wasiriya Beds
contain both fossils of extant and extinct mammals as well as Middle Stone Age
artifacts, considered to represent the archaeological and behavioral indications
of earliest Homo sapiens. Importantly, although biological (fossil and genetic)
evidence supports an eastern African origin for Homo sapiens, the Middle Stone
Age archaeological record for this region is sparse, with a particular paucity
of sites containing both stone artifacts and associated faunal remains. As a
result, behavioral differences that may be a key factor in the evolutionary
success and global dispersal of our species cannot yet be tied to the very
region where they originated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The field program will test
the feasibility of a long-term multidisciplinary project investigating the
behavior and environmental context of early Homo sapiens in the eastern margins
of the Lake Victoria basin, where the Wasiriya Beds of Rusinga are one of the
few localities preserving both stone artifacts and fossils. Fossil fauna from
archaeological sites are important for inferring early human diets and hunting
strategies and reconstructing the environments that shaped early human
adaptations. Their absence from most eastern African archaeological sites has
severely limited the capacity to test alternative models of environmental or
cognitive change as the causal factors in the behavioral evolution of Homo
sapiens. As a result, field survey of key Wasiriya Beds exposures, controlled
test excavations, and radiometric age determinations will (1) target
identification of in situ (buried) artifacts and fossils, (2) assess their type
and abundance, and (3) determine the stratigraphic relationships of the
artifacts and fossils. These basic data, presently lacking, are necessary to
determine the potential for prolonged research in the Wasiriya
Beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of any "High Risk" research such as this
feasibility study is, by definition, dependent on the specific results of the
study. If the Wasiriya Beds are found to contain fossil mammals in association
with Middle Stone Age artifacts, this will lead to a long-term multidisciplinary
research project that has clear broader impacts. First, the archaeological
project seeks data to address the fundamental issue of modern human origins and
to understand why one African-based population subsequently spread throughout
the globe replacing other human groups, such as the Neanderthals, an issue of
general public interest. Second, like most paleoanthropological research
efforts, this would develop into an interdisciplinary activity drawing upon a
wide array of scientific disciplines, including archaeology, paleontology,
paleoecology, isotopic chemistry, and geology. Third, the Wasiriya Beds project
provides ample scope for training and thesis research for both US and Kenyan
graduate students. Finally, it highlights the importance of Kenyan prehistory in
global issues and will contribute to the expansion of the National Museums of
Kenya on Rusinga Island.