* 0841481
* Workshop:  User Interface Software and Technology 2008 Doctoral Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Elizabeth Mynatt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

This is a 12-month standard award to support a doctoral symposium program at the
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST), to be held in
Monterey, CA (October 18-22, 2008). This will bring together approximately 8
dissertation-stage doctoral students from diverse areas that include traditional
graphical user interfaces, virtual and augmented reality, multimedia, new input
and output devices, CSCW, and ubiquitous computing, among others. It includes on
day of talks and interaction with 3 distinguished senior faculty mentors,
followed by events integrated throughout the conference.

Intellectual Merit The doctoral symposium is intended to help expand the
participation of young researchers currently pursuing a Ph.D. studies in the
area, giving their innovative work wider exposure in the community, helping to
foster a sense of community among these young researchers, and providing an
opportunity to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community in an interactive and supportive environment. This will be
accomplished in a number of ways. Visibility will be increased by publication of
student position papers in the UIST Conference Companion, and by presentation of
posters at a special session the first night of the conference. Community
building will include beginning the symposium with an informal social event to
establish a friendly and interactive atmosphere before formal presentations are
made, and the inclusion of substantial time for discussion among the
participants. Finally, guidance and feedback will be provided by senior members
of the community with substantial experience working with Ph.D. students in the
area, again structured with substantial time planned for interactive discussion.

Broader Impact The UIST doctoral symposium brings together highly talented
students and several senior researchers, facilitating the development of a
social network that will play a major role in the career success of new
researchers. Since both faculty and students are diverse on several dimensions
(research topics, methodological approaches, national and cultural background),
the students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in their professional
development.