* 0841119
* SGER: Pattern generation in a hybrid solid state/synthetic bacterial system
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Luke Lee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 02/28/2010
* USD 90,000.00

Objective: The objective of this effort is to investigate a hybrid bacteria-
microsystem in which two-way communication between the cells and a chemical
interface chip enables two-dimensional patterns of gene expression. The
investigators will demonstrate a) direct activation and inactivation of gene
expression on the chip and b) a genetic Turing reaction-diffusion system driven
by the microchip.

Intellectual Merit: In this work, initially identical cells will be grown on a
solid, two dimensional layer of nutrient, supported by, and in contact with, a
microfluidic system designed to control pH or other environmental parameters.
The microsystem will perturb the environment of selected cells or subpopulations
under precise programmable control to enable local changes in gene expression.
Growth and production of desired compounds in individuals or small sub-
populations will be monitored independently from an optical device positioned
above the active substrate. The technique will enable the fabrication of a new
class of organic constructs built from co-operating cell populations in a manner
analogous to differentiation schemes in developmental biology. Chemical
microsystems are a fundamental component of this vision, as they will allow for
the control and patterning of such multi-cellular synthetic systems. Micro-
interfaces of this kind will open the door to a revolution in the biofabrication
of microsystem-addressable multi-cellular systems.

Broader Impact: This project has very high interdisciplinary scope. For
synthetic biologists and microsystems engineers, these chemical interfaces would
be providing revolutionary new tools in their ability to control the development
of their synthetic systems. In addition to its research outcome, it promises to
be a good vehicle for teaching students at both undergraduate and graduate
levels. The research results will be disseminated through classroom instruction
and workshops.