* 0841152
* SGER:  Managing Inconsistency in Logical Spreadsheets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Michael Genesereth, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 96,519.00

In traditional spreadsheet systems, such as Excel, cells are
&lt;br/&gt;partitioned into "directly specified" cells&lt;br/&gt;and "computed"
cells and the formulas used to specify the values of &lt;br/&gt;computed cells
are "functional",&lt;br/&gt;i.e. for every combination of values of the directly
specified cells, &lt;br/&gt;the formulas specify unique values&lt;br/&gt;for the
computed cells. Logical Spreadsheets expand the utility of
&lt;br/&gt;traditional spreadsheets by&lt;br/&gt;dispensing with the distinction
between directly specified cells and &lt;br/&gt;computed cells and
generalizing&lt;br/&gt;from functional definitions to logical
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One problem with logical spreadsheets is the
potential for &lt;br/&gt;inconsistency. In using logical
spreadsheets,&lt;br/&gt;users can select values for cells that are inconsistent
with the &lt;br/&gt;values of other cells, given the
constraint&lt;br/&gt;defining the spreadsheet. Simply eliminating inconsistent
values is &lt;br/&gt;not the answer - (1) rejecting new&lt;br/&gt;values that
are inconsistent with past values limits the user's &lt;br/&gt;freedom and (2)
dropping past values that&lt;br/&gt;are inconsistent with new values restores
consistency but loses &lt;br/&gt;information. On the other hand,
retaining&lt;br/&gt;inconsistencies is problematic when the spreadsheet tries to
derive &lt;br/&gt;consequences of updates, since&lt;br/&gt;inconsistent logical
theories entail everything!&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike logical entailment,
existential entailment behaves well in the &lt;br/&gt;face of inconsistencies
and, therefore,&lt;br/&gt;is more useful in this setting. Work in this project
includes (1) a &lt;br/&gt;study of the behavioral properties of existential
entailment in the &lt;br/&gt;context of logical spreadsheets, (2) the
development of efficient &lt;br/&gt;algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for computing
existential entailment (with special attention to rule
&lt;br/&gt;transformation, reformulation, and&lt;br/&gt;differential logic), (3)
the development of an open-source Javascript &lt;br/&gt;implementation
incorporating these&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, and (4) an evaluation of this
technology in the form of &lt;br/&gt;user surveys, comparative studies,
and&lt;br/&gt;ablation studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on the
project can be found at the project web &lt;br/&gt;site at
http://logicalc.stanford.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;