* 0841609
* Resistance and tolerance of aspen to mammalian herbivores:   Costs, benefits and selection in ontogenetic context
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Richard Lindroth, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2014
* USD 537,701.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Interactions between browsing mammals and trees play key
roles in shaping North American forest ecosystems. The nature of these
interactions is likely governed by plant defense traits, such as chemical
resistance, tolerance, and escape. Although the roles of these integrated
defense syndromes have been extensively documented for herbivorous insects,
relatively little comparable work has addressed impacts of browsing mammals.
Developmental constraints on the efficacy of various defense traits likely
differ between insects and mammals. Recent work with aspen (Populus tremuloides)
has demonstrated strong developmental variation in resistance, and implicated
mammals as instrumental in shaping the expression of defense in this foundation
tree species. This project will investigate the costs, benefits, developmental
constraints, and ecological and evolutionary consequences of multivariate
defense systems (resistance, tolerance and escape) in aspen against browsing
mammals. This work will employ a set of diverse aspen genotypes, grown in common
garden studies and subjected to artificial and natural browsing, to determine
the degree to which specific chemical compounds confer defense against browsing
mammals, assess the costs and benefits of, and potential tradeoffs among,
resistance, tolerance and escape in multiple environments, and evaluate the
selective impact of browsing on the genetic structure of defense traits in an
experimental population. Aspen is a widely distributed and economically
important species in North America. This work should provide new insights and
tools relevant to land managers and agencies working to maintain aspen in
environments of decline throughout the Intermountain West. This research will
also contribute to the training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
students.