* 0841008
* Collaborative Research: Comparative Investigation of Incipient Sex Chromosome Evolution in the genus Asparagus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Joseph Pires, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2011
* USD 10,000.00

While distinctive sex chromosomes are a conspicuous feature of the nuclei of
diverse&lt;br/&gt;organisms, the evolutionary processes responsible for the
origins of separate genders&lt;br/&gt;and sex chromosomes in animals, plants and
fungi remain largely unknown. The&lt;br/&gt;independent origin of separate sexes
(that is, male individuals and female individuals) in&lt;br/&gt;many flowering
plant lineages provides biologists with an opportunity to
investigate&lt;br/&gt;various stages in the evolution of gender determination
and sex chromosomes. For&lt;br/&gt;example, separate sexes have evolved within
the last two million years in the genus&lt;br/&gt;Asparagus and the genes
responsible for gender determination have been mapped to a&lt;br/&gt;relatively
small region on otherwise recombining chromosomes. PIs, Leebens-
Mack&lt;br/&gt;and Pires will sequence across the newly evolving female
(proto-X) and male (proto-Y)&lt;br/&gt;forms of this region in garden asparagus
in order to test hypotheses concerning the&lt;br/&gt;early evolution of
incipient sex chromosomes and to identify candidate genes that may&lt;br/&gt;be
responsible for gender determination.&lt;br/&gt;By investigating the mechanisms
that promote repression of recombination between&lt;br/&gt;genes influencing
male and female function in flowering plants, the results from
this&lt;br/&gt;project will have implications for crop improvement and the
fundamental processes that&lt;br/&gt;shape genome structure. Undergraduate
students will also be trained in genome&lt;br/&gt;annotation and comparative
genomics.