* 0841857
* Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Repeat-Mediated Deletion
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Elaine Sia, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Roy Welch
* 04/30/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Most eukaryotic cells contain
mitochondria, the membrane-bound organelles that produce energy for the cell. In
addition to DNA found in the nucleus of the cell, mitochondria contain DNA. The
faithful maintenance of the mitochondrial DNA is essential to the normal
function of cells. Deletions of large segments of the mitochondrial DNA are
common mutations in many types of cells. In humans, these mutations accumulate
with age and are associated with inherited disease syndromes. Deletions of this
type are also commonly observed in the mitochondrial DNA of baker's yeast. The
long-term goal of this project is to understand the mechanism by which these
deletions arise using yeast as a model system. The researchers aims are directed
at understanding the proteins involved in this process and their activities. The
researchers have devised genetic strategies to study these factors to study the
proteins that contribute to mitochondrial deletions, determine what proteins
bind to double-strand breaks in mitochondrial DNA, and study the temporal events
in mitochondrial double-strand break repair. Completion of this work will
provide new information on the broad area of mitochondrial DNA metabolism,
including replication, recombination and repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have a positive impact in the
education of undergraduates in the biological sciences in several ways. In the
past 5 years, the principal investigator has mentored 17 undergraduate students
pursuing independent projects. Studies with yeast are well suited to
undergraduates with little experience, allowing them to learn a large number of
techniques and concepts in a summer or semester. In addition, the research
represents a collaboration with the co-principal investigator at SUNY-Brockport,
which is primarily a 4-year institution that does not grant Ph.D. degrees. The
Department of Biological Sciences provides excellent opportunities for
undergraduate research. More to the point, the record of the co-principal
investigator over the past 5 years has supported the goal of the Department of
Biological Sciences at Brockport to further undergraduate involvement in
research. The co-principal investigator has sponsored a total of 15
undergraduates, and 7 Master's students in a variety of independent studies and
directed research projects, 3 of those were CSTEP/McNair Scholars. The
researchers will continue to honor this commitment to scientific education with
the involvement of undergraduate biology majors at SUNY Brockport and the
University of Rochester in the current project. Both the principal investigator
and the co-principal investigator have adapted several small projects for use in
laboratory courses. Exercises have been designed that incorporate standard yeast
genetic approaches and yeast two-hybrid techniques to teaching labs. The
students perform screens with baits relevant to studies currently being
performed in both the principal investigator's and the co-principal
investigator's laboratories.