* 0841114
* Collaborative Research:  SERPENT:  Serpentinite, Extension and Regional Porosity Experiment across the Nicaraguan Trench
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Steven Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2012
* USD 700,003.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thin, rocky shell of the Earth, the
lithosphere, is broken into a mosaic of thin plates that are inconstant motion.
Along some boundaries between plates, one slides beneath the other and is
consumed in a process known as subduction. Most of great earthquakes and violent
volcanic eruptions occur at subduction zones. Both of these processes are
significantly affected by the amount of water that is carried into the interior
with the downgoing plate, but these processes remain poorly understood because
the amount of water entering the subduction system remains poorly constrained. A
major carrier of water is the mineral serpentine, and one of the major
uncertainties is the volume of water that is being carried into the subduction
system by serpentinized upper mantle. Electromagnetic geophysical methods are
sensitive to the presence and concentration of water at depth in the Earth. This
project consists of a large-scale electromagnetic experiment along a 300 km
profile off Nicaragua in a region that shows evidence for substantial fault
related fluid circulation in the crust and possibly in the upper mantle, and
high Ba/La ratios and water contents in adjacent onshore volcanics suggesting a
strong slab fluid input into the arc-melting. This survey will combine
controlled-source electromagnetics (CSEM) with broadband and long period
magnetotellurics (MT) to provide a comprehensive picture of the conductivity
structure from the seafloor to the upper mantle, representing the entire input
into this part of the Central American subduction zone. In addition to the
societal relevance of improving our understanding of processes that produce
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, this project will promote international
scientific cooperation and support two Ph.D. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;