* 0841319
* SGER: Evaluation of an Interactive Daylighting Tool for Architectural Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Barbara Cutler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 07/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

The research objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research award is to
prototype and validate an interactive daylighting tool that allows architects to
explore alternative designs and new technologies to improve the sustainability
of their buildings. Our hybrid global illumination rendering method combining
radiosity and shadow volumes will be seamlessly incorporated into the early
stages of design. We envision our tool as a plug-in to popular modeling packages
used by experienced designers, who are knowledgeable but not necessarily experts
in daylighting technology or advanced graphical simulations. We hypothesize that
use of our rendering and visualization software will make the architectural
design process more effective, creative, and satisfying and lead to more energy-
efficient building designs. We will design and carry out a preliminary user
study to test this hypothesis. Our framework will be compared with current
design practice by measuring the breadth of designs considered as well as the
efficiency of the final design.

If successful, the results of this research will demonstrate the effective use
of interactive global illumination algorithms and temporal maps for
architectural design, including the use of non-intuitive complex specular window
materials. The new tool will be used in architectural design studios and
workshops to enhance creative thinking and broaden the number of criteria that
can be considered and balanced during design. The project will engage graduate
and undergraduate students in computer science, building technology, and
architectural design. If successful, our system will improve the architect's
ability to make effective use of daylighting and reduce the need for
supplemental electric lighting, reducing consumption of non-renewable energy
resources. The same framework can be applied to other design problems that
require complex physical simulation and visualization, including passive solar
heating and cooling, acoustics, aerodynamic building envelopes, and general
(non-architectural) design scenarios.