* 0841999
* Exploring a novel nitrogen biogeochemical cycle and its dynamics in a contaminated aquifer
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Eugene Madsen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 587,133.00

This project seeks to advance understanding of the roles that microorganisms
play in detoxifying ground waters polluted with organic compounds. The complex
microbial communities that dwell in subsurface habitats have the capability of
metabolizing organic contaminants. When this occurs, the metabolic processes
(e.g., biodegradation) carried our by one set of microbial populations can lead
to the accumulation of byproducts that may foster growth and metabolism of
another set of populations. This project aims to reveal the intricate
interactions (processes and controls) between microbial populations that reside
in a shallow aquifer in South Glens Falls, NY that is contaminated with aromatic
hydrocarbon-rich coal tar waste. Naphthalene is a key pollutant there.
Understanding how the microbially-mediated processes alter site geochemistry and
how site geochemistry (in turn) alters microbial reactions and is a central
goal. The fundamental hypothesis of this project is that a novel nitrogen cycle
has developed on site due to three interacting factors: (i) the influx of
naturally occurring nitrate in groundwater; (ii) anaerobic microbial metabolism
of the aromatic hydrocarbons leading to an accumulation of ammonia and methane,
and (iii) fluctuating oxidation-reduction (redox) conditions that control
physiological reactions carried out by the microorganisms. Seven auxiliary
hypotheses to be tested within this project examine the detailed interactions of
microbial populations and the specific genes they express to catalyze these
reactions that both destroy pollutants and influence water quality. To test
these hypotheses, we will: routinely monitor the geochemical status of the site;
routinely assess the composition of microbial communities across the site using
molecular fingerprinting techniques; implement a series of laboratory-based
determinations of nitrogen-cycle processes (especially dissimilatory reduction
of nitrate to ammonia, DNRA), complete a complementary array of molecular
biological field assays characterizing the naturally occurring communities and
their expressed functional genes; and integrate the entire data set using
correlational analyses.

This project addresses fundamental questions about the function of naturally
occurring microbial communities, the identities of populations active in
transforming nitrogen and carbon compounds, and how environmental pollution
alters the structure and function of microbial populations that maintain
ecosystems. Thus, the information generated advances scholarly areas that span
cellular, ecological, and pollution-control issues. Furthermore, this project
will contribute to graduate and undergraduate education of project participants
and to public educational outreach (via a web site and other activities by the
investigator). This project will provide a database on fundamental microbial
diversity (of culturable microorganisms, sequences of genes controlling the
cycling of both carbon and nitrogen) that will be valuable resources for
comparison to the taxonomy and functional roles of microorganisms in other
habitats. Rapid, open exchange of geochemical data, microbial cultures, nucleic
acid sequences, and biogeochemical processes with other scientists and the
public will enhance the impact of this project on society's awareness of the
significance of microorganisms in ecosystem function.