* 0841270
* CAREER:   Proximate and Ultimate Causes of Sensory System Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Karen Carleton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 06/30/2014
* USD 799,956.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African cichlid fishes provide a unique
system for understanding how genomic information (DNA) is converted into whole
organism variation (e.g., differences in size, shape, color). There are more
than 2000 species of cichlid fishes, making them some of the most diverse
vertebrates. One of the many ways in which cichlid species differ is how they
see. Some species are more sensitive to short wavelength light (ultraviolet ?
green), while others are sensitive to longer light (blue ? red). Such
differences could influence cichlid behavior, and contribute to the evolution of
new species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These differences raise several obvious
questions. How are these visual differences genetically controlled? What
evolutionary forces are responsible for these differences? Are they the result
of natural selection or do they happen randomly? To answer these questions,
genetic crosses will be made between cichlid species with different visual
sensitivities and used to isolate the genes controlling visual differences. In
addition, comparisons will be made between different species to look for
correlations between visual sensitivities and either environment (depth, water
clarity) or ecology (what they eat, how they hunt, how they find mates).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER grant will also develop new educational
materials to integrate the teaching of physics and biology. This will involve
the development of a sensory biology class where physics concepts are introduced
in the biological context of the five senses. These materials will strengthen
students? understanding of the biological and physical sciences and will be made
available to other universities on the web. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this work include 1) understanding how animal diversity is created,
2) training students in international research through field work in Malawi,
Africa, and 3) development of integrative research and teaching programs which
weave together biological, chemical and physical approaches. &lt;br/&gt;