* 0841237
* SGER:  Upgrading Community Atmosphere Model (CAM) Cloud Macrophysics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Christopher Bretherton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2009
* USD 33,468.00

A climate model is a complex software system whose parts must work properly
together. This is a particular challenge for its atmospheric 'moist physics'
parameterizations - turbulence, cumulus convection, cloud formation, cloud-
aerosol interaction and precipitation, because these processes tightly interact
on length scales much smaller than a climate model grid cell. The Community
Atmosphere Model (CAM) is the atmospheric component of the world's leading
community-developed climate model. Coordinated efforts by several research
groups, loosely organized into a CAM Microphysics Initiative, are completely
revamping most of the moist physics parameterizations. Their aim is to reduce
CAM's cloud and precipitation biases and to enable credible global simulation of
the effect of human-produced aerosol on clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
these efforts, some important shortcomings have been found in the CAM
formulation for 'cloud macrophysics'- the parameterizations that determine the
fractional cloud cover and the masses of liquid and ice cloud particles that
condense and evaporate in each model grid cell. These shortcomings involve
inconsistencies between the calculation of cloud fraction and cloud condensate
that often result in 'empty clouds' (cloud area with no cloud particles),
especially in regions of shallow cumulus convection. In high-latitude regions,
CAM cloud predictions are sensitive to arbitrary changes to the order of calls
to different parameterizations. The goal of this research is to implement and
test a set of detailed code changes that will: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Better treat the
interaction between cumulus and stratiform cloud cover, ameliorating issues of
'empty clouds' with finite cloud fraction but no condensate.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Ensure that the cloud macrophysics is operating on an appropriate state.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) Use a more justifiable closure to calculate the rate of
condensation /evaporation in the cloudy part of grid cells. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Use a
relationship between cloud fraction and relative humidity that is analogous to
schemes used by other leading climate centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research must be completed within the next several months in order to be
evaluated in time to be included in the next generation Community Climate System
Model 4 (CCSM 4), to be frozen in early 2009 and applied to the Intergovenmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) fifth
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The model changes will
improve the internal consistency of the treatment of cloud processes in CAM.
They will allow all moist processes to contribute to a consistent and physically
realizable subgrid spatial distribution of cloud condensate within each grid
cell. All changes are based on recommendations from the published literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Many NCAR, DOE and university scientists
use the CCSM as their primary climate model. This research will provide a solid
basis for further code improvements in the microphysics, cumulus convection, and
moist turbulence parameterizations that are needed to produce a cutting-edge
simulation of human-induced aerosol effects on clouds and climate and better
projections of 21st century climate change. These changes will be ready to use
for model simulations in support of the 5th IPCC Assessment, for which better
simulation of cloud-aerosol feedbacks is emerging as an important thrust.