* 0841765
* SGER:  Acquisition & Operation of an Experimental Testbed for System-Level Research to Support Data-Intensive Computing Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Indranil Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 07/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

The world is populated with enormous amounts of data from a wide variety of
sources. There is a compelling human need to represent, analyze, query, manage,
understand, and respond to such data for knowledge extraction and decision
making. In collaboration with Yahoo! and Hewlett-Packard, we are creating an
experimental testbed, the Cloud Computing Testbed (CCT), at the University of
Illinois (UIUC) for data-intensive applications using distributed "cloud"
computational resources to enable researchers to address this need by processing
data at various levels of the system stack, from network, operating system,
virtual machines, and distributed applications to the Web. The exploratory
nature of CCT results from its focus on systems and networking related research
issues within a data-intensive cloud computing environment. Other existing or
proposed data processing clusters are focused on user-level applications for
which a stable and thus fairly rigid environment must be maintained, whereas the
proposed research with the CCT will go deep into the system software stack to
explore new and better ways to provide system-level support for data-intensive
computing. The UIUC research efforts cover a breadth of research areas including
networking, operating systems, virtual machines, distributed systems, data-
mining, Web search, network measurements, and multimedia. Access to the CCT is
also being made available to external CISE researchers by way of an application
process administered by UIUC.

The CCT will provide the academic community with the opportunity to do research
in data-intensive computing spanning multiple research areas (OS, virtual
machines, distributed systems, datamining, the Web, and online social networks),
and in particular to explore powerful systems and networking research topics in
a data-intensive environment. It will give the academic community access to
resources that would otherwise be unavailable due to cost. The CCT is providing
opportunities for multi-disciplinary research on large-scale, distributed
computing projects. It is accelerating research for Internet-scale computing and
will drive innovation for future systems.