* 0841170
* CAREER: Large-scale Spatial Temporal Data Driven Simulation with Sequential Monte Carlo Methods
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Xiaolin Hu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 425,234.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of&lt;br/&gt;2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale spatial
temporal systems such as wildfire are inherently difficult to study due to their
complex and dynamical behavior. Computer modeling and simulation provide an
important tool for understanding and predicting the dynamic behavior of these
systems. While sophisticated simulation models have been developed, traditional
simulations are largely decoupled from real systems by making little usage of
real time data from the systems under study. With recent advances in sensor and
network technologies, the availability and fidelity of such real time data have
greatly increased. A new paradigm of dynamic data-driven simulation is emerging
where a simulation system is continually influenced by the real time data for
better analysis and prediction of a system under study. This project
investigates tractable approaches for dynamic data driven simulation of large-
scale spatial temporal systems based on state-of-the-art probabilistic
techniques using Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) methods. New algorithms and
methods are developed to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of data driven
simulation of large-scale spatial temporal systems. The project builds upon the
application context of wildfire that the PI has experience
with.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a strong impact on both theory
and practice aspects of simulation-based study of large-scale complex systems in
general, and wildfire in particular. The project will result in major advances
to the new paradigm of dynamic data-driven simulation, and can potentially
benefit many other fields where sophisticated simulation models are used, such
as manufacturing, transportation, geo-ecological science, and national security.
The project also has a comprehensive education component, including course
development, involving undergraduates and under-represented students in
research, and international student exchange. Dissemination will include
demonstrations, a shared simulation environment, and workshops/tutorials.