* 0841338
* From Hectares to Nanometers:  GK-12 Multidisciplinary Explorations of Functional Nanoscience and Tropical Ecosystems
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2009,01/31/2016
* Liz Diaz-Vazquez, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 01/31/2016
* USD 2,549,295.00

From Hectares to Nanometers: GK-12 Multidisciplinary Explorations of
&lt;br/&gt;Tropical Ecosystems and Functional
Nanoscience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GK-12 project builds a strategic
interdisciplinary partnership between the University of Puerto Rico?s Institute
of Tropical Ecosystem Studies and Institute for Functional Nanomaterials, which
together provide doctoral research projects to over eighty PhD students in
chemistry, biology, chemical physics, and environmental science. It will
strengthen 7th-9th teachers and students? scientific knowledge through
multidisciplinary explorations of tropical ecosystems and functional
nanoscience, while improving graduate students? abilities to communicate and
teach science. Through this GK 12 project: 24 graduate students will be better
prepared to be leaders and to communicate and collaborate effectively with
colleagues and peer reviewers as well as with teachers, students, and the
general public; 48 science teachers in eight 7th-9th level schools will broaden
their science content knowledge and have a better understanding of nano and
environmental sciences; 165 additional teachers will participate in the Summer
Institute gaining science content knowledge and acquire educational materials
development skills; 3,000 7th?9th students will experience the excitement of
scientific research and improved understanding of science. This GK-12 project
will increase and diversify the national pool of competent scientists, enhance
teachers? content knowledge in two multidisciplinary science fields, provide 7th
9th students understanding of the core concepts and ideas in nano and
environmental sciences, and develop modern educational materials. The GK-12
educational materials and other products will be incorporated into the Pre
Service Teacher Science Methodology Course, impacting future teachers and their
students, and they will be available online for teachers and students around the
world. &lt;br/&gt;