* 0841282
* Workshop on Formal Approaches to Mayan Linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* David Pesetsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2011
* USD 18,930.00

The Formal Approaches to Mayan Linguistics (FAMLi) workshop will bring together
researchers working on formal approaches to Mayan linguistics. There are
currently around thirty Mayan languages spoken in Central America. Some are
relatively stable while others are severely endangered. Though there are many
researchers working on formal issues in Mayan linguistics, there have been no
recent forums dedicated entirely to this topic. FAMLi hopes to remedy this gap.
The workshop will help researchers make new contacts, foster collaboration, and
inspire interest in Mayan languages within the broader field of linguistics. A
special goal of FAMLi is to encourage research by native speaker linguists
through active recruitment of submissions and travel funding assistance. The
FAMLi workshop will be held at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology during
the 2009-2010 academic year. This location will pull participants from MIT and
neighboring institutions. The workshop will feature five invited speakers as
well as fourteen talks and twelve posters. Four of the invited talks will
represent current research in the core areas of formal linguistics: phonology,
morphology, syntax, and semantics. The fifth talk will focus on the interaction
between formal linguistics and the study of under-documented or endangered
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FAMLi will bring together scholars with similar
scientific interests, but different levels of language expertise. Mayan
languages are genetically close enough that many of the same theoretical
questions arise in languages across the family. At the same time, the many
differences which exist among the individual languages make collaborative
discussion a profitable way to investigate problems and have the potential to
yield solutions that might not be clear from investigations of individual
languages in isolation. The research presented at FAMLi will also underscore the
importance of careful, thorough fieldwork on under-represented and endangered
languages for the investigation of formal questions. Another positive outcome
will be the creation of contacts between Mayan scholars and the broader
theoretical community. This will lead to new partnerships between native speaker
linguists, other members of the Mayan linguistics community, and theoretical
linguists who may have never worked on Mayan languages before.