* 0841419
* Pathways regulating the germ cell microenvironment - the roles of seven-up and homothorax
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Cordula Schulz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 01/31/2014
* USD 463,996.00

In humans and in animals, many short-lived cells, such as skin, blood, or sperm
cells, are constantly reproduced from adult stem cells. The function of stem
cells depends on cues provided by supporting cells, commonly referred to as
?micro-environment cells? or niche cells. However, little is known about how
micro-environment cells are made and how they contact the stem cells. The
investigator proposes to investigate these fundamental questions, using fruit-
flies (Drosophila melanogaster) as a genetic model system. The investigator has
previously implicated two genes, termed seven-up and homothorax, for proper
functioning of micro-environment cells. She proposes to examine the roles of
these genes and the molecular pathways in which they act, and to place them in
context with known pathways to gain a mechanistic understanding of micro-
environment formation. The outcome of the proposed research will therefore have
a broad impact on our understanding of tissue formation, and contribute to the
development of techniques for controlling stem cells in tissue
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves training of
students in genetic and molecular techniques. The investigator has a record in
training students from underrepresented groups, and intends to continue this
track.&lt;br/&gt;