* 0841435
* Early Human Occupation of the Tibetan Plateau and the Development of High Altitude Adaptations
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* John Olsen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 190,080.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. P. Jeffrey Brantingham and a team
of U.S. and Chinese scientists will conduct three years of archaeological and
paleoenvironmental research on the northern margins of the Qinghai Tibet
Plateau. Genetic studies of contemporary Tibetans and stone tools found in
surface archaeological settings have been used to suggest that human foragers
first colonized of the Plateau environment as early as 30,000 year ago. Recent
evidence collected by the research team suggests, however, that human humans
first ventured into the high elevation areas, in excess of 3000m above sea
level, as recently as 15,000 years BP, and possibly did not permanently occupy
the Plateau until around 8000 BP. The late colonization of the Qinghai Tibet
Plateau stands in sharp contrast to the early movement of people into other
extreme environments such as the Gobi desert and high arctic at 40,000 BP, which
researchers generally attribute to an expanded biogeographic capacity among
early anatomically modern humans. The goal of the current project is to
understanding the processes driving initial human colonization of the northern
Qinghai Tibet Plateau and establish why the timing and characteristics of
colonization differed so markedly.

Dr. Brantingham hypothesizes that colonization of the Qinghai Tibet Plateau
occurred in several phases and was driven by a combination of social and
environmental pressures. Late Upper Paleolithic foragers first occupied the
margins of the northern Plateau during the late Pleistocene (15,000-11,000 BP)
only seasonally, relying on cultural adaptations developed in low elevation
environments surrounding the Plateau. During the early Holocene (8200-6400 BP),
competitive displacement by low-elevation sedentary farming communities forced
foragers to permanently occupy high elevation areas and established conditions
sufficient for the evolution of pastoralism based on mutualistic relationships
with farmers in low-elevation environments. The team will test these hypotheses
using a combination of field survey and excavation, anchored by an intensive
geochronological dating program. A series of buried sites on the upper margins
of the northeast Qinghai Tibet Plateau are known to span the critical
15,000-5,000 BP period when the basic characteristics of modern adaptations on
the Plateau developed. Excavation of these sites will allow characterization of
the adaptive strategies that facilitated successful colonization. Survey in the
surrounding areas will allow us to characterize the accompanying land use
patterns.

The intellectual merit of the project will be to offer new insights into the
relative roles of biogeographic constraints and competitive/mutualistic
processes in driving human population movements and the emergence of radically
new adaptive strategies such as pastoralism. The results will therefore be
relevant to broader questions surrounding the origin and spread of modern humans
and the development of complex social and economic adaptations.

The research explicitly supports broader positive societal impacts by fostering
long-term international scientific collaborations, delivering quality graduate
educational experiences to the next generation of American and Chinese
archaeologists, and expanding knowledge about our own species' broad history and
adaptive capacities to public and professional audiences.