* 0841407
* Scripps Classroom Connection:  Developing a School District/Research Institution Partnership in Earth System Science Education
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Cheryl Peach, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2015
* USD 2,958,972.00

Scripps Classroom Connection: Developing a School District/Research Institution
Partnership In Earth System Science Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Scripps
Classroom Connection (SCC) aims to systemically and simultaneously improve
communication skills of Earth Science (ES) graduate students and K-12 ES
education at the San Diego Unified School District (SDUSD). These goals are
relevant because earth science literacy (ESL) is fundamental to the success of
our society, which must practice much more effective stewardship of our very
fragile planet. Society needs to understand how planet Earth works as an
integrated chemical, physical and biological system to develop appropriate
strategies for sustainable use of earth resources, disposal of waste products,
effective mitigation of the impact of climate change, and natural disasters. Yet
ES is amongst the most neglected STEM education disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCC is based on a close collaboration between Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, a world-class research institute in Earth and ocean
science, and the SDUSD, the 8th largest urban school district in the US, with
the guidance of professionals from the UCSD education science department. Key
efforts and outcomes of our project will include: (1) Development of an
enduring, pedagogically robust curriculum in ES at the SDUSD through a
collaboration between scientists, teacher-educators, teachers and graduate
students; (2) Training of a new breed of graduate students that is equally
comfortable communicating their science to their specialist peers and to lay
audiences, (3) Effectively raising ESL in SDUSD schools laying a foundation for
a public that becomes an effective steward of Planet
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;