* 0841223
* SUPER-M : School and University Partnership for Educational Renewal in Mathematics
* EDU,DGE
* 04/15/2009,07/31/2015
* David Ross, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,768,755.00

ABSTRACT FOR THE NSF PROPOSAL GK-12: SUPER-M&lt;br/&gt;PI: MONIQUE
CHYBA&lt;br/&gt;DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS, UNIVERSITY OF
HAWAII&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The School and University Partnership for
Educational Renewal in Mathematics project (SUPER-M) will bring the knowledge
and expertise of research mathematicians into K?12 classrooms, making an
important contribution to improving school mathematics in Hawaii. The project
will provide K?12 students with an enriching learning environment where
mathematics is interesting and dynamic. The project will also contribute to the
formation of a cadre of highly qualified teachers, bringing new mathematics
expertise to schools throughout the State of Hawaii and helping to sustain the
program. Over five years, 38 Fellows will be selected to partner with K?12
schools on Oahu, the Big Island and Maui. Fellows will take a semester long
course on ?Issues in K?12 Mathematics Education,? learning about best practices
in the design of professional development courses for teachers. Fellows will
design and lead workshops for K?12 teachers arising from their areas of
research. Upon completion of the course, Fellows will partner with a cooperating
teacher, creating and leading mathematics activities for K?12 students. In this
way, SUPER-M will provide K?12 students with a solid grounding in mathematics,
increasing their opportunities to pursue careers in STEM disciplines. SUPER-M
will serve under-represented populations by placing a special emphasis on
recruiting Native Hawaiian and women Fellows. SUPER-M expects to profoundly
impact the community at large through special events such as summer camps,
public outreach events, and family math days.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;