* 0841047
* Does Training in Acting Foster Theory of Mind, Empathy, and Emotion Regulation?
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Ellen Winner, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joan Straumanis
* 08/31/2010
* USD 199,570.00

Does Training in Acting Foster Theory of Mind, Empathy, and Emotion
Regulation?&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Ellen Winner&lt;br/&gt;August 4,
2008&lt;br/&gt;Training in theater requires that one take the perspective of
other characters. Actors must analyze their characters? mental worlds (theory of
mind), experience their characters? emotions (empathy), and exert control over
their own emotions (emotion regulation). The study of acting can therefore
provide a new way to understand how these key interpersonal and personal
abilities are learned. Two studies will test the hypothesis that theater
training fosters these abilities in children and adolescents. Study 1 will
investigate how acting teachers train these skills in 8-10 year-olds and 13-15
year-olds. Theater classes for these age groups will be videotaped and analyzed
to determine the habits of mind taught. Study 2 will follow these two age groups
over the course of one school year, comparing those receiving theater training
(40 in each age group) vs. a control group receiving visual arts training (40 in
each age group). A set of tests will be administered in early fall 2008, and in
late spring 2009 to assess skill in understanding others? minds, empathy, and
emotion regulation. A comparison of the two groups at the beginning of the year
will reveal whether those who choose to take acting classes come to this
endeavor with already heightened skill in these three areas. A comparison of the
two groups after a full year of study will tell us whether, to what extent, and
in what way acting training increases these three target
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to infer what another individual
believes and feels, the proclivity to feel empathy, and the ability to exert
control over one?s emotions in a positive way are undeniably important social
and emotional skills. These skills develop throughout childhood and adolescence,
with some individuals (e.g., psychotherapists, negotiators, leaders) reaching
higher levels than others. A demonstration that acting training can lead to
expertise in these abilities would have clear practical and educational
implications. Such understanding could lead to the development of intervention
strategies for children and adolescents deficient in understanding others (e.g.
individuals with autism spectrum disorder), deficient in empathy (e.g. bullies),
and deficient in emotion regulation (e.g. those with depression or aggression
disorders). The research could also lead to intervention strategies for typical
children and adolescents, as the skills in question here are of value to
individuals of any age, whether in school, in the family, among friends, or in
the workplace.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;