* 0841259
* New, GK-12: A Multi-Disciplinary Research and Teaching Program in Biomedical Engineering for Discovery and Understanding of Cell Communication
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Thomas Chen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,665,273.00

New, GK-12: A Multi-Disciplinary Research and Teaching Program in Biomedical
Engineering for Discovery and Understanding of Cell Communication

This inventive program is designed to train a new generation of scientists in
biomedical science and engineering who are inter- and multi-disciplinary in
their training, better equipped for multilevel communication across ages (GK-12)
and fields (engineering, biology, and chemistry), and finally prepared to take
leadership roles for scientific inquiry and progress into the 21st century. The
research component consists of activities in silicon sensor design, modeling,
and understanding how molecules move and the functions of multi-cellular tissues
and organ systems in response to external chemical and physical stimuli through
intercellular communication. The research is critical for continued
understanding and advances in some of the fundamental questions facing biology
and medicine, and ultimately our society for better quality of life. The
educational component consists of activities to advance biomedical engineering
and to provide innovative changes to graduate education by developing a new
generation of scientists with transferrable skills in global culture and
diversity, leadership, civic and public engagement, innovation, ethics, and
communication. The graduate fellows and doctoral advisors collaborate with K-12
teachers to make new STEM content using engineering approaches accessible to
K-12 STEM education. The participation of industry partners provides practical
experiences for graduate fellows, teachers, and K-12 students in the program.