* 0841669
* Acquisition of a New Electron Microprobe for The University of Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Michael Drake, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

0841669&lt;br/&gt;Drake&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This proposal
seeks $500K (1/2 total cost) in funding to acquire a new electron microprobe.
NASA will fund the other 50% in a separate funding action. The current Cameca
SX50 probe is 18 years old, heavily used (400 hours / month), and has supported
users from UA and other US, foreign and community institutions. Over the past 17
years, the current instrument has provided data in over 265 peer-reviewed
publications, 75 PhD theses and 35 M.S. theses. The current instrument has seen
increased downtime due to maintenance issues and replacement parts are becoming
difficult, if even possible, to find. Requested is a new Cameca microprobe with
Wavelength Dispersive Spectrometers (WDS), an Energy Dispersive Spectrometer
(EDS), an Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS), and re-circulating water chiller.
The new instrument will be housed in the existing facility. UA will provide
funds for remodeling. The PI will have overall responsibility for the
acquisition while co-PI will be the facility manager and be fully-funded by the
state. The probe will be instrumental in several on-going research projects at
UA. Questions to be addressed include understanding Earth and other planet?s
history though mineralogy and geochemistry, determining the early thermal
history of Earth and other terrestrial planets, determining the material
composition and properties of Earth and other terrestrial planets, understanding
early planetary accretion through chondrite analysis, understanding primitive
achondrites, determining large-scale mixing and low-temperature components in
the early solar system, determining solar system chronology, thermodynamics,
phase equilibrium and diffusion kinetics related to terrestrial planetary
processes, U-Th-Pb geochronology and developing other chronometers and
thermochronometers, mineral resource identification and tectonics. Archeological
applications for the instrument include understanding early human environments
and tracing metallurgic and ceramic development, adoption and spread in early
civilizations. This acquisition will replace and enhance the capabilities of a
widely-used University and collaborative resource. The facility will be open to
outside users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***