* 0841054
* Young Mathematicians Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* L. Alayne Parson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2013
* USD 224,997.00

The Young Mathematicians Conference is an opportunity for students involved in
REU programs in mathematics to present their research results in talks and
posters presentations over the course of three days. Approximately 70 students
from all parts of the US are invited to report on about 50 projects. Invitations
are competitive and based on the review of abstracts by a panel of faculty
reviewers. In addition the conference invites around a dozen mentors to exchange
ideas and experiences in supervising undergraduate research. Moreover, about the
same number representatives from graduate programs in mathematics from a variety
of US institutions are invited to share their perspectives and insights about
graduate studies in mathematics in open forums and individual conversations.

Highlights of every conference are three plenary lectures by highly accomplished
researchers and teachers, who introduce students to advanced, innovative, and
exciting topics in mathematics. Speakers in the past included recipients of
prestigious MacArthur and Sloan Fellowships, Pólya and Nevanlinna Prizes, as
well as of the Haimo, Chauvenet, and Allendoerfer Awards for excellence in
exposition and teaching. The event schedule strongly encourages discussions and
interactions of students researchers with their peers as well as senior
mathematicians. One of the main goals of the conference is to guide talented
students from an initial research experience in mathematics towards a career as
research mathematicians. The YMC series was started in 2003 and was held in
every year since then (except for 2008) during the month of August.