* 0841313
* Collaborative Research:  Theoretical and Conceptual Advances in the Cognitive Neuroscience of Self Representation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2007,08/31/2010
* Anthony Jack, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 08/31/2010
* USD 39,238.00

One the deepest mysteries of life is consciousness. Most people take for granted
the fact that they are aware, that their waking experiences are framed by the
construct of a "self" identity that remains consistent throughout life. But what
are the physical, psychological, and cultural bases of consciousness? Some
researchers believe that this construct is ultimately subjective, which means
that it cannot be directly observed or measured. Some believe that consciousness
can nonetheless be studied by indirect observation, while others have argued
that the quality of subjective experience can never be studied by the scientific
method.

With support of the National Science Foundation, Drs. Jack, Gallagher, and
Raichle will join an international team of psychologists, psychiatrists,
philosophers, and neuroscientists to investigate the empirical bases of
consciousness. They will examine whether evidence for different
conceptualizations of the self can be found in patterns of brain activity, and
if so, whether their neuroscientific findings can help to further refine and
expand our understanding of consciousness. Their work is focused on how the
representation of self differs as a function of social and environmental
contexts.