* 0841814
* a Workshop on Neutrino Geoscience 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,10/31/2009
* William McDonough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 10/31/2009
* USD 23,498.00

A Workshop on Neutrino Geoscience will be held in September 2008 at SNOLab
(Sudbury Neutrino Observatory Laboratory). This 2.5-day meeting will have
geology and particle physics talks focused on recent developments in global and
Canadian geology, and geoneutrino experiments at SNO (Sudbury Neutrino
Observatory), KamLAND and Borexino. There will be ~60 participants, with roughly
equal representation from both communities. There will be a tour of the SNO
underground facility, including a view of the SNO+ experimental environment.
This meeting will engage the North American geological and particle physics
communities in an effort to foster collaborative research. The particle physics
community seeks feedback and insights from the geological community in regards
to knowledge about the K, Th and U content in the nearest 500 km radius, half-
spherical volume beneath the SNO+ detector. The meeting organizers include Drs.
Mark Chen (Queens University, Ontario, Canada), Claude Jaupart (University of
Paris, France), Bill McDonough (University of Maryland, USA) and Roberta Rudnick
(University of Maryland, USA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has
been made in exploiting the practical utility of antineutrino detection for
geological and nonproliferation purposes, in particular, reactor monitoring.
Despite these remarkable successes, these inter-related communities have had
only modest overlap. As a result, the fields of applied and basic antineutrino
physics lack an overarching strategy that would allow efficient exploitation of
the resources and strengths provided by each stakeholder. This workshop aims to
develop the basis for such a strategic alignment of interests between the
fundamental and applied antineutrino physics communities, including
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The geonneutrino
signal represents a background contribution to a global antineutrino signal,
which also includes contributions from nuclear reactors and weapons related
nuclear materials. Thus, understanding in detail the geoneutrino contributes
greatly to the viability of antineutrino detection for nuclear nonproliferation
purposes. Some applications are potentially important to maintaining a safe
society that uses such nuclear materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The importance of this workshop will be to unite disparate
groups of multi-disciplinary scientists with shared goals in antineutrino
detection research and applications. A goal of the workshop is to develop
stronger bonds of communications between these fields. This step is necessary in
order to fully understand the various the components of an antineutrino spectrum
and identify correctly the sources of the signal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;