* 0841194
* Conference Support for IEEE Energy 2030 Conference Participation in Atlanta, GA on November 17-18 at Marriot Marquis Hotel
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Deepakraj Divan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 01/31/2009
* USD 4,950.00

The first IEEE Energy 2030 Conference on Sustainable Energy Infrastructure will
take place in Atlanta on November 17/18, 2008, at the Marriott Marquis hotel in
downtown Atlanta. This new conference is being initiated by the IEEE, including
the IEEE New Technology Directions Committee, IEEE USA, IEEE Standards
Association, Power and Energy Society, and Power Electronics Society.

Conference themes include reduced carbon generation, smart grid and power
delivery, replacement of fossil fuel consumption at the load point, improved
energy efficiency, reduced energy consumption and impact of carbon cap and trade
legislation on choice of technology solutions. The conference will include
invited and original technical papers, industry presentations, and an exhibition
providing an opportunity to showcase new and emerging technologies that will
impact energy sustainability in the years ahead.

It is the objective of this award to support for the travel/registration
expenses for a selected group of students and junior faculty to attend this
conference.

Intellectual Merit: Issues related to sustainable energy are very complex, with
interactions between public policy, economics, technology and social issues.
This conference provides a first opportunity to bring together a diverse group
of researchers, academics, industry practitioners, economists and policy makers,
to begin a dialog, to identify the gaps, and to create the framework for
achieving a sustainable energy infrastructure by 2030. The IEEE is uniquely
positioned to help define what the transformed infrastructure is likely to look
like, and to initiate the discussion on the challenges that need to be overcome
to achieve success.

Broader Impacts: This conference is the first conference to focus on energy
sustainability as a mid-term target, to be achieved on a global scale. This is
possibly the most important issue facing society today.

The conference provides a great opportunity for graduate and undergraduate
students and junior faculty to interact with leading international researchers
in the area of sustainable energy infrastructures. Special efforts will be made
to recruit students and speakers from minorities and underrepresented groups.