* 0841958
* Phylogenetics and taxonomic revision of the neotropical genus Drymonia (Gesneriaceae, tribe Episcieae)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* John Clark, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 03/31/2013
* USD 239,817.00

This project will produce a framework for studying a fascinating example of
flower and fruit diversification in a poorly studied plant group from the
tropical rainforests of Central and South America. Most species in the target
group (genus Drymonia in the flowering plant family Gesneriaceae) are rarely
collected and inadequately known. Many of the species that will be studied have
never been photographed and at least ten species are new to science. Molecular
data will be generated to assess recently diversified lineages to answer
questions on the origins of fruit and flower
morphologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will document plant
diversity from ecosystems that are critically endangered. Exploratory collecting
expeditions will be conducted in Panama, Costa Rica, Peru, and French Guiana
where targeted areas represent significant gaps in our knowledge of plant
diversity. Training opportunities will be given to one doctoral candidate in
field and lab-oriented research and undergraduate students at the University of
Alabama. Teachers from the Tuscaloosa City/County Schools will be exposed to a
variety of experiences including assisting on field expeditions to the tropics.
A live collection will be developed for conservation of rare and endangered
species as well as for assessing floral features. &lt;br/&gt;