* 0841551
* RUI:   Investigating the mechanisms of Syndecan function during nervous system development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Karl Johnson, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 08/31/2013
* USD 519,925.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proper development
of the central nervous system depends on the ability of neurons to extend axons
to their proper synaptic targets and to build synapses on them once they have
arrived. Syndecan was recently shown to be a crucial regulator of nervous system
development. Mutations in the Syndecan gene cause fruitfly embryos to develop
with frequent errors in axon guidance at the midline of the central nervous
system. In addition, Syndecan mutants have severe defects in synapse growth.
Binding partners for the extracellular domain of Syndecan have recently been
identified, however, the mechanisms by which Syndecan controls neural
development is unknown. In this project, biochemical and genetic screens will be
conducted using the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster to identify novel proteins
that work with Syndecan to help build the central nervous system. In addition, a
variety of engineered Syndecan expression constructs will be tested in order to
reveal which domains of Syndecan are required for function. These studies should
provide insight into the molecular mechanisms of how Syndecan controls axon
guidance and synapse formation, and also are likely to identify novel genes
which control these processes. In addition, because Syndecan is highly conserved
from Drosophila to humans, this project will provide broadly applicable
information about how neurons find their synaptic targets, and how synapses grow
once the postsynaptic target has been contacted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be conducted at a small liberal arts college and entirely by
undergraduate students. Students considering careers in science benefit
tremendously from undergraduate research experiences; it allows them to learn
how scientific knowledge is gained, and to consider whether they wish to pursue
a career in scientific research. Working closely with the PI, students will
develop their own research projects. The research is also brought into the
classroom, providing additional opportunities for undergraduate students to use
the mutants and other genetic materials developed in the PI's laboratory to
conduct their own independent research projects in his upper-division courses.
Lastly, contact with both junior high and high school students through the
Cabrillo Marine Aquarium will allow additional opportunities to discuss research
and the process of conducting hypothesis-driven scientific inquiry.