* 0841066
* Collaborative Research:  Using MARGINS Research Data Resources in the Classroom: Developing and Testing Multidisciplinary Mini-Lessons
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Geoffrey Abers, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Matty
* 12/31/2009
* USD 41,774.00

Geology (42)

This collaborative project is generating and testing a set of multidisciplinary
course materials, called MARGINS Mini-Lessons, that repurpose the rich data and
visualization resources that have been developed by projects supported through
the NSF-MARGINS Program for use in introductory and upper level undergraduate
courses. The Principal Investigators, all members of the MARGINS Steering
Committee and/or the MARGINS Education/Outreach Advisory Committee, are engaging
the MARGINS academic community in this effort through a MARGINS Education Mini-
Workshop. There, participants gain insight into the current state of the four
MARGINS Science Initiatives, and the varied data repositories and information
resources housing MARGINS results. Workshop participants are identifying key
content areas to address with Mini-Lessons, and are participating in their
development and testing in concert with the Principal Investigators and the
module assessment team.

Several different varieties of MARGINS Mini Lessons are being developed, based
on successful models, including 4-6 large-scale lessons. A resource and support
team, comprising members from the MARGINS Education/Outreach Advisory Committee,
is working with Mini-Lesson developers to ensure that the completed modules
follow best educational practices and are effectively tested and assessed.
Smaller-scale ideas arising from the workshop are being produced as shorter
Mini-Lessons, and supported through standardized online assessment resources
that instructors can use to test their effectiveness and report back results.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in its mining of the extensive
MARGINS data repository for interdisciplinary educational materials that will
bring the realities of modern earth science into undergraduate courses. The
broader impacts of this project lie in its efforts to build a broad-based
educational community of MARGINS researchers and educators through the module
development processes. The modules themselves are being used in a range of
undergraduate geoscience courses on both two- and four-year college campuses,
and are reaching diverse student audiences.