* 0841210
* USAP Operations
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2008,09/30/2008
* Kevin McCarthy, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility
* Contract Interagency Agreement
* Patrick Smith
* 09/30/2008
* USD 265,502.00

The National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs (NSF/OPP), and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Office of Space Communications
(NASA/HQ Code OT), initiated a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) in September, 1993,
that established spacecraft tracking and data acquisition capability at the
United States Antarctic Program (USAP) McMurdo Station research facility. The
primary initial mission supported by the agreement was the acquisition of
RADARSAT-1 synthetic aperture radar (SAR) satellite remote sensing imagery from
a 10 meter antenna ground tracking station constructed for this purpose.
Pursuant to the MOA, NSF supports operations and maintenance and utilizes the
assistance of NASA Wallops Flight Facility (NASA/WFF) to discharge this
responsibility. NSF provides funding to NASA/WFF to supply on-continent
personnel for MGS operations and maintenance.

NASA confirmed the continued acquisition of RADARSAT-1 data through the
completion of the RADARSAT-1 support agreement with the Canadian Space Agency,
which concludes in April, 2008. NASA further anticipates a continued need of the
MGS for NASA Ground Network operations beyond the cessation of the RADARSAT-1
mission. Continuation of the MGS will be subject to a renegotiation of the
governing MOA terms and conditions.

A new interagency agreement will be implemented to replace the original
agreement implemented under award #9628886 due to the age of the original
agreement. This new support agreement prepared by NSF/OPP has been negotiated
with NASA/GSFC/Code 453 to define levels of support and funding for Fiscal Years
2007 and 2008.

NASA has proposed a FY07 budget totaling $174,784 in direct funding and an
amount not to exceed $15,000 for NSF logistics support (airline tickets,
chargeable O&M support, etc.) and $5,000 for local McMurdo logistics/supplies.
NASA has proposed a FY08 budget totaling $179,122 in direct funding and an
amount not to exceed $15,000 for NSF logistics support (airline tickets,
chargeable O&M support, etc.) and $5,000 for local McMurdo logistics/supplies.

The proposed annual funding continuation totaling $353,906 is recommended for
award to NASA/GSFC. Prior awards (direct funding only) under the prior
interagency funding agreement have totaled $3,732,179 to NASA for this activity.
The annual award under the new interagency agreement will restart the cumulative
tracking at the recommended award funding of $353,906.

