* 0841055
* SGER: Neural-Network-Based Adaptive Dynamic Programming for Maximizing Survival Probabilities
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Abhijit Gosavi, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 02/28/2010
* USD 70,969.00

Abstract Proposal Number: 0841055 Proposal Title: Neural-Network-Based Adaptive
Dynamic Programming for Maximizing Survival Probabilities PI Name: Abhijit
Gosavi PI Institution: Missouri University of Science and Technology

Most previous work on optimal control and adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) has
focused on a kind of best-case optimization, where the system to be controlled
is stable and the goal is simply to maximize benefits or minimize costs. This PI
has been a leader in the small but important area of risk-sensitive ADP, which
still aims to maximize benefits but tries to find less risky strategies for
doing so. In this new work, the PI proposes to develop new methods aimed at the
worst case situation, where stability or survival can not be guaranteed, and the
optimization problem is to maximize the probability of survival. This is a very
important class of problems. In addition, he plans to bridge the gap between the
decision, management and risk community, where he has worked so far, and the
engineering ADP community, by developing new software tools that can apply ADP
efficiently to problems with a mix of discrete and continuous variables.

Intellectual merit of proposal: This would be the first work to apply ADP (or at
least continuous-variable ADP) to an extremely important class of problems. The
challenging of maximizing a probability of survival is very important, for
example, in trying to understand what brains do. Risk-sensitive ADP (RSADP) will
be applied for the first time to the emerging class of ADP methods capable of
efficiently coping with discrete and continuous variables at the same time.

Broad impact of proposal: New tools in MatLab for this kind of optimization
method could be of enormous strategic importance to the development of the
entire ADP field. This could also be of more than usual benefit to the PI and to
the area he has tried to pioneer at this stage of his career. The results of
this project will build the foundation for studying RSADP on numerous problems
in engineering where ADP can be used: routing of vehicles, maintenance of
structures (especially in the face of risky natural disasters), revenue
management in airlines, and supply chains of manufactured products.

