* 0841370
* TRIAD: Reforming Graduate Education by Integrating Teaching, Research, and Industry Applications to Deepen Scientific Understanding
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Elbert Myles, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,845,511.00

Title of Project: TRIAD: Reforming Graduate Education by Integrating Teaching,
Research, and Industry Applications to Deepen Scientific Understanding
Institutions: Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU); Tennessee State
University (TSU)

Co-PIs: Anthony Farone, Ph.D., Mary Farone, Ph.D., E. Lewis Myles, Ph.D., Kim
Sadler, Ed.D. The TRIAD program will make a three-fold connection between
graduate fellows (GF), partner teachers (PT) and their high school biology
students, and biotechnology/biomedical industry partners (IP) in middle
Tennessee. The theme is ?Applications of Cellular and Molecular Biology
Research.? TRIAD will allow GFs to (1) improve communication skills through
teaching and presentations while sharing their research with PTs, students,
other GFs, and IPs; (2) connect their research to applied technologies/products
through a classroom biology unit; and (3) interact with industry scientists.
Each summer, GF-PT pairs will spend time in the research laboratory of the GF
and in the IP?s facility. Following this experience, the GF-PT pair will develop
a teaching unit on a research area of interest to the GF-IP. GFs will also
mentor high school biology students in research projects. Fellows will help
students develop hypotheses, conduct experiments, analyze data, draw
conclusions, and submit a presentation to the Tennessee Junior Academy of
Science. Intellectual merit of TRIAD includes research to determine if industry
interactions and research mentoring experiences create better prepared graduate
student scientists, and if engaging PTs and their students in inquiry-based
research with GFs will increase standardized test scores in biology and/or
encourage more students to pursue STEM careers.

The TRIAD program three-fold interactions will have broad impacts through
industry connections and a K-12 experience with STEM graduate education;
engaging high school biology students from high-need schools in inquiry-based
research; and with industry partnerships extending long-term, sustainable
programs impacting the science education continuum (K-20+).

