* 0841433
* SGER:  A Nation Divided: Immigration and Citizenship on the Border
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Miguel Diaz-Barriga, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

In July 2008 in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas, the United States
government began construction on a section of the projected seven hundred mile
border fence. This monumental project, combined with the U.S. presidential
election further focusing already heightened national attention on the hot-
button issue of "illegal" immigration, makes this an historic moment and the
Lower Rio Grande Valley (South Texas) a unique field site. Anthropologists
Miguel Diaz-Barriga and Margaret Dorsey, in their pre-investigative research,
found a disconnect between local, Mexican American perspectives and national,
policy-based perspectives on the twin issues of immigration and the construction
of the border fence. The ethnographers plan to learn if this disconnect actually
exists and if so, the extent to which it exists in addition to learning what
Mexican Americans think about immigration policy, how they experience
immigration, and the construction of the border fence. The research will be
conducted starting in September 2008 in Hidalgo County for five months
(September 2008-January 2009). The ethnographers will employ three
methodologies: participant observation at a variety of grassroots forums; in-
depth interviews; and analysis of immigration and border fence-related media
such as television programs, news articles, pamphlets, and radio commentary in
both English and Spanish. The researchers will conduct ethnographic fieldwork at
a range of gathering spots in Hidalgo County such as popular, locally-owned
taquerias, veteran's halls, and Democratic and Republican Party sponsored
events. The researchers will conduct more extensive interviews with a range of
relevant people: current state senators and congress members, candidates,
participants in the political parties, and activists in border wall coalitions,
an amalgam of business leaders, local residents, border land owners, and
environmentalists. This project presents perspectives often missing in national
and local debates over immigration--that of Mexican American border residents
themselves. As such, it will also contribute to a more informed, nuanced, and
multifaceted understanding of immigration and positively inform public policy.