* 0841583
* Collaborative Research:  DHB Virtual Worlds:  An Exploratorium for Theorizing and Modeling the Dynamics of Group Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2007,08/31/2012
* Noshir Contractor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 620,755.00

This major inter-disciplinary research effort will use virtual worlds as an
exploratorium to theoretically extend and empirically model the dynamics of
group behavior. In the process it will develop novel computational techniques
for analyzing large-scale networks, which will have applicability across a wide
variety of domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important and complex
decisions made by governments and organizations occur in group contexts. A
central challenge, spurred by new developments in information technologies (IT),
is that the nature of groups and how they operate has changed radically. Today,
many groups ? in social, political, and economic contexts - are ad hoc, agile,
transient entities that emerge from a larger primordial network of
relationships. For a short time, these groups accomplish a variety of tasks, and
then they dissolve, only to be reconstituted later with a different
configuration. While there is growing awareness of the socio-economic
consequences of these groups, our understanding of how they form and their
impact on effectiveness is severely limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address this limitation by developing a theoretical framework that reflects
the contemporary conceptualizations of groups. It proposes a network approach to
modeling the eco-system of overlapping and constantly changing groups that
constitute the fabric of contemporary society. It recognizes that empirically
testing such a model poses formidable data collection challenges. However, a
unique resource available to the research team is access to all behavioral
traces (server logs) from one of the world''s largest Massively Multiplayer
Online (MMO) games, EverQuest 2, which is particularly well-suited to theorize
and empirically model the dynamics of group behavior. MMOs comprise tens of
thousands of players who are at any one point in time coalescing in thousands of
groups to accomplish ""quests"" and ""raids"" that involve a variety of
activities similar to tasks we undertake in real life ? finding information or
materials, making, selling or buying products and services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the data collection challenge, the scale of the
proposed research enterprise also poses significant computational challenges in
uncovering and analyzing the complexities that govern the dynamics of group
behavior in these virtual worlds. Using advanced computing applications and
technologies, this project seeks to capture, infer, and model the networks that
explain how groups emerge and how they function. Specifically, the researchers
will use temporally evolving graphs to model such networks, and develop scalable
algorithms to compute metrics of group behavior on them. Tying these complex and
shifting individual and networked behaviors to traditional forms of analyses
represents a novel interdisciplinary challenge in both scope and
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expand our knowledge of how
groups form and operate in larger ecosystems of groups, individuals, and
organizations. The analysis of logs generated from Virtual Worlds poses novel
challenges from a computational perspective. This interdisciplinary
investigation will result in new (1) information models for modeling the Virtual
World, (2) data structuring and algorithmic techniques for data access and
analysis, and (3) techniques for computational efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The knowledge and tools developed in this research will allow researchers to
understand more fully, and practitioners to cultivate more effectively, the
emergence and performance of ad hoc groups in contemporary society. It will also
provide other disciplines with new computational and statistical modeling
methodologies and tools, which should have considerable positive implications
for future research in other disciplinary areas. The findings and deliverables
of the proposed research will be immediately generalizable to training and
education related to groups (beyond just MMOs or Virtual Worlds), social
networks, and online games.