* 0841818
* Gordon Research Conference 2009:  Glial Biology: Functional Interactions Among Glia &amp; Neurons:  March 15-20, 2009 Ventura, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Philip Haydon, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 01/31/2010
* USD 14,000.00

This project is for partial support for an international meeting on Glial
Biology, as part of the Gordon Research Conference series, to be held in
Ventura, California, March 15-20, 2009. The broad and long-term goal of the
conference is to increase our understanding of the manner in which glial cells
in the brain interact with one another and with neurons during normal brain
function and in neurological diseases. The biology of two specific glial cell
types, astrocytes and microglial cells, is emphasized in this meeting. The
specific aim of this meeting will be to convene 44 speakers to discuss critical
areas of glial research with a total of 140 participants, during a five-day
conference. The program will address glia cell involvement in synaptic structure
and function, neurogenesis, brain energy metabolism, cerebral blood flow, and
some neurological diseases including tumors and stroke. The Glial Biology GCR is
designed to: 1. Initiate and help sustain an interactive dialogue between
scientists in different fields of glial biology and glial-neuron interactions by
providing a long-term forum for presentation of cutting-edge work to a diverse
group of leading researchers. 2. Suggest new approaches to solve timely glial
biology problems and help identify controversial issues in this field that
require resolution. 3. Raise awareness in the neuroscience community of the
importance of glial-neuronal interactions. Specific presentations at this
conference will focus on the involvement of glial cells in brain development,
tumor formation and spread, normal and deranged energy metabolism (e.g., stroke
and hypoglycemia) and pain perception. Students and post-doctoral fellows will
be invited and will have a unique opportunity to learn from some of the most
distinguished glial scientists in the world.