* 0841297
* Promoting Ocean Literacy Through CAMEOS: Coastal, Atmospheric, and Marine Environmental Observing Studies
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Susan Williams, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2015
* USD 2,812,762.00

Promoting Ocean Literacy Through CAMEOS: Coastal, Atmospheric, and Marine
Environmental Observing Studies

Abstract

The Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML) CAMEOS program connects graduate student
research and K-12 science curricula to ocean literacy principles, marine
laboratory resources, and environmental technology. BML?s atmospheric, earth,
ocean, and computer scientists partner with science education experts to give
graduate students life-long skills in inquiry-based teaching, science content,
environmental observing technology, and cyber-infrastructure. Graduate fellows
then use their own investigations and training to develop motivational research
projects that provide field experiences and access to start-of-the-art sensor
networks for middle and high school students. Use of new environmental observing
systems and cyber-infrastructure transforms STEM teaching at all academic levels
by offering exploration and data-gathering tools for field studies,
collaboration, and real and ?virtual? research experiences in classrooms and
laboratories. K-12 teachers and students are presented with science role models
and opportunities to practice all tasks performed by professional scientists,
from creating research questions and collecting data to sharing results at
scientific conferences. Ocean processes are at the heart of global climate
predictions and failing fisheries, but are poorly understood by the general
public. Broad ocean literacy is needed to build ocean stewardship, strengthen
science literacy, and create a new generation of ocean leaders. CAMEOS builds on
national ocean and science literacy initiatives, and broadens participation of
under-represented graduate and K-12 students in inquiry-based STEM education.
Program participants and users of CAMEOS curricula and resources gain a greater
understanding of the importance of ocean processes, technological tools, and
research to their daily lives, science education, resource management, and
environmental stewardship.