* 0841479
* Collaborative Research:  Use of Genome Enabled Tools to Understand Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2013
* C. Phoebe Lostroh, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 76,346.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

C. Phoebe Lostroh Collaborative Research: Use of genome enabled tools to
understand symbiosis IOS- 0841479

The squid-Vibrio fischeri symbiosis has emerged as an engaging and important
model for studying animal colonization by bacteria. The availability of several
sequenced genomes in the genus Vibrio, has made this a more powerful system than
ever for elucidating the complex gene networks that enable the contrasting
lifestyles of bacteria. For this molecular genetics project which integrates
research and education, the investigators will construct mutant bacteria with
defects in each of the more than four thousand bacterial genes present in V.
fischeri. This tool for discovery will then be used to characterize bacterial
traits relevant to animal colonization in high-throughput assays by six research
teams comprised almost entirely of undergraduate researchers. This library of
mutants, along with data from the multiple parallel assays, will provide a high-
resolution network of functionally-related datasets indexed by gene that will
provide an unprecedented view of gene function in the context of the entire
genomes. This library of mutants will be publicly available for bioinformatics
analysis, and thus will fuel the next generation of experiments. Research
increasingly involves high-throughput molecular genetic and genomics-based
strategies for discovery that often necessitate the coordination of large teams.
Therefore, the large number of students participating in this project will be
well prepared for science careers in the 21st century.