* 0841521
* Genetics and Evolution of Reproductive Character Displacement in Phlox drumondii
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2016
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2016
* USD 999,999.00

This project will examine the evolutionary processes responsible for flower-
color divergence between populations of Phlox drummondii in areas with and
without the closely related P. cuspidata. This divergence represents one of the
best purported cases in plants of reproductive character displacement, in which
two similar species with overlapping ranges evolve to minimize the amount of
hybridization due to selection against gamete wastage. Combining both measures
of individual fitness and analysis of patterns of molecular variation in the
genes responsible for the flower-color change, the planned experiments will test
whether this divergence satisfies a set of criteria for character displacement
that have been developed over the past two decades, and thus determine whether
this divergence truly constitutes character displacement. They will also test
alternative explanations for the observed divergence, including local adaptation
to an environmental factor unrelated to interaction with P. cuspidata.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral component of the research program outlined
here is the teaching and training of students at a variety of educational
levels. Funds are explicitly requested to support the training of one
postdoctoral fellow and one graduate student. As in the past, undergraduates
will be actively engaged in this research, both as Independent Study students
during the academic year, and as summer research assistants. At the high school
and undergraduate levels, women and minorities under-represented in science will
be targeted for training in research.