* 0841686
* From Individuals to Communities:  Consequences of Ontogenetic Functional Diversity for Community Structure and Functioning
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Volker Rudolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2014
* USD 386,636.00

A central challenge in community ecology is to understand the connection between
biodiversity and the functioning of ecosystems. The traditional approach in
community ecology and particular in food web theory is based on the premise that
predictions can be made by treating a species as a homogenous entity. However,
no population is truly homogenous and individuals within a species often vary
considerably in their ecological function. By far the largest source of this
functional variation between individuals stems from differences in size and
developmental stage. Indeed, the functional variation across developmental
stages within a species often exceeds the variation across species. The
unresolved question is how this functional variation within species affects the
structure and functioning of natural ecosystems. This question will be answered
using a combination of field experiments manipulating the stage-structure in
predatory invertebrates in natural pond communities, and development of a new
theoretical framework that accounts for functional variation across
developmental stages. Together these studies will provide first insight into how
the ecological variation across developmental stages within species may alter
the structure, dynamics, and functioning of entire ecosystems. Human activities
are fundamentally changing ecological systems and natural populations. Our
ability to predict how such changes will affect the functioning of ecosystems
will critically depend on our understanding of the detailed mechanisms that
connect intraspecific diversity to ecosystem functions. The study will permit a
new detailed understanding of the mechanisms that determine how individuals
scale up to affect entire communities and their functioning. The obtained
results will advance our conceptual understanding of whether and what details
need to be included in a general predictive framework for community dynamics and
ecosystem processes and guide the development of conservation and harvest
strategies to assure that vital ecosystem functions are not lost in the future.
It will also provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, including underrepresented groups in science.