* 0841213
* CAREER: An Integrated Research/Educational Plan for Advancing RF Superconductivity for Particle Accelerators
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2015
* Matthias Liepe, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 03/31/2015
* USD 800,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0841213 INSTITUTION: Cornell University NSF PROGRAM: PHY ?
ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Liepe, Matthias U..
TITLE: CAREER: An Integrated Research/Educational Plan for Advancing RF
Superconductivity for Particle Accelerators

This proposal requests partial support for a program of research to
systematically characterize the radio-frequency(RF) surface resistance of
superconductors to advance superconducting microwave cavities for particle
accelerators and for an education and outreach program involving community
college faculty and students in the research. This will be carried out at the
Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-based Sciences and Education at Cornell
University.

The ultimate performance of a superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) accelerating
cavity is governed by two factors: the maximum accelerating gradient that can be
achieved without electrical breakdown, and the cavity Q (or Quality factor) when
operating near this maximum gradient. The higher the Q, the less power required
to achieve the maximum gradient, and therefore the less cost to both construct
and operate the accelerator. The optimal Q of a cavity at a given level of
excitation is related to the RF surface resistance of the cavity wall material,
and this surface resistance is in turn related to the maximum RF magnetic field
at the surface in a way that is both very sample dependent and theoretically
poorly understood. The focus of the proposed research program will be on
studying the mechanisms that limit the intrinsic Q in SRF cavities, and ways to
improve Q. The primary attention in studying these topics will be on the
superconductor niobium, which is the material of choice today for SRF cavities.
As a subsidiary topic the potential of the A-15 superconductor Nb3Sn for
providing highest intrinsic quality factor cavities will be explored. In
studying these topics it will be of critical importance to get statistically
significant data. This proposal addresses this challenge by developing a host
cavity for testing small material samples with fast turnaround.

A new generation of improved superconducting rf cavities would have
transformative, broad impact across accelerator-based sciences and engineering
by improving the energy reach, performance and scientific potential of future
particle accelerators. These next generation accelerators will fulfill the needs
for particle physics, nuclear physics, neutron science, X-ray science and free-
electron lasers. In addition, this research provides for the education of future
generations of accelerator scientists and engineers, which are in high demand.
Finally, this proposal includes a program to provide research opportunities in
the physical sciences specifically for community college students to encourage
them to pursue careers in science, technology, or science education. This large
and critical group of students usually has very limited or no access to cutting-
edge research opportunities and the proposed pilot program addresses this well-
recognized, but mostly unaddressed issue.