* 0841679
* Collaborative Research:   Joint influences of host genetics and community context on eco-evolutionary host-parasite dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Michael Goodisman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2013
* USD 385,000.00

Project title: Collaborative Research: Joint influences of host genetics and
community context on eco-evolutionary host-parasite dynamics

Why are some epidemics devastating to host populations, while others have only
small effects? This question is particularly timely given that epidemics of
infectious disease in wildlife populations have increased worldwide. In this
project, Duffy and Hall will study links between the severity of fungal parasite
epidemics in zooplankton host populations and interactions between evolutionary
and ecological processes. One key factor that may shape disease severity is
rapid evolution of disease resistance, fueled by genetic variation within host
populations. If true, genetic variation in resistance could potentially dictate
the severity of epidemics. If genetically diverse host populations can better
withstand disease, results from this project might then suggest worrisome,
causal links between worldwide increase in disease and the recent, widespread
loss of biodiversity. A second key factor that may shape disease severity is
predation. In particular, Duffy and Hall will consider the role of predators
which selectively prey on infected hosts (a common occurrence in nature). They
are particularly interested in whether predation and genetic variation in
resistance interact to determine epidemic severity. This project will use a
three-pronged approach to tackle these questions. It will combine intensive
studies of natural epidemics in lake plankton, laboratory experiments
manipulating host diversity and predation, and development of epidemiological
models that incorporate both rapid evolution and selective predation. The
processes examined and the modeling work naturally extend to many other disease
systems. Therefore, this work will ultimately produce theoretical guidance for
efforts seeking to understand and control the severity of wildlife disease.