* 0841793
* SGER:  Workgroup Protocols: Human Protocols for Synchronization of Task Planning, Execution and Information Exchange in Groups
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Stanley Peters, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David W. McDonald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 49,736.00

As organizations tackle increasingly sophisticated problems, they seek methods
for enhancing the collective intelligence of workgroups. A key problem is how to
coordinate activity when the task definitions, task owners, and communication
paths can be known only as the work unfolds. Can constraints be imposed on the
behavior of workgroup members that are flexible enough to allow this kind of
creativity, but structured enough to make best use of the group's cognitive
resources? Many organizations find dynamic workflow to be a challenging problem
and actively seek better methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot project
addresses the question of dynamic workflow using formal Workgroup Protocols as
an organizing principle. The first step is to define an execution model for
structuring the stream of tasks, without limiting the content of the tasks. The
next step is to define explicit protocols for such common activities as
planning, delegation, reporting, and so on. Finally, experiments will be
conducted with human subjects, to test impacts on performance and general
usability of the protocol framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this work rests in the novel approach to structuring collaborative work.
Rather than relying on free-form communication to allocate cognitive resources,
this research explores how design ideas from computer systems may be adapted to
fit emergent cognitive activity, and what kinds of modifications would be
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work would be seen in
three areas: (i) providing a new vision for managing knowledge work, with more
dynamic control over accountability and transparency; (ii) setting a research
agenda for developing tools, models, languages, and systems; and (iii)
suggesting massively-collaborative structures, similar to Wikipedia, but with
more intricate task dependencies and communication flows.