* 0841734
* Collaborative Research:   Biodiversity Survey of Freshwater Algae of the Hawaiian Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Alison Sherwood, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2015
* USD 499,700.00

An award has been made to the University of Hawaii under the direction of Dr.
Alison Sherwood to conduct a biological inventory of the freshwater algae of the
Hawaiian Islands. Dr. Patrick Kociolek of the University of Colorado at Boulder,
and Dr. Jeffrey Johansen of John Carroll University are collaborators on the
research. This project will produce the first comprehensive, well-illustrated
freshwater algal flora of a tropical region for anywhere in the world. The
principal freshwater habitats of the main Hawaiian Islands will be surveyed and
collections will be identified using morphological and molecular analyses. The
objectives are to 1) establish long-term archived collections of Hawaiian
freshwater algae morphological and genetic studies, 2) make all data available
through a project database and website, and 3) describe newly discovered
freshwater algal taxa from the Hawaiian Islands. This project blends traditional
taxonomy with bioinformatic analysis and data display. The survey brings
together a top-tier team of algal taxonomists, all of whom have previous
experience with the Hawaiian algal flora, to collect, document and describe the
freshwater algae of the Hawaiian Islands. Work will be coordinated through the
University of Hawaii and will bring together researchers from four different
institutions and enhance partnerships with multiple agencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five graduate students, five undergraduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow will be trained in algal surveying and culturing techniques,
morphological identification of freshwater algae and molecular methods. Pacific
Islander undergraduate students will be hosted through research internships each
of three summers through the University of Hawaii?s Undergraduate Mentoring in
Environmental Biology program. A year-round undergraduate research internship
for a Native Hawaiian student will be hosted at the University of Hawaii. A
family program of stream exploration through the Hawaii Nature Center will be
offered each summer, aimed at middle school students. Surveys in taro fields
will foster communication between the researchers and farmers from the Native
Hawaiian community. In addition, the results of the proposed surveys will be
made available to the scientific community and beyond through the establishment
of: 1) the online Hawaiian Freshwater Algal Database, and 2) a website providing
summary data for species.