* 0841594
* Integrity of the Plant Golgi
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Federica Brandizzi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2010
* USD 120,001.00

Intellectual merit. It is well established that cells of plants, fungi, and
animals contain organelles that carry out vital functions for the life of a
cell. What is yet to be learned is how the identity of organelles is established
and maintained. In this project, the plant Golgi apparatus will be used as a
model to address this fundamental question. In plants, the Golgi apparatus is
composed of highly mobile stacks of membranes that are dispersed on tubules of
another organelle, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The plant Golgi receives
proteins and membranes from proximal and distal locations; it is involved in
their modification and sorting to their final destinations and in synthesizing
the cell wall that encapsulates plant cells. The flow of membrane proteins
through the Golgi as well as the dynamic exchange of peripherally associated
proteins require continuous remodeling of this organelle. Yet, the stacks
withstand dispersion during the intense traffic of proteins to and from the
Golgi. This raises the fundamental biological question: How does the Golgi
retain its integrity (i.e. architecture and composition)? The integrity of the
Golgi depends on the organelle's ability to dynamically maintain its steady-
state architecture and membrane distribution during protein traffic. Using a
screen specifically developed for the plant Golgi in the Brandizzi laboratory, a
unique set of mutants was identified in which an established Golgi marker is
partially mis-targeted to other organelles. This screen is exciting because it
sets the foundation for identifying key players of the machinery that controls
plant Golgi integrity. In this project, characterization of the Golgi mutants
will be carried out to identify the protein(s) responsible for the maintenance
of the architecture and membrane steady-state distribution at the plant Golgi.
This work will lead to answers to fundamental questions regarding organelle
biogenesis and important differences in Golgi organization and function across
eukaryotic biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Plants are
the primary energy source of all biospheric development: all animals survive on
plants, both directly and indirectly. The secretory pathway of plants plays a
fundamental role in the conversion of fixed carbon into energy-rich materials
such as proteins, lipids, and complex sugars. These plant-derived products are
important not only for nutrition, but they have the potential to be used as
renewable fuels, lubricants, textiles, and building materials of all kinds. The
plant Golgi is a key organelle in cell wall biosynthesis and storage protein
deposition. Because unique variations exist among systems as a result of
evolutionary adaptation, it is important to study the plant Golgi if humanity is
to tap into the full potential of plants as primary providers of bio-molecules
on earth. This project will also enable the Brandizzi lab to continue their
engagement in teaching and outreach activities to communicate to students and
teachers the scientific discoveries in plant science and their impact on our
society.