* 0841936
* Collaborative Research:  Recovery and analysis of preserved Poaceae viruses to examine microbial dispersal and evolution during an era of global change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* W. Allen Miller, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2015
* USD 92,305.00

Wheat, oats, rice, and other cereal grains are key pillars of human societies
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;Along with other members of the grass family, these plants
provide the majority of the&lt;br/&gt;calories humans eat, either directly as
grains or indirectly as meat and milk produced by&lt;br/&gt;grazing animals.
Unfortunately, these important grasses are plagued by several
families&lt;br/&gt;of plant viruses, including the barley and cereal yellow
dwarf viruses, which damage&lt;br/&gt;cereal grain production worldwide. These
viruses also harm wild grasses and can&lt;br/&gt;advance the spread of invasive
species in nature. How have influential viruses like&lt;br/&gt;these emerged and
what factors have contributed to their spread and diversification?
To&lt;br/&gt;find clues about virus history, the project team will recover and
analyze genetic&lt;br/&gt;sequences of old viruses preserved within historical
collections of dried plants around&lt;br/&gt;the world. Phylogenetic analysis of
the viruses will reveal how these viruses have&lt;br/&gt;spread over time and
permit estimates of dates of key events in their history. The&lt;br/&gt;research
will also provide information on the influence of humans on the spread of
plant&lt;br/&gt;viruses.&lt;br/&gt;Human development of agriculture and global
trade are two factors that have likely&lt;br/&gt;influenced the emergence and
spread of potent viruses. This research will provide&lt;br/&gt;missing
information about virus dynamics in the past and produce new insight into
the&lt;br/&gt;ways by which human activities influence the development of virus
threats. The&lt;br/&gt;project's broader impact will include training of
educators and students from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups, contributions to
microbial ecology outreach efforts through a&lt;br/&gt;science museum, and the
addition of information about virus relationships to curated&lt;br/&gt;plant
collections.&lt;br/&gt;NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:0843140 PI Name:Malmstrom, Carolyn&lt;br/&gt;Printed