* 0841786
* Organic and Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Robert Bergman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2014
* USD 770,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports the
efforts of Dr. Robert G. Bergman of the University of California Berkeley to
explore new reactions of cobalt-bound nitrosyl groups and alkenes, followed by
reactions involving coordinated alkenes and other reagents. These reactions
focus specifically on strained and unstrained, unsaturated hydrocarbons, so that
the basic characteristics of the reactions can be most clearly elucidated.
Reactions of the dinitrosyl-alkene complexes with a range of electrophiles are
examined to determine the reaction components (e.g., base, Lewis acid additives)
that are required to successfully form the new carbon-carbon bonds between the
adducts and the electrophiles. Fundamental studies of the mechanisms of adduct
formation, adduct dissociation and carbon-carbon bond forming processes include
detailed kinetics and isotope labeling experiments. Particular attention is paid
to understanding the role of the Lewis acid and promoter that facilitates these
transformations. Parallel to the studies of the cobalt-based systems, Professor
Bergman and his group are exploring whether dinitrosyl complexes involving other
metals and ligands will engage in analogous chemistries with simple alkenyl
derivatives. Computational methods, primarily with density functional theory,
are used to predict which systems are likely to undergo reversible dinitrosyl-
alkene adduct formation. Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students
working on this program receive excellent training. Professor Bergman has
recently helped to initiate a new curriculum emphasizing science literacy for
students in grades 3-5 in the local Alameda County, CA public schools.