* 0841532
* Workshop on a "Drug Discovery" Approach to Breakthroughs in Batteries.  To be Held September 8-9, 2008 at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* James Caruthers, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 39,810.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: ECS-0841532

Proposal Title: Workshop on a "Drug Discovery" Approach to Breakthroughs in
Batteries to be held at MIT on September 8-9, 2008 PI Name: Delgass, W. Nicholas
PI Institution: Purdue University

Objectives:

At a recent IEEE workshop for Congressional staff on plug-in hybrid cars, the
questions were posed: "What is the probability that basic researchers in the US
could come up with a new battery twice as good for cars as the newly emerging
standard, the iron phosphate lithium ion battery? What could be done to maximize
the probability that this goal is actually achieved, as soon as possible?" This
workshop will attempt to answer the second question, with reference to what NSF
can do. As part of its discussions, it will ask what can be done to take full
advantage of approaches to creating breakthroughs used in the pharmaceutical
industry, where computer simulation based on computational intelligence and
quantum mechanical modeling has made it possible to search a larger space of
possibilities more quickly and more cheaply than conventional approaches.

Scientific merit of proposal:

The search for better pharmaceuticals has demonstrated how a challenging testbed
pursued in a serious manner can be of great value in stretching the underlying
disciplines, and in building new bridges between disciplines. The chairman of
this workshop intends to build on that prior success, to create a new scientific
success story here. Input from the NSF communities in Adaptive and Intelligent
Systems, and in Quantum Modeling, will also enhance the chances of success. A
breakthrough in batteries of this magnitude would be highly transformative.

Broad impact of proposal:

The decision to fund this workshop at the present time is mainly based on its
broader impacts. The issue of gasoline dependency and prices has already become
a matter of life and death, and is expected to become a worse and worse threat
to us all until and unless plug-in hybrid cars and electric cars penetrate half
the world automotive fleet. That rate of penetration -particularly in US car
production -is being substantially delayed by lack of good enough, cheap enough
batteries available to US manufacturers. It is hoped that this workshop will
enable the research community to contribute the most that it can to meeting this
national need and grand challenge.