* 0841884
* LTREB:   Evaluating population cycles and spatial synchrony using long-term demographic and genetic data on snowshoe hares
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* L. Scott Mills, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2015
* USD 445,772.00

Snowshoe hares provide the classical textbook example of cyclical, synchronous
fluctuations in population size. Hare cycles in Canada and Alaska are legendary
for their 8-11 year regularity and their 20- to 50-fold amplitude difference
between peak and low population densities. Equally as remarkable, population
fluctuations are synchronized across much of this range. Cyclic dynamics and
spatial synchrony appear to break down in the southern parts of the hare's
range, where habitats for snowshoe hares are more fragmented and movements among
populations more difficult. The factors responsible for population synchrony and
for the breakdown of synchrony, remain speculative. By extending a unique,
spatially extensive time series of hare dynamics in the continguous US, PI Mills
proposes to test long-held hypotheses accounting for a latitudinal gradient in
hare dynamics and the role of population connectivity in generating these
geographic patterns. Nine years of preliminary data suggest that southern
populations exhibit greater temporal fluctuations than previously recognized,
and that these populations are more distinct genetically than are northern
populations spanning a similar spatial extent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding patterns and causes of hare dynamics will
advance the basic understanding of factors that influence large-scale population
processes, with implications for conserving and managing many ecological
systems. Population cycles and synchronous dynamics, though famously exemplified
by snowshoe hares, occur in many taxa, including various insects, fish, oaks,
viruses, grouse, and large mammals including caribou and muskox. Of particular
conservation concern is the possibility that population synchrony and
connectivity may directly affect the long-term persistence of a species. An
additional application of this research to conservation arises because Canada
lynx, which feed almost exclusively on snowshoe hares, are federally threatened
in the U.S. outside of Alaska. The PI has established a formal program for
undergraduate mentoring, and plans to involve a host of graduate and
undergraduate students in this field project. Finally, all data collected will
be available to the general public within 1.5 years of their collection.