* 0841546
* Photosynthesis and Phloem Anatomy
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* William Adams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2013
* USD 486,203.00

The proposed work seeks to improve the currently incomplete understanding of
factors that determine, and may limit, plants' maximal rates of photosynthesis
and productivity. By combining physiological and anatomical assessments, it will
be tested whether there is a fundamental relationship between the maximum rate
of plant photosynthesis and specific anatomical features that may be
determinants of the capacity of leaves' sugar-exporting (phloem) vessels. Sugar
export may sometimes present a bottleneck to carbon distribution throughout the
plant and thus to plant productivity. In particular, leaf loading vein density
and the ratio of loading cells per exporting phloem vessel will be assessed in
species with different mechanisms of phloem loading. If a relationship between
photosynthetic capacity and phloem features can be established, these features
will be available to: (i) identify plant species and varieties with superior
photosynthetic performance and productivity; (ii) inform future engineering
efforts directed at manipulating these anatomical features to enhance plant
productivity. It will furthermore be established whether features such as high
loading vein density are associated with enhanced productivity under dry
conditions and/or cool temperatures. If such an advantage can be established,
this will aid in the selection of plants with superior productivity in warm/arid
regions that are expanding under global climate change and at higher latitudes
and altitudes into which crop cultivation is expanding under the present global
warming trend and where plants will experience seasonal exposure to colder than
usual temperatures. The knowledge gained from this work will aid in the effort
to maintain, and improve, crop productivity as well as carbon sequestration,
which are urgent goals given the burgeoning human population as well as the
current and projected impact of climate change. Furthermore, the PIs will
utilize their existing connections to recruit students from diverse backgrounds
into the proposed research and resulting publication/dissemination efforts as
well as for outreach efforts. Lastly, the PIs are planning to continue their
publication activity in venues reaching a broad audience including non-
specialists.