* 0841440
* CAREER: A Portable Solar Adaptive Optics System for High-Resolution Imaging Investigations
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Deqing Ren, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2015
* USD 547,581.00

The PI will develop the first portable solar adaptive optics system (PSAO) at
California State University Northridge (CSUN) for scientific observations in the
1 ìm to 4.5 ìm infrared band. He will use the PSAO to perform high-resolution
solar imaging with the National Solar Observatory (NSO) 1.5-meter McMath-Pierce
telescope (McMP) on Kitt Peak near Tucson, Arizona. The PSAO will take full
advantage of the McMP's large aperture and high magnetic sensitivity in the IR.
The PSAO will utilize a wave-front sensor and deformable mirror with 120
efficient actuators to efficiently correct for atmospheric turbulence, in order
to provide high angular resolution images in the near IR. The expected
scientific results will enhance our understanding of the dynamics and structure
of small scale magnetic fields on the Sun.

The PI also plans to explore and evaluate Multi-Conjugate Adaptive Optics (MCAO)
approaches for solar imaging, since this technique provides a large corrected
field of view for observing solar active regions. For nighttime astronomy MCAO
systems, 3D tomographic wave-front sensing and reconstruction have been
difficult problems to solve, since multiple laser guide stars are needed. The
Sun, however, provides an excellent opportunity for MCAO tomographic wave-front
sensing, since any number of equivalent 'guide stars' can be obtained from sites
on the solar disk itself. The PI will use the PSAO's wave-front sensor to
measure and reconstruct turbulence-induced wave-front errors at different
altitudes, allowing a quantitative performance evaluation of the MCAO technique.

Once the PSAO is fully demonstrated, the PI plans to transfer his techniques to
the NSO at Kitt Peak and make 50% of PSAO observing time available to the wider
solar community. His tomographic wave-front sensing and reconstruction efforts
will be important steps forward in developing future solar MCAO technologies for
solar telescopes. This project will also integrate research and education
through the development of a new Laboratory for High-Resolution Solar Imaging at
CSUN. This lab will be used intensively for teaching, training, and technology
development at CSUN, and initially involve at least ten undergraduates, three
graduate students, and one postdoctoral researcher. This project will provide
long-term cross-disciplinary training in physics and astronomy to CSUN students,
and the research results will be incorporated into courses taught by the PI. The
proposed program will also create a long-term partnership between CSUN and the
NSO, which will provide excellent opportunities for additional student training
and education at Kitt Peak.