* 0841809
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Interactive effects of chronic N deposition, acidification, and phosphorus limitation on coupled element cycling in streams
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Herbert Valett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd A. Crowl
* 05/31/2010
* USD 88,680.00

Human activity has doubled the amount of nitrogen on the landscape, creating a
pollution problem and changing the balance among multiple nutrients that limit
biological activity in ecosystems. At the same time, other disturbances, such as
acidification, interact with nitrogen enrichment in ways that strongly influence
the productivity and health of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. This project
examines the interactions among multiple elements and disturbances (nitrogen,
phosphorus, metals, and acidification) along a continuum from the atmosphere
through soils to streams. This project takes advantage of two unique experiments
in which entire watersheds have been experimentally enriched with nitrogen and
acid for nearly two decades. A series of new studies in those watersheds examine
how chemical and biological changes in soils alter the ability of streams to
take up, use, and retain nitrogen and phosphorus. These nutrient interactions
are then related to important biological processes that affect the productivity
and health of streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses an important
pollution problem that requires an approach that integrates biology and
geochemistry along flow paths that link the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
This type of integration is a challenge, but needed for effective environmental
management, environmental research, and science teaching. Results from this
project and interactions between university and US Forest Service researchers
will inform effective management of watersheds faced with multiple pollution
problems. A series of collaborative workshops in which high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students work with researchers and teachers will
promote multidisciplinary learning. The collaboration will seek to develop a
computer simulation model for use in teaching integrated biology and chemistry
in high school and college science curricula. &lt;br/&gt;