* 0841822
* Collaborative Research:   Consumer control of high-productivity, low-nutrient ecosystems:  Enhancement of primary productivity by grazing fish in Lake Tanganyika
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Peter McIntyre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Todd A. Crowl
* 04/30/2010
* USD 160,450.00

Many of the most species-rich ecosystems on Earth, such as coral reefs and
tropical rain forests, are characterized by high plant and animal productivity
despite an apparent lack of the nutrients required to sustain plant growth. The
east African rift valley lakes may be the only high-productivity, low-nutrient
freshwater ecosystems. The profusion of life in these lakes is concentrated at
their edges, where sufficient light reaches the lake bottom to allow for high
rates of photosynthesis of the algae growing on the rocks. But how is high algal
productivity maintained in the face of 1) the extreme scarcity of critical
nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus in the environment and 2) the intense
grazing pressure imposed by high densities and rich diversity of herbivorous
fish? The answer may lie in the grazing fish themselves. The hypothesis that the
negative impacts of fish on their algal food resource are offset by the positive
effects of fish on nutrient availability will be tested. Lab and field
experiments will be used to test whether fish promote ecosystem productivity by
1) slowing the loss of nutrients to deeper waters by storing nutrients in their
bodies; 2) rapidly recycling dietary nutrients between algae, animals, and the
environment; and 3) promoting the growth of types of algae that are able to use
and retain forms of nutrients unavailable to most algal species. Thus, algae-
eating fish may encourage the growth of their own food resources by speeding up
the nutrient cycle, stockpiling nutrients, and increasing the influx of new
nutrients into the ecosystem. Testing the importance of fish in sustaining lake
productivity requires measuring nutrient storage and recycling by fish,
experimentally testing whether algae grow faster when fish are present,
measuring inputs of nutrients from the depths of the lake, and using theoretical
models to compare the importance of fish and other nutrient inputs. This
combination of activities will be pursued both under field conditions in Africa
and in laboratories in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
help to guide efforts to protect the hundreds of unique species and the
globally-important fishery of Lake Tanganyika by clarifying two critical issues.
First, fishermen are catching too many fish in many lakes worldwide, including
Lake Tanganyika. This overharvest may remove too many nutrients from the lake,
or reduce the rate of nutrient recycling so that algae grow more slowly. By that
mechanism, fishing could actually undercut the future productivity of the lake.
Second, climate change is warming the surface waters of the lake and reducing
the seasonal winds that cause cold, nutrient rich waters to periodically well up
from the depths of the lake. Reduction in the frequency of influx of these deep-
water nutrients is cutting off the algal growth that sustains the fish. This
research will offer the first thorough evaluation of how these human-imposed
factors will affect the productivity of Lake Tanganyika, which supports a
regional human economy. The project will increase public awareness of Lake
Tanganyika?s aquatic life through a website, an article for an aquarium hobbyist
magazine, and a popular science article. Finally, many students from Wright
State University and the University of Michigan will gain professional
experience through involvement in the project. This will include students from
Africa as well as Americans. Partnerships with African and global non-profit
organizations will further broaden the impact of the research.&lt;br/&gt;