* 0841514
* SGER:   Discrete Volumetric Curvature Flow for Graphics Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Xianfeng Gu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2009
* USD 78,999.00

SGER: Discrete Volumetric Curvature Flow for Engineering
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given a surface in the three dimensional
Euclidean space, the surface can be deformed to one of the three canonical
shapes, the unit sphere, the plane and the hyperbolic disk. Furthermore, the
deformation is angle preserving. The Poincare's conjecture and Thurton's
geometrization conjecture generalize the fact to three dimensional manifolds.
Basically, a three manifold can be decomposed to pieces in a canonical way, with
each piece admitting one of eight geometries. The canonical Riemannian metric
plays important roles in many engineering applications, such as hexahedral
meshing, volumetric parameterization and volumetric spline construction. The
proof of Poincare's conjecture offers a powerful tool to compute such metrics,
Ricci flow. The Ricci flow is the process to deform the Riemannian metric
proportional to the curvature, such that the curvature evolves according to heat
diffusion. Eventually, the curvature is constant everywhere, and the canonical
metric is achieved. The proposal aims at designing and implementing discrete
curvature flow for volumes, and apply it in graphics, geometric modeling,
medical imaging and many other engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
3-manifolds are represented as tetrahedral meshes. The edge lengths and dihedral
angles encode the Riemannian metric and curvatures of the mesh. Discrete
curvature flow deforms the edge lengths according to the curvatures, such that
at the steady state, the curvature is constant everywhere. Discrete curvature
flow can be formulated as the gradient flow of special energy forms. The
energies can be optimized using Newton's method; the critical point gives the
desired metric. Furthermore, the proposal also uses volumetric harmonic
differential forms to compute the geometric structures based on Hodge theory.
The discrete curvature flow method is proposed to tackle several important
engineering applications. Hexahedral meshing has been the Holy Grail in meshing
research field for years. By deforming the volume to simpler shapes and
tessellating the deformed volume, hex-remeshing can be obtained
straightforwardly. Volumetric parameterization is the foundation for texture
mapping, shape matching, registration and comparison. Curvature flow maps
general volumes to canonical shapes, which induces natural parameterizations.
Constructing volumetric splines, which is consistent with the boundary surface
spline, is a long lasting open problem in geometric modeling field. The
curvature flow method can offer new insights and tools to tackle the
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;