* 0841031
* SGER: Metadata-Driven Approach to Discovery-Oriented Exploration of Massive Data Sets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Ruth West, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2010
* USD 101,457.00

Multi-scale, multi-modal, multi-site science, such as terrestrial observatories
and other dynamic and adaptive sensor-based application, high resolution sub-
cellular imaging, or genomic analyses of communities of organisms, builds large
data sets that can serve as the basis for in silico exploration and analysis.
Often the data collections represent a wide range of disciplines, yet there are
often a limited number of interpretations, guided by an individual scientist?s
expertise. Intuitive exploration that transcends disciplinary boundaries and
expertise could enhance the process of interdisciplinary collaboration, as well
as drive the process of discovery in new directions. This proposal seeks to
develop a dynamic metadata-based approach for intuitive, interactive, and
immersive multi-scale, multi-modal data exploration application to a wide range
of data sets and their associated metadata. The original focus will be on
metagenomics data from the Global Ocean Survey. The development of the
environment will enable a different dynamic sorting and sifting of data rather
than relying solely on known or expected features. Such open-ended exploration
occurs not only in observational science, but also in tasks ranging from network
intrusion detection. Students will be engaged in the research and collaboration,
with dissemination in public cultural activities, as well as through more
traditional academic venues.