* 0841957
* Genetic basis of reproductive isolation in Solanum Sect. Lycopersicon
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Leonie Moyle, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2013
* USD 512,092.00

Species are isolated from each other by barriers to reproduction, so that their
hybrids are generally inviable and/or sterile. The research proposal involves
three projects that examine the genetic basis of species reproductive isolating
barriers in the plant group that includes the domesticated tomato, Solanum
lycopersicum. First, the chromosomal location of genes that contribute to
species barriers will be identified using "trait mapping" in hybrid populations
between two species. Second, the degree to which different species share the
same reproductive isolating genes will be examined using classical genetic
crosses between hybrid genotypes. Third, the specific genes that lie within
identified chromosomal regions will be uncovered, using recombinational "fine-
mapping" with molecular genetic markers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the
genes that cause hybrid sterility can provide insight into fundamental
biological processes, including how new species are formed, and which genes
contribute to reproductive functions. In addition, this research has practical
applications. Wild relatives of agronomically-important species, such as tomato,
are useful sources of natural genetic variation (e.g. for disease resistance, or
tolerance to drought stress). Understanding the genetic mechanisms of
reproductive isolation between these species can aid in developing breeding
strategies to overcome these sterility barriers during crop improvement.