* 0841112
* SGER:  Exploratory research on complex network approach to epidemic spreading in rural regions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Walter Schumm, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2009
* USD 50,001.00

The objective of this proposed exploratory and potentially transformative
research is to use complex network theory to model and analyze the spread of
epidemics in rural regions, with special emphasis on the study of graph
characteristics and dynamics, and their impact on the speed and direction of the
epidemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social and economic costs of epidemics may
be less well understood today than ever, yet infection of only a few animals or
humans can have serious implications for international trade and policies.
Furthermore, the loss of far greater numbers of livestock or people is quite
possible, with inherently&lt;br/&gt;enormous social and economic costs.
Moreover, methods for detecting and forecasting epidemics that may have worked
in the past in urban or rural overseas regions may not apply to rural regions in
the Plains states today.&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
develop optimized guidelines that administrators can use to establish procedures
and realign resources to help mitigate the effects of an outbreak in rural
regions, caused by a malicious attack or by natural
occurrences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will start working on the
following four research tasks: &lt;br/&gt;(1) collect empirical data on rural
Kansas and create the underlying networks, (2) extend the underlying network to
families of graphs and study the graph-theoretical metrics of those networks to
predict their behavior and dynamics during an epidemic, &lt;br/&gt;(3) create
accurate and portable simulators running on PCs, and &lt;br/&gt;(4) develop
optimized guidelines to control outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit. This research is intended to lead to scientific breakthroughs in complex
network theory and analysis. In particular, families of networks will be
analyzed to determine critical structures for the spread of epidemics. New
metrics will be proposed to quantitatively measure the network robustness
relative to epidemic spreading. Additionally, a new type of analysis for the
rate at which an infection spreads will also be generated using weighted and
asymmetric networks. This new analysis should provide greater accuracy in
predicting the spread of an epidemic. This knowledge can then be incorporated
into policies/plans to curb the spread of an infectious
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This research is intended to have
a broad impact on society and related research. For example, society will
benefit by having more effective policies to decrease the effects of an
epidemic. To clarify, in all cases, disease epidemics in human or animal
populations may cause extensive social and economic losses. Being able to have
an environment that is intrinsically robust to these type of attacks would
provide a strong defense against malicious individuals as well as protection
against natural events/disasters. Thus, the proposed work will foster
interdisciplinary collaboration among rural sociologists and network experts.
Finally, the research team will continue to mentor and recruit minorities and
females into their research group, which is an interdisciplinary team.