* 0841644
* Molluscan Neuroscience Conference to be held February 13-16, 2009, at the University of Puerto Rico
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Mark Miller, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,000.00

This project is for partial support of the Moluscan Neuroscience 2009 conference
to be held February 13-16, 2009 at the Institute of Neurobiology, a free-
standing unit of the University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus. This is
the third conference dedicated exclusively to Molluscan Neuroscience since 1997.
The other conferences were the Cell and Molecular Biology of Aplysia and Related
Invertebrates meetings held at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) in 1992
and 1997. This meeting has as one of its goals to enhance interaction among
investigators in the field with a format and scale modeled on the CSHL meetings
held in the 90's. The meeting will bring together world experts and students in
an environment geared towards interaction, participation and discussion of the
latest ideas and findings in the field. It will assemble the international
community of neuroscientists and students who use molluscan models to
investigate a wide spectrum of fundamental neurobiological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sessions and symposia will address specific
thematic areas in which this field has been most influential. These include:
Learning and Memory, Central Pattern Generators, Evolution of Neural Circuits
and Behaviors, Development, Neuromodulation, Ion Channels, and Signal
Transduction. Emphasis will be placed on platforms designed to increase the
accessibility of these resources to the broader Neuroscience community.
Workshops will be organized to discuss the use of new tools such as the emerging
Genome Projects for Aplysia and related gastropods, cephalopod genomics, genomic
and microchemical analysis of single cells and cell compartments, and
NeuronBank.org initiatives for archiving identified neurons and their homologs
across species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funds will enable multiple educational
and outreach initiatives by providing travel, housing, and registration support
for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows who could not otherwise attend.
Emphasis will be placed on promoting participation of junior investigators,
women, local students from Puerto Rico, and members of other groups that are
under-represented in this field. This outreach reflects a firm conviction that
the greatest beneficiary of such broadened participation will be the field of
Molluscan Neuroscience itself. The host institution will provide administrative
support and all funds related to the conference venue.