* 0841911
* The Importance of Molybdenum Speciation to Nitrogen Fixation and Assimilation in Lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Douglas Capone, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 533,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The productivity of many aquatic
ecosystems is often limited by the availability of a key nutrient. In the oceans
and in some lakes nitrogen is often that key limiting nutrient. Nitrogen, which
is critical for life, occurs in diverse chemical forms including nitrogen gas,
ammonium, nitrate and various organic species such as amino acids (the building
blocks of proteins) and nucleic acids (the building blocks of DNA). Nitrogen can
be converted among these species by various microbes which thereby affect the
relative availability of forms of nitrogen useful to plants (e.g. nitrate and
ammonium) and higher organisms. Nitrogen cycle processes may themselves be
limited by other nutrient factors. For instance, many of the key enzyme
reactions in the biological nitrogen cycle require metals for their activity. In
particular, molybdenum, is a required component of the enzymes of the nitrogen
cycle pathways involved in the uptake of nitrate (nitrate assimilation) and
nitrogen gas (nitrogen fixation). In lake ecosystems, a major unknown is how
nutrient trace metals that generally exist at very low concentrations control
the cycling of nitrogen. The main objective of this study is to determine how
the chemical form of nutrient trace metals, such as molybdenum (as well as iron
and copper), affect the capacity of organisms to take them up. Studies will be
undertaken in three lakes in California and Nevada with contrasting productivity
and trace metal concentration. Whereas the uptake of nitrate and nitrogen gas is
often controlled by iron availability in marine systems, it is hypothesized that
in lakes the limiting trace element for these processes is molybdenum. To test
this hypothesis, the PI's have developed new analytical techniques that measure
the different chemical species of molybdenum in these lakes. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide considerable new information on the
importance of metal availability and form in controlling key nitrogen cycle
processes. High quality data on metal abundance in lakes is scarce. These
studies will therefore provide information on how metal loading has changed and
affected these systems over time. Extensive development and subsequent human
perturbations have occurred since the earlier intensive studies were conducted
in the watersheds of some of these lakes. The project will provide employment
and training in state of the art techniques and approaches for undergraduate,
graduate students and postdoctoral associates. The PIs teach at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels and are active in K-grey education and
outreach programs. Both are activists in increasing gender and ethnic diversity
in the environmental sciences. The results will be widely disseminated through
presentations and publications.