* 0841275
* SGER: Multi-Tier Indexing for Web Search Engines
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This project is adapting prior work on federated search to create a more
selective approach to searching web indexes that we call topic-partitioned
indexing. Each subset (shard) of a topic-partitioned index covers specific
content areas, so that only shards covering the query?s topic area(s) need to be
searched. Our research is developing methods to efficiently assign documents to
shards. Supervised and unsupervised techniques are used to match queries to
shards. The result is a selective search that delivers similar accuracy as more
exhaustive searches, but requires an order of magnitude less effort, thus
yielding significant computational and financial savings. The project is using
the Google/IBM cluster to crawl the web and perform the data cleansing and pre-
processing necessary to develop a web dataset of 500 million to 1 billion
documents to support the research. Additional effort is being devoted to
producing a corpus that is useful for a broad range of research purposes. A
project goal is to share the dataset with other researchers on the Google/IBM
cluster, and eventually with a broader research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have three types of broad
impact. The data centers of large web search companies are expensive and major
consumers of electrical power, thus reducing their costs has significant
financial and environmental benefits. Lower computational costs make it
practical for academic researchers to conduct research on datasets that web
search companies consider credible, thus increasing the impact of academic
research. Finally, research datasets such ours typically have long life spans
and are used for diverse research projects by scientists around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;