* 0841758
* Linking Host Diversity and Amphibian Disease:  Experimental and Field Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Pieter Johnson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2013
* USD 417,661.00

Host-parasite interactions are embedded within dynamic, often highly disturbed
environments, which can sharply alter patterns of infection and disease risk
among hosts. Changes in land use and the resulting shifts in biological
communities have been linked to the emergence of pathogens with medical and
veterinary importance. However, the ecological mechanisms responsible for
increases in infection often remain conjectural. This proposal examines how the
ongoing transformation of landscapes surrounding wetlands influences an emerging
issue of conservation importance: amphibian limb deformities. The flatworm
parasite Ribeiroia ondatrae, which sequentially infects freshwater snails,
larval amphibians, and birds, has been linked to widespread limb deformities in
amphibians. Infection and the resulting malformations also increase amphibian
mortality, potentially causing declines in amphibian populations. Building upon
previously funded NSF research and ecological theory, the current proposal
combines broad-scale field surveys and mechanistic experiments to understand how
land use change, by altering host density and host diversity, will promote or
limit Ribeiroia abundance and amphibian malformations. This effort will
specifically seek to identify how biodiversity losses in freshwater ecosystems
affect the transmission of pathogenic parasites, such as Ribeiroia. Considering
the growing number of emerging infections that threaten human health and
wildlife conservation, results of the proposed efforts have broad application
potential. Ribeiroia is not only growing in conservation importance itself, but
is an excellent analog for other parasite infections of economic and human-
health significance (e.g., human blood flukes). This proposal would further
support cooperative efforts among amphibian biologists and ecologists to address
ongoing declines in amphibian populations worldwide.