* 0841165
* Photochemical Aging of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons on Asian Particulate Matter
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Staci Simonich, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2013
* USD 332,945.00

The primary objective of the research is to understand the effect of
photochemical aging on the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) composition of
Asian particulate matter (PM) during trans-Pacific atmospheric transport to the
U.S. West Coast. The principal investigators hypothesize that nitro-PAHs (NPAHs)
and oxy-PAHs (OPAHs) are formed on Asian PM during trans-Pacific atmospheric
transport. The specific goal of this research is to use aerosol reactors to
study the photochemical aging of size-fractionated Asian PM in the laboratory.
While incomplete combustion results in the formation of unsubstituted PAHs, both
nitro-PAHs and oxy-PAHs result from both direct emission during incomplete
combustion and reactions of unsubstituted PAHs with photochemical reactants
(ozone, hydroxyl radical and nitrogen oxides) during the daytime and reactions
with nitrate radicals at night. It is likely that PAHs react with these oxidants
during trans-Pacific transport to form NPAH and OPAH. Existing aerosol samples
from both Asia and Oregon, containing Asian PM, will be used for the laboratory
studies of PAH aging. Chemical oxidation of PAHs on aerosol samples will be
carried out and subsequently analyzed in collaboration with colleagues at the
University of Bordeaux.

The activity includes training a graduate student and continued inclusion of a
faculty member from Central Oregon Community College (COCC) and her
undergraduate students in the research. COCC undergraduate students will learn
to conduct statistical manipulations of a large research data set, as well as
understand the process of identifying and quantifying PAHs using mass
spectrometry. Finally, the results of the research could have global
environmental policy implications with regard to combustion emission controls in
Asia.