* 0841641
* US - Tanzania Dissertation Enhancement: Does climate change drive population divergence in African highlands? Investigations through spatially explicit paleoclimate analyses
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* John Bates, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Carleen Maitland
* 03/31/2011
* USD 14,375.00

Under this Doctoral Dissertation Enhancement Project, Ms. Lucinda Lawson will
conduct further research in Tanzania in the exploration of genetic variation
within and between populations of African reed frogs and incorporates spatial
distribution and landscape characteristics to understand the biological and
evolutionary processes that have produced the observed patterns of variation.
This project investigates the population genetics of three co-occurring montane
members of the genus Hyperolius, which have an endemic diversification within
these mountains. Preliminary results indicate that populations show significant
structure throughout this area, with a clear pattern of Northward colonization,
potentially mitigated by climate cycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Eastern Arc
Mountains are a Conservation International Biodiversity Hot Spot, with a
substantial diversity of amphibians, almost all of which are endemic to this
tiny area. Lawson will sample localities predicted by bioclim models in Diva-GIS
from the paraphyletic ?break zone? between haplotypes. She will also extend this
work through the highlands of Malawi to sample populations thought to be
outgroups to all Eastern Arc populations. During this time Lawson will be
working with W. Ngalason (Tanzanian PhD student) on elevational patterns of
Eastern Arc amphibians in the field and in the collections at the University of
Dar es Salaam, and will conduct survey work of understudied mountains with the
East African Montane Herpetology working group, of which she and W. Ngalason are
members. This study will be one of the first to combine ecological and
phylogenetic information for a genus of African frogs to assess the effects of
historic habitat fragmentation on populations. This system is ideal for
combining climatic/landscape modeling and cutting-edge molecular techniques to
investigate the evolutionary processes that helped shape variation in a poorly
known, megadiverse and threatened system. Such studies have important
implications for conservation planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program has a strong focus on working with local Tanzanian researchers and
students, providing training in sampling, monitoring techniques, and population
genetics. Pressure for agricultural lands, extensive logging of forests and
other activities in Tanzania have drastically reduced the available montane
habitat in this tropical region and developing a strong local involvement in
monitoring and conservation is the key to keeping this system alive. Though the
primary focus of this study is to enhance our understanding of the dynamics of a
?meta-population? in a naturally fragmented landscape, the researchers are also
collecting information on communities as well as distributional, ecological, and
behavioral data. Upon completion of this work, all resulting scientific papers
will be submitted to the Tanzanian research council (COSTECH) and the Tanzanian
Wildlife Department (TAWIRI), as dictated by collection permits and published in
both US journals and African Journals to allow access to these findings for the
researchers who need them most. In Illinois, Lawson has given talks on
evolution, climate change and conservation, and amphibian declines to grade and
high school children and groups at the Field Museum. This research program will
be extended to include a student mentorship project through the Illinois Math
&amp; Science Academy and University of Chicago undergraduates will be
incorporated in the analysis of genetic patterns and modeling of processes,
providing a valuable research experience to potential future evolutionary and
conservation biologists.&lt;br/&gt;