* 0841885
* Beta diversity of plant-insect food webs along an altitudinal gradient in the tropics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yves Basset, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2012
* USD 625,153.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Food webs describe the flow of resources through ecosystems
from producers (plants) to primary consumers (herbivores) and on to secondary
consumers (predators). Food webs are especially complex in diverse tropical
rainforests where numerous species share common resources. Plant-insect food
webs are a major component of Earth's biodiversity, but little is known about
the interconnected webs of tropical rain forests because they are more difficult
to study than simpler ecosystems. Slash-and-burn agricultural practices on the
island of New Guinea provide a unique opportunity to disentangle complex food
webs. Unlike ecological research in protected natural areas, scientists can
extract living plants and insects from pristine forests for experimental
purposes when New Guinea farmers expand their gardens. A previous project
experimentally tested the feeding habits of insect pests attacking approximately
250 species of lowland tropical forest trees. The present project builds upon
the earlier work by examining forests at higher elevations where predictions
about the shape of complex food webs can be evaluated. This research aims to
identify predators and parasites influencing the dietary limits of timber pests
including bark beetles and caterpillars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recovery of
managed forests from outbreaks of damaging insects can be informed by studies of
plant-insect food webs. The recent mountain pine beetle outbreak in the western
U.S. is ten times larger than any previously recorded in the region, with an
economic impact that is measured in billions of dollars. Food webs of diverse
forests, as on the island of New Guinea, offer unparalleled opportunities to
understand the factors limiting the diet and range of timber pests. New Guinea
is also home to the world's third largest remaining tropical forest wilderness
and is under international consideration for markets in greenhouse gas
mitigation. This project supports the training of young scientists including
several graduate students and develops natural resource expertise in a region of
global importance. In addition, species discovery and ecological information
will establish a baseline for future monitoring of forest response to continuing
global change.