* 0841014
* New Hydrocarbon-Stabilized Metal-Atom Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* John Ellis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2014
* USD 441,000.00

The Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program supports the work of Professor John E. Ellis at the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities for research into previously unexplored areas of low
valent transition metal chemistry. Objectives include defining the limits of
"superreduced" transition metal chemistry and providing new understanding of the
reduction of coordinated ligands. Naphthalene, anthracene, and other polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon,or polyarene, complexes containing transition metals in
formal oxidation states that are unprecedented, such as Sc(I-), V(II-), and
Cu(I-), or very rare, such as Hf(0, II-), Ta(I, 0), and Ni(I-, II-), will be
prepared by reduction of metal halides or related precursors in the presence of
these hydrocarbons. The new compounds will be isolated and fully characterized
whenever possible. Anionic polyarene-stabilized complexes promise to be of
particular interest as unique storable sources of "naked" atomic metal anions,
M(Z-). Their reactions with dinitrogen, carbon monoxide, isocyanides,
phosphanes, and other acceptor ligands will be explored as a route to hitherto
unknown classes of low valent metal complexes. The development of conventional
routes to new hydrocarbon-stabilized metal-atom reagents will enable access of
such highly-reactive species by other investigators, who do not have access to
the specialized and expensive metal-vapor reactor apparatus originally required
for the preparation of related species. This project is also important in the
education, training, and professional development of a new generation of
scientists and educators, including undergraduate and graduate students,
visiting faculty, and other post-doctoral associates, where participation by
minorities and women is particularly encouraged. Polyarene metal complexes are
possible reagents for nitrogen fixation, catalysts for new polymers of
unsaturated organic and inorganic species and precursors to novel polymetallics.
This project endeavors to develop facile and reproducible routes to new labile
hydrocarbon complexes and employ these species as reagents for a general
investigation of the chemistry of transition metals in previously unknown or
rare formal oxidation states. In this fashion significant contributions to our
fundamental understanding of transition metal chemistry are anticipated.