* 0841461
* Upgrade of Electron Microprobe for Earth Science and Materials Research at the University of South Carolina
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Christopher Hintz, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 166,853.00

0841461&lt;br/&gt;Yogodzinski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal
seeks funding of ~$167K to purchase components to upgrade an existing electron
microprobe (SX-50) at the University of South Carolina. The probe is 1986
vintage and needs several updated components, both hardware and software.
Requested are a new WDS automation system including a Windows-based acquisition
and analysis computer, new software to control the probe and integrate EDS and
WDS data, a new EDS detector and related acquisition system, and a new
cathodoluminescence detector. The University will contribute $50K in matching
funds. The upgraded EMP facility will allow the PIs to continue
multidisciplinary research projects encompassing geologic, public health,
engineering and materials research. The PI studies igneous processes aiming to
understand the physical and chemical processes of subduction-related magmas and
the conditions leading to their formation. Areas of interest are the Aluetians
and Kamchatka. Studies are conducted by measuring whole-rock geochemistry, Pb,
Sr, Nd, and Hf isotopic ration, and phenocryst and glass inclusion EMP analysis.
Co-PI Bizimis focuses on upper mantle processes using detailed mantel xenolith
geochemistry. Planned EMP use involves detailed observations of mineral rim
reactions, diffusion profiles, minor matrix phases and student training. Co-PI
Barbeau studies sedimentation and tectonics. Foci include determining mineral
elemental compositions including CL analysis, resolving sediment provenance, and
contraining plate tectonic and kinematic reconstructions. Co-PI Hintz will use
the EMP to better understand elemental abundances in foraminifera calcite and
aragonite tests. These abundances will be used as proxies for existing
environmental conditions in the paleorecord. Co-PI Zhao studies mantle processes
and nuclear waste management. The EMP will be critical in determining mantle-
related processes, composition and evolution. Additionally, the EMP facility
will support materials research. The EMP is incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate-level courses in mineralogy and igneous and metamorphic petrology.
Professors from other departments (Biology) also teach EMP methods. The current
probe supports NSF-sponsored research which produces peer-reviewed publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;