* 0841739
* Acquisition of a CO2 Coulometer with Acidification Module and Furnace Kit for Paleoenvironmental Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Harold Rowe, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Boyd
* 08/31/2010
* USD 30,932.00

0841739&lt;br/&gt;Rowe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks funding of
~$31K to purchase a UIC coulometer and acidification module to perform
paleoenvironmental research. The system will be able to analyze total organic
and total inorganic carbon (TOC and TIC) in water, rock, and soil samples. The
PI has experience with this instrument and it will be configured and housed in
the stable isotope facility at UT-Arlington. The PI will offer analyses with a
small fee structure to allow purchase of supplies and support consumables. The
overall research goals for this acquisition revolve around better understanding
paleooceanographic conditions. The coulometer will be used to assess DIC and DOC
in depositional formations to relate biogeochemical indicators (such as under
oxic-anoxic conditions), primarily in high-deposition areas (like ocean basins).
Land-derived nutrient loadings will also be assessed through understanding oxic-
anoxic conditions in organic-rich sedimentary material. The instrument will also
be crucial in examining the geostratigraphy associated with the Permian-Triassic
boundary mass extinction. Finally, stream geomorphology will be assessed in
recent times by linking hydrological parameters with carbon and elemental
biogeochemistry. Data from this instrument will be made available to the
community through PaleoStrat and CHRONOS databases. It will be used in an REU
program examining coal mining impacts on carbon dynamics in Appalachian streams.
This instrument will allow the PI to be more selective for samples needing
additional analysis and allow students the opportunity to take vital, but
perhaps more straight-forward measurements. The PI will incorporate the
instrument into three courses. The PI is well-represented in female and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;