* 0841295
* GK-12 Fellows: Linking Urban Water Quality with Science Education in the Chesapeake Watershed and the Coastal Region of Belize.
* EDU,DGE
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2016
* Shiladitya Chaudhury, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 02/29/2016
* USD 2,606,068.00

&lt;br/&gt;Title: GK-12 Fellows: Linking Urban Water Quality with Science
Education in the Chesapeake Watershed. &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Christopher
Newport University&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dr. Gary Whiting, Department of Biology,
Chemistry and Environmental Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GK-12 project goals are to: a) broaden the
contextual framework of graduate fellows? research; b) enhance the fellows
ability to effectively communicate how science functions; c) bring excitement of
doing science into high school student experience, and d) have high school
students apply their findings directly to benefit the environment and society.
An inquiry-based teaching approach will be used by fellows to guide 9th grade
teachers and students in developing field sampling and spatial analysis skills
to address critical ecological issues impacting the local Chesapeake Bay. High
school students will design and build field gear, sample local ponds and lakes,
geospatially analyze (GIS) their results across the city?s landscape (Web-
linked), and take their results into the neighborhoods surrounding these
watersheds to encourage the businesses and residents to be aware of their
actions on water-quality and make recommendations for improvement. The GK-12
project is a partnership between Christopher Newport University, the five high
schools of Newport News Public Schools (NNPS), the Engineering Department for
the City of Newport News, and HR STORM, a committee of the Hampton Roads
Planning District Commission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will set the
stage for increased recruitment of minorities into science fields with the
recruitment of Fellows from historically black colleges and universities and the
prevalence (over 65%) of minority students in the participating high schools.
The project activities, tools and partnerships will be a model for other
universities and communities to address local and regional environmental
problems while educating their students and residents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;