* 0841291
* New, GK-12 -Collaborative Curriculum Development: Interdisciplinary Middle and High School Education in Biomedical Engineering through Graduate Student/Teacher Interaction
* EHR,DGE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Michael Shuler, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 04/30/2015
* USD 2,910,000.00

GK-12, Collaborative Curriculum Development: Interdisciplinary Middle and High
School Education in Biomedical Engineering through Graduate Fellow/Teacher
Interaction

PI: Michael L. Shuler Co-PIs: Shivaun Archer and Chris B. Schaffer Department of
Biomedical Engineering Cornell University, Ithaca, NY

Abstract: This GK-12 program capitalizes on the strength of Cornell University?s
biomedical engineering graduate fellows in interdisciplinary research as well as
the education experience of local science teachers to create and implement new
interdisciplinary curricular materials for middle and high-school science
classes. The principle aim of this program is to help graduate fellows make the
critical transition from student to scientist by asking them to identify the
conceptual underpinnings of their field in order to develop outreach materials
related to their research. Graduate fellows then teach these underlying concepts
to teachers and students, thereby helping the fellows to develop the science
communication skills that are essential for their future as interdisciplinary
researchers and citizen/scientists. At the core of the program is the
?collaborative curriculum development? project: Graduate fellows will work with
a teacher and faculty advisor during a six-week summer program on the
development of innovative, inquiry-driven science education activities related
to the fellow?s research, which will then be implemented in underserved rural
and urban schools during the following year. In addition to graduate fellows
becoming more conceptually-oriented scientific thinkers with better science
communication skills, the participating teachers will improve their science
knowledge and receive help implementing best-practice science teaching methods,
while students will receive enhanced science education. In particular, the
inquiry-driven activities will let students experience science not as an
abstract collection of facts from separate fields, but as a process for
discovery that integrates knowledge across disciplines, thereby increasing
student understanding of and interest in science.