* 0841006
* MARGINS:  Collaborative Research: The Oxidation State of Mariana Arc Magmas and its Relationship to Subduction Volatile and Mass Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Elizabeth Cottrell, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/28/2014
* USD 83,531.00

Collaborative Research: The oxidation state of Mariana arc magmas and its
relationship to subduction volatile and mass cycling
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Geochemical exchange between the
earth's interior and exterior, via crust formation at ridges and crust
destruction at subduction zones, has modified the composition of both the
surface and interior reservoirs through time. The oceanic crust becomes
progressively oxidized and hydrated as it ages, linking water and oxidation
state in the subducting plate. This link could decouple within subduction zones
due to the mantle's buffering capacity, or it may persist to depth. Oxidized or
oxidizing components from the subducted slab may modify mantle and magmatic
oxidation states, thereby influencing element partitioning, magmatic
differentiation and degassing, and the long-term evolution of oxygen
availability in the mantle. Several recent studies of bulk-rock and
mineralogical proxies for oxidation state (e.g., redox-sensitive V partitioning,
spinel composition, whole-rock Fe+3/_Fe) have yielded contradictory views of
mantle oxidation state in modern tectonic settings and throughout earth history.
Modern subduction zones provide an ideal setting to investigate if and how redox
conditions of the mantle and hydrosphere have co-evolved. This study aims to
develop a new method of measuring the oxidation state of basaltic magmas, using
a synchrotron-based microbeam technique (micro-XANES) for non-destructive, in
situ measurement of the redox-sensitive Fe+3/_Fe ratio in glasses. This
technique will allow direct comparison of melt oxidation state to major,
volatile, and trace element composition in primitive, undegassed magmatic
liquids (i.e., natural pillow glasses and melt inclusions) and experimental
glasses at a ~10 _m sampling scale. Both natural glasses from along and across
the Mariana arc/trough system and synthetic glasses from analog piston-cylinder
experiments will be analyzed, with the goals of (1) testing magmatic Fe+3/_Fe
ratios against alternative proxies of both melt and mantle oxidation state (2)
evaluating the role of magmatic processes, volatiles, and slab-derived
components in influencing oxidation state, and (3) modeling the effects of the
subduction cycle on the long-term evolution of redox conditions in the earth's
interior. Mariana arc lavas are ideal for this study because they carry
primitive, undegassed, basaltic melt inclusions that record a range of magmatic
water contents and slab-derived chemical signatures. Also, samples of submarine
glass from the full length of the Mariana trough back-arc basin, can be analyzed
to provide information regarding spatial variations in volatile content and
ozidation state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will
develop a potentially transformative new micro-analytical technique for the
quantification of oxidation state in natural and experimental glasses. Results
will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and on-line databases.
These results will have broad-reaching results with direct relevance to the
MARGINS, RIDGE, and deep earth science communities. This project also will
foster the careers of two early-career female PIs who will bring their
complementary skills to bear on a new problem requiring a highly collaborative,
multidisciplinary team. The two PIs are deeply committed to mentoring under-
represented minorities in the earth sciences and have established a track record
with such students during the pilot work for this project. Finally, this award
will fund a Ph.D. student to be jointly mentored by the two PIs, and therefore
exposed to a broad palate of experimental and analytical techniques with which
to launch a career in the earth sciences.