* 0841123
* Conference:  The 4th International Symposium on Plant Dormancy; June 8-11, 2009 in Fargo, ND  at the Holiday Inn Convention Center
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2009
* Xing-You Gu, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 07/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

Dormancy plays an important role in regulating developmental processes in plant
buds and seeds and has evolved as a mechanism for survival during harsh
environmental conditions. For example, economically important perennials of the
agricultural, horticultural, and forestry sector, as well as troublesome
perennial weeds, establish new shoot growth from over-wintering, dormant buds
each new growing season. Whereas annual weeds tend to persist in agricultural
systems because seed dormancy scatters germination over time making control by
conventional methods difficult; lack of seed dormancy occasionally causes pre-
harvest sprouting (PHS) problems in crop production. When plant buds and seeds
fail to maintain proper control of dormancy, frost damage, poor weed control,
low germination rates, PHS, and ultimately, low crop yields are often the
result. This has been estimated to economically impact to US agriculture
conservatively at more than 500 million dollars. However, recent discoveries
related to plant dormancy processes, many of which have not yet been published,
provide new opportunities to foster collaborations between scientists in
academia and industry, and agricultural practitioners working on related
problems. The 4th International Plant dormancy Symposium provides a venue to
bring together world renowned academic, industrial, and agricultural experts in
the field of plant dormancy to present their most recent findings. The outcome
of this symposium is expected to inspire new approaches to control plant
dormancy, foster collaborations, and reduce redundancy of research efforts.
Additionally, special incentives to encourage young scientists and scientists
from under-represented groups will bring new thoughts and ideas into the field
of plant dormancy research and enhance future efforts through mentorship and
collaboration. Finally, participation of industry and agricultural stakeholders
should assist in developing new ideas into products for American agriculture,
and help better direct academic research.