* 0841400
* New, GK-12: Mathematically Aligned Vertical Strands Connecting Mathematics Research, Pedagogy and Outreach for GK-12 Fellows and Teachers (MAVS Project)
* EDU,DGE
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2015
* Tuncay Aktosun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2015
* USD 2,854,024.00

The MAVS project creates a seamless transition in mathematics that spans the
school curriculum and bridges to research-level mathematics. At the heart of the
MAVS project are cohesive vertical teams of graduate students, K-12 teachers,
and mathematicians. Each year eight fellows will be teamed with eight teachers
at a predominantly minority high school and its feeder schools. They will
collaborate to develop and deliver lessons that reflect a robust understanding
of the vertical alignment of the mathematics curriculum and connections to
research mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAVS project develops innovative
program components, such as research and teaching seminars, mentoring triads,
and teaching quads. The mentoring triads consist of a fellow, his/her research
advisor, and a MAVS faculty mentor. The teaching quads consist of two MAVS
fellows with a mentor junior high and a mentor high school teacher. The project
will establish a model for extending vertical articulation in the mathematics
curriculum to research-level mathematics that will be disseminated at local,
statewide, and national levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate fellows will gain
crucial leadership and communication skills for the 21st Century workplace. K-12
students will benefit from model lessons developed and K-12 teachers will
benefit from an enhanced understanding of mathematics content and of the
importance of the mathematics they teach and how it is situated in the
curriculum. The project focus promotes an innovative model for addressing the
acute needs of underserved student populations to improve mathematics education
for this group from junior high to the graduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;