* 0841940
* Collaborative Research:    Effects of tropical watershed deforestation on mangrove ecosystem function and services
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Thomas Stone, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 68,097.00

Deforestation of coastal watersheds is occurring throughout the tropics,
altering transport of water, nutrients and sediments to mangrove estuaries and
coastal oceans. This occurs because of powerful couplings linking land use
changes on upland watersheds to receiving aquatic ecosystems down the
topographical gradient. This research uses innovative multidisciplinary
ecological, hydrological and biogeochemical approaches along six transects in
Panama from watersheds subject to different degrees of deforestation to coastal
mangroves. This layout will enable testing of hypotheses relating deforestation
to functioning of mangrove ecosystems. Results will provide a fresh view of how
coastal zones are organized and how human activities reshuffle natural
couplings. The work will be based in the Liquid Jungle Laboratory, a research
station that permits doing modern research in a remote
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the work include definition of
the connections between land use practices and conditions in adjoining mangroves
in tropical coastal areas. Results will furnish information needed for assessing
impacts of deforestation on coastal mangrove ecosystems that provide a series of
economically valuable ecological services, such as fish and shellfish nurseries,
interception of land derived nutrients, export of energy rich materials,
stabilization of shorelines, maintenance of biodiversity, and various
harvestable yields. An education and outreach program will focus on training
U.S. and Latin American postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students.
Strong collaborations with Panamanian and Argentine colleagues will enable
bilingual websites, presentations and new programs to help transfer results to
local people, managers, decision-makers, and scientific colleagues by digital,
printed and oral means.&lt;br/&gt;