* 0841414
* Evidence-based inquiry into the distant, remote, or past (EIDRoP): linking evidence to inference in the Kansas science classroom
* EDU,DGE
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2015
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2015
* USD 2,768,351.00

GK-12 project abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project title: "Evidence-based
inquiry into the distant, remote, or past (EIDRoP): linking evidence to
inference in the Kansas science classroom"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators:
Carolyn J. Ferguson, Timothy Bolton, Srinivas Kambhampati, Iris Moreno Totten
and N. Sanjay Rebello (Kansas State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much public
misunderstanding of science involves misconceptions regarding the types of
evidence accepted within scientific disciplines as well as the manner in which
scientists move from evidence to inference. Understanding how available data can
provide information about objects or events that cannot be directly experienced
or manipulated is particularly challenging to students. Through "Evidence-based
inquiry into the distant, remote, or past (EIDRoP)", Kansas State University
(KSU) graduate fellows in the biological sciences, geosciences and physics will
work with mentor teachers at Junction City High School (USD 475) to develop and
teach both discipline-specific and interdisciplinary lessons responsive to state
standards in science as inquiry and the nature of science. Professional
development activities include a Summer Institute, a fellows class and an annual
Capstone Meeting. Program goals are to: enhance young scientists' abilities as
effective communicators and as educational collaborators; improve science
education for grade 9-12 students through the infusion of contemporary science
research, an integrated emphasis on nature of science, interdisciplinary
teaching modules and provision of scientist role models; enhance the knowledge
of grade 9-12 teachers through teacher training, interaction with KSU students
and faculty, and curriculum enrichment; strengthen USD 475's partnerships with
STEM departments at KSU; and expand collaborative partnerships within KSU and
between KSU and K-12 education. EIDRoP will have extensive broader impacts in
terms of enhancing education (of fellows, students, teachers and faculty), and
will drive a cultural change in science education with respect to interactions
between University science departments and K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;