* 0841933
* Identification of photoheterotrophic microorganisms in temperate freshwater lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Michael Sieracki, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2013
* USD 650,000.00

Fuelled by solar energy and performed by microscopic algae, or phytoplankton,
photosynthesis is the primary source of productivity in aquatic ecosystems.
However, recent studies suggest that microorganisms with previously unknown
capabilities for harnessing solar energy, the so-called photoheterotrophs, are
abundant in the oceans and are present in freshwater ecosystems as well. In
contrast to algae, which completely depend on chlorophyll-based photosynthesis
for their growth, photoheterotrophs use pigments called rhodopsins and
bacteriochlorophylls to convert solar energy into a food supplement to their
predominant diet of ingested organic matter. The aim of this project is to
discover, describe, and document the predominant organisms that make up this
unusual group of phytoplankton in temperate freshwater lakes. &lt;br/&gt;Due to
their light-harvesting capacity and amenability to genetic engineering,
photoheterotrophs may be useful in future bioenergy production systems. Research
results will provide baseline information for freshwater phytoplankton
bioprospecting, in a search for potentially useful microorganisms. The broader
impacts of this work also include further development of cutting-edge research
technologies, such as the study of a complete genome of a single cell, infrared
epifluorescence microscopy for visualizing phytoplankton, and fluorescence-
activated cell sorting to isolate and study phytoplankton cells for experiments.
One postdoctoral associate and up to three undergraduate students will be
trained during the course of the project, with particular effort placed on
recruiting Native American students. Wide dissemination of research results will
be achieved by workshops and advanced courses to the scientific community, as
well as through diverse outreach activities to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;