* 0841234
* "NEW: GK-12" Graduate Students and Teacher Engaging in Mathematical Sciences (G-Teams)
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Virginia Horak, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,954,730.00

GK-12 Graduate Students and Teachers Engaging in Mathematical Sciences
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The G-TEAMS Program (Graduate Students and Teachers
Engaging in Mathematical Sciences) provides an innovative and dynamic
opportunity for graduate students and teachers to collaborate on the development
of novel, rigorous, and relevant material for K-12 mathematics courses. The
program, run by the Institute for Mathematics and Education and the Department
of Mathematics at the University of Arizona, builds on a long-standing
relationship between these two units and schools in the Tucson area. Fellows are
recruited from the graduate programs in Mathematics and the interdisciplinary
programs in Applied Mathematics and in Statistics at the University of Arizona.
They work with high school teachers on the development of new courses, such as
probability and statistics and mathematical modeling, on ways to promote
algebraic thinking in K-8 grades, and on strategies to facilitate transitions
between elementary, middle, and high school. The program is interdisciplinary
and involves innovative approaches, such as video conferencing between
classrooms and the Applied Mathematics Laboratory, or the use of computer
simulations and applets. G-TEAMS lessons and learning objects are made available
to the community by means of a web portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
promotes STEM disciplines to underrepresented K-12 student populations and
fosters a synergetic relationship among fellows, teachers, and K-12 students.
Fellows learn to communicate mathematical ideas to diverse audiences, implement
a range of teaching techniques, and increase their understanding of K-12
educational issues. Teachers become familiar with cutting-edge research and
broaden their understanding of mathematics. Students learn to appreciate the
wide variety of possibilities offered by STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;