* 0841556
*  Symposium:  Impacts of Media Multitasking on Children's Learning &amp; Development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Clifford Nass, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 05/31/2010
* USD 36,721.00

Media multitasking is defined in the literature as engaging in more than one
media activity, such as watching TV, reading, playing video games, or instant
messaging, over a specified period of time. Media multitasking is a growing
phenomenon observed among 8-18 year olds, yet little is known regarding how this
behavior influences key cognitive, developmental and behavioral processes which
affect the way young people learn, reason, socialize, think creatively, and
understand the world. Previous research in the adult population generally shows
that media multitasking negatively impacts productivity. However, little
research to date has examined the processes underlying children's media
multitasking or how such processes may affect cognitive development and
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clifford Nass of the Stanford CHIMe Lab and Roy
Pea, Co-PI of the NSF LIFE (Learning in Informal and Formal Environments)
Center, in partnership with the Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop, will
convene a symposium for an interdisciplinary group of leading scholars from
neuroscience, child development, cognitive, communication, and education fields,
and key policy leaders to advance our understanding of the potential
implications of media multitasking for learning and cognitive development in
children and youth. The primary goal of the symposium is to define a coherent
agenda to stimulate needed theory-based research on the implications of media
multitasking for learning and cognitive development. The symposium will consist
of three panels of multi-disciplinary experts to examine: a) media multitasking
and cognitive development, b) media multitasking, learning and productivity, and
c) design principles for leveraging media multitasking in educational contexts.
A meeting report will be distributed on the symposium website and in print form.
The symposium website will also facilitate communication and knowledge sharing
among a newly defined research community and serve as a clearinghouse for
information on the implications of media multitasking for cognitive development
and learning. Overall, the activities associated with this grant will help
activate a new special interest academic community, and encourage and facilitate
knowledge sharing and collaboration across institutional, intellectual and
methodological disciplines. Through understanding how media multitasking may
affect psychological processes underlying learning and cognition, practitioners
will be better prepared to inform policy and to maximize educational impact in a
broad range of learning contexts.&lt;br/&gt;