* 0841146
* New GK12: Molecular Biology Initiative in Rural Southeast Georgia
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2009,12/31/2016
* Bret Danilowicz, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2016
* USD 2,298,664.00

Molecular Biology Initiative in Rural Southeast Georgia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the Molecular Biology Initiative (MBI) program is to enhance the
education of biology students pursuing advanced degrees (M.S.) by providing
fellowships, long-term mentoring, on-going professional development activities,
and rigorous molecular biology training. As part of their professional
development, MBI fellows are partnered with biology or chemistry high school
teachers; and the fellow-teacher teams work together to design hands-on,
inquiry-based molecular biology activities for the classroom. A unique feature
of the program is the ability of fellow-teacher teams to link their projects
with on-going university research. The MBI program provides team support through
workshops, seminars, intensive mentoring, and an annual symposium. The overall
outreach program design considers inquiry-based learning educational research
and the outcomes of a two-year pilot program conducted by the PI. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The MBI program will have sustainable impacts at the university and
high schools. The program will pilot a transformative graduate program model for
professional development and close mentoring of fellows. This approach will
contribute to the education of outstanding and diverse cohorts of graduate
students with strong communication, pedagogy, leadership, time-management, and
discipline-specific skills; and an intimate knowledge of issues facing K-12
science education. It will enhance university molecular biology research
programs and improve the quality of science education in rural high schools via
in-service teacher training and infrastructure improvements. Each year the MBI
program will directly impact 11-14 graduate students (at least 30% from
traditionally underrepresented groups) and over 1000 high school students from
high-need schools (45% economically disadvantaged students, 37% minorities).
&lt;br/&gt;