* 0841026
* Developing the Skills for Learning Language - Revised
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Lisa Gershkoff-Stowe, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 467,071.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to turn thoughts into words
is central to communication and learning. The earliest form of this uniquely
human skill is object name production. Children begin using words to name
familiar objects around their first birthday. Over the next several months new
words are slowly added to their productive repertoire. Many researchers have
noted that towards the end of the second year, there is a striking increase in
the rate of productive vocabulary growth. As children develop increasingly
larger and more complex language systems, a major challenge is to locate
information quickly and easily. The focus of this research is on how the lexical
processing system develops in response to this challenge. Previous
investigations support the idea that the lexicon is a complex and dynamic
entity. In children, especially, the emergent lexicon is continuously subject to
change and reorganization as new words are added and lexical neighborhoods
(groups of related words) are formed. More words in the lexicon increase the
opportunity for competition during retrieval. The need to retrieve a growing
number of lexical items quickly and accurately thus may serve as an impetus for
system-wide changes in how words are processed early in the course of word
acquisition and production. In the current research, the critical question is
whether there is a point in development when lexical processing is no longer
guided by the properties of individual words alone, but rather by the ensemble
of words belonging to a single system. Such a shift would suggest an increase in
automaticity. Automatic processes are typically fast and require little
attention and effort. The benefit of automaticity would be to free up cognitive
resources for other cognitive and linguistic tasks. A number of key components
are implicated in the simple act of naming: processing the visual or perceptual
attributes of objects, matching this information to memory, linking semantic
representations of the objects to their phonological forms, and formulating and
executing words for production. Early in development, children seem to invest
considerable effort in these processes. The primary objective of the present
research is to investigate the mechanisms associated with word retrieval and the
developmental changes that underlie improvements in naming. The principal
technique used for investigating these processes is children's failures of
retrieval, that is, the errors they produce when attempting to name familiar
objects. Such errors provide a unique window onto the structure and operations
of the lexicon as they change with increased vocabulary growth. The
investigation will include both typically developing children and children with
specific language impairment who experience difficulties with naming. This
clinical population is characterized as having normal comprehension skills and
nonverbal intelligence, but problems with retrieving words from lexical memory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make an important contribution in three
major respects. First, the project will provide new empirical findings and
theoretical insights into how children develop the skills needed to become
mature speakers of language. Second, the findings will have relevance for
existing models of adult language production and help to bridge knowledge of the
word retrieval operations in novice and experienced word learners. Third, the
research will contribute new understanding of the critical differences between
normal and language impaired children and may provide practical benefits for
understanding the etiology of those identified with word finding problems. In
particular, the behavioral data obtained from this research should enhance the
adoption of best practices in the assessment and early intervention of children
at risk for lexical processing disorders.