* 0841216
* SGER: Event-triggered control over sensor/actuator wireless networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Paulo Tabuada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2009
* USD 75,000.00



Objectives: This proposal represents a research effort towards the integration
of sensing, computation and actuation over wireless networks. Although current
trends in wireless network research focus on sensing, the natural next step is
to consider actuation, thereby transcending the ``passive'' role of wireless
networks towards an ``active'' role where information is collected, processed
and consumed within the network. One of the major difficulties faced when
performing actuation over wireless networks is that a constant rate of data
needs to flow from sensors to actuators. As communication is energy expensive
and network nodes have small batteries, this constant rate of data quickly
depletes the existing energy resources and severely limits the life span of
applications.

Intellectual Merit: This project explores a different paradigm to perform
actuation over wireless networks. Instead of reading the sensors, computing
feedback control laws and updating the actuators in a periodic fashion, as it
has been done in the past 30 years in control engineering, information is
transmitted and actuators are updated only when necessary. This new paradigm,
termed event-triggered control, guarantees desired levels of control performance
while drastically reducing communication and thus energy utilization.

Broader Impact: The proposed event-triggered paradigm greatly increases the life
span of applications by reducing communication. Therefore, this project will
enable several different kinds of applications, currently hampered by small
energy reserves of network nodes, such as mechanized agricultural irrigation,
reconfigurable factory automation, future HVAC systems, etc. The project also
aims at involving undergraduate students in the validation of the proposed
techniques thus contributing to increase the number of domestic students
pursuing graduate degrees in science and engineering.

