* 0841265
* SGER: Exploratory Research: Integration of Multiscale Nanowire Devices and their Thermoelectrical Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Tae-Youl Choi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 02/28/2010
* USD 59,856.00

The main goal of this project is to realize the fabrication of multiscale
electric devices based on conducting nanowires and their characterization by
using nanomanufacturing principles such as self-assembly, dielectrophoresis, and
focused ion beam nanolithography. The objectives include the following
tasks:&lt;br/&gt;(a) hierarchical integration of nanowires into multiscale
electric devices, and&lt;br/&gt;(b) characterization of individual nanowires in
terms of Seebeck coefficient and thermal conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;The self-
assembly technique and dielectrophoresis will be combined to control individual
nanowires and attract them into desired pairs of microelectrodes. Fountain pen-
based metal nanoink soldering or electron-beam metal deposition techniques will
be adapted to enhance the conductivity between metal electrodes and nanowires.
Focused ion beam will be used to define a nanostructure such as
nanoheater/nanothermometer for aiding the characterization of individual
nanowires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of the of the proposed work lies
in the fact that the investigation of thermal and electric properties of
nanowires will provide a fundamental database for thermoelectric devices, which
in turn contributes to developing alternative energy sources. The proposed
integration method will provide a practical means for nanomanufacturing massive
and multiscale nanowire-based thermoelectric devices. The proposed work yields
significant information on the Seebeck and Peltier coefficients of one-
dimensional nanostructures. The research outcomes of nanomanufacturing and
properties of nanomaterials investigated in the project will contribute to
establishing a new research and education program in the recently established
Mechanical and Energy Engineering Department at the University of North Texas. A
systematic effort will be made to recruit minorities to this research project
through the Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science program. Talented
undergraduate students with a high degree of financial need in this program are
ensured of success as they are engaged in the various research experiences
proposed herein. &lt;br/&gt;