* 0841227
* Intrinsic Tilt of Transmembrane Helices
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Roger Koeppe, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 580,293.00

The experiments for this project will employ solid-state magnetic resonance
methods to investigate peptide-lipid interactions. In particular, the
investigators seek to understand the molecular mechanisms by which designed,
anchored, membrane-spanning peptides interact with lipids and adjust their tilt
or geometry in response to changes in the lipid environment. Of specific
importance will be attempts to resolve recent apparent discrepancies or
controversies that have arisen between the experimental results from magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and the theoretical predictions from molecular dynamics
simulations concerning the behavior of peptides that span lipid bilayer
membranes. The experimental methods will address these timely issues by using
two independent and inherently different approaches, namely methods based upon
the deuterium (2H) quadrupole interaction and the nitrogen/hydrogen (15N/1H)
dipole interactions. The expected results will enhance the collective
understanding of protein/lipid interactions and the function of membrane
proteins at the molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will augment a
particular University of Arkansas initiative aimed toward developing a new
paradigm for undergraduate science education. This HHMI funded "Studio Approach
to Science Education" has been designed for innovative recruiting of new
creative minds to lifelong careers dedicated to scientific discovery, while at
the same time broadening the base for participation of non-traditional
individuals and underrepresented groups in science. Efforts here will broaden
the team research concept by including NSF-supported students working alongside
and in conjunction with ongoing studio research team members. The impact of
extending the novel studio/team experience will benefit society by helping to
build the future scientific work force.