* 0841691
* REVSYS: Phylogenetic Systematics and the Taxonomic Revision of Sturgeons, (Actinopterygii:  Acipenseridae), an Endangered Family of Ray-finned fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eric Hilton, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 494,603.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sturgeons, paddlefishes and their
fossil relatives form a small group that is thought to have split off from other
fishes early in the evolutionary history of ray-finned fishes, the group that
contains approximately half of all vertebrate species alive today. The 25 living
species of sturgeons are distinctive fishes, with five rows of bony plates along
their bodies, elongate snouts, and shark-like tails. Many species of these so-
called living fossils, which are found throughout the northern hemisphere, are
difficult to distinguish from one another and most of these long-lived, highly
migratory fishes are endangered or threatened. Hilton and his collaborator
Dillman will conduct the first ever analysis of evolutionary relationships to
include both morphological (primarily skeletal anatomy) and DNA data for all
living and fossil sturgeon species. Together Hilton, Dillman, and an
international team of sturgeon experts will conduct detailed taxonomic studies
of every species of sturgeon based on new observations of specimens housed in
natural history collections. This study will establish a new taxonomic
classification of sturgeons, which will be used in many areas of their biology,
including developmental, evolutionary, and conservation biology, and fisheries
management.&lt;br/&gt;This project will support and train a postdoctoral
researcher and a Ph.D. student in the methods and techniques of both
morphological and molecular evolutionary biology and taxonomy. Hilton is active
in programs focused on training of undergraduate and high school students, and
public volunteers, all of which will be involved in this project. Sturgeons are
culturally and economically important fishes (e.g., they are the source of
caviar) and are of great interest to public audiences. Public outreach
activities associated with this research, including displays at local and
regional museums and aquaria, will target audiences at all scales (local to
global) and will promote the crucial role that natural history collections,
systematics, and taxonomy continue to play in 21st century biology.