* 0841452
* RUI:   Mechanism of Promoter Escape by E. coli RNA Polymerase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Lilian Hsu, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 465,000.00

In a round of transcription, RNA polymerase goes through three phases --
initiation, elongation, and termination -- to synthesize a full-length
transcript. Promoter escape, which constitutes the initiation-elongation
transition, is a key step in regulating productive gene expression. Failure of
RNA polymerase to negotiate this transition results in the repetitive synthesis
of abortive RNA, a process known as abortive initiation. The extent of abortive
initiation vs. promoter escape differs from promoter to promoter and is guided
by the initial transcribed sequence (ITS) at each promoter. While previous
research has led to the description of a general outline of the promoter escape
process, current research will be directed at achieving a detailed mechanism of
promoter escape. This goal will require investigation into the sequence-specific
nature of promoter escape to understand how an ITS directs a unique abortive
initiation-promoter escape program at individual promoters, and controls
productive expression by governing the rate of escape and the extent of RNA
polymerase partitioning. The proof of a promoter escape mechanism will also
require structural characterization of initial transcribing complexes poised on
the brink of escape. The methods to be employed in this research will include
quantitative in vitro transcription analysis of wild type and mutant promoter
templates, kinetic determination of rate and equilibrium constants to understand
better the partitioning of transcribing complexes into productive or
unproductive conformation, and footprinting techniques to characterize the
static or dynamic structure of transcribing complexes. The combined approaches
will shed light on how the ITS sequence directs RNA polymerase to relinquish its
promoter contacts at specific positions and bring about the escape transition at
a defined rate. All of the knowledge gained from studying E. coli RNA polymerase
will be of relevance to understanding the promoter escape strategies by T7 RNA
polymerase and eukaryotic Pol II. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Being
affiliated with a women's college, the principal investigator routinely works
with many undergraduate students in the research and teaching laboratories. The
research provides many self-contained, well-designed, and cutting-edge projects
for rigorous and critical investigation. A broad impact of the research projects
leads to the training of undergraduates, especially young women and of diverse
ethnicity, preparing them for research participation in a scientific career.