* 0841873
* Collaborative Research:   Convergence and Contingencies in Savanna Grasslands
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* John Blair, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 03/31/2013
* USD 64,063.00

Grasslands and savannas occupy one eighth of the land surface on Earth, are
economically important as grazing lands, and are highly impacted by human
activities. They also have tremendous conservation value and support most
remaining large native grazing animals in the world, particularly in Africa. A
fundamental understanding of the factors most important for sustaining savanna
grasslands, including their natural fire and grazing regimes, is required for
their management and conservation. Scientists have questioned whether grasslands
in different regions function similarly. Convergence in functioning would mean
that ecological understanding and conservation strategies could be generalized
for savanna grasslands worldwide. But contingent factors specific to a region,
such as differences in evolutionary history or the types of grazers present, may
lead to unique responses in some savanna grasslands. The goal of this research
is to compare responses of key ecological processes to fire and grazing in North
American and South African savanna grasslands. Scientists will take advantage of
three ongoing, long-term experiments that manipulate fire return interval and
the presence of large grazers. Responses of plant productivity, plant diversity
and nutrient cycling will be compared, and the mechanisms underlying responses,
such as differences in plant traits or evolutionary histories, will be assessed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative research elucidating the consequences of human
alterations of fire and grazing regimes worldwide is needed to enable
development of management strategies that can insure the sustainability of
ecologically and economically important savanna grasslands. This research will
provide the basic knowledge necessary to do so, as well as afford training and
important global and cultural experiences for young scientists, graduate
students and undergraduates. Finally, though collaborations that are already
established, results will be made available to scientists and managers in South
Africa.