* 0841361
* The Interactions of Biology, Chemistry and Physics at the Land-Ocean Interface:  A Systemic PARTnership Aimed at Connecting University and School (SPARTACUS)
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Stephan Zeeman, University of New England
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,870,008.00

Abstract, GK-12 0841361 (U. of New England,
Zeeman)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. A Systemic PARTnership Aimed
at Connecting University and School (SPARTACUS) project forms linkages among
university researchers and their graduate students with the K-12 community.
Focusing on the hydrologic cycle in a coastal watershed it conveys the
importance of interdisciplinary efforts in scientific and social issues, to K-12
students and teachers through the work of Graduate Fellows and their advisors.
Interrelationships of physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics, and geology are
examined in a local watershed using the Saco River Coastal Observing System
(SaRCOS). It investigates how precipitation drives river discharge, which in
turn, governs the coastal current, which influences coastal weather. While
scientifically important, these phenomena are also tangible to students at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The project engages K-12 students and
teachers in authentic inquiry-based learning in STEM-related disciplines. This
unique project brings together school districts? needs, scientific research, and
place-based inquiry education. Graduate Fellows gain an understanding of the
educational process, develop communication skills and team building, and
appreciate the importance of K-12 outreach as a professional commitment. Place-
based inquiry projects are used to engage students in active learning. Schools
benefit from professional development of teachers, and enrichment of the
learning environment, while society gains greater scientific and technical
literacy. The schools encompass rural to urban settings, including the two
largest and most ethnically diverse districts in Maine. Replication of the model
is highly viable since it is grounded in local environs and research,
effectively connecting the community, school and university.&lt;br/&gt;