* 0841143
* The Duel Functions of Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Grover Waldrop, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2014
* USD 538,000.00

Membranes are the essential barriers that define and delineate the inside versus
the outside of a cell. Membranes are composed of fatty acids, and in contrast to
humans, bacteria synthesize all of the needed fatty acids for their cellular
membranes. Fatty acids are synthesized by a series of enzyme catalyzed chemical
reactions. The enzyme that catalyzes the first reaction in fatty acid synthesis
is acetyl-CoA carboxylase. Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is a multifunctional enzyme
composed of two different enzymes: biotin carboxylase and carboxyltransferase.
The first aim of this project involves trying to understand how the three-
dimensional structure of biotin carboxylase allows the enzyme to catalyze the
reaction. For instance, the enzyme is composed of two identical subunits where
each subunit can in theory catalyze the reaction. The fundamental question is:
if each subunit is capable of catalyzing the reaction why does it exist as a
dimer? One hypothesis that is being tested is that the subunits are not
independent but instead depend on each other by alternating their catalytic
cycles. Similar to the up and down motion of a bicycle pedal, one subunit
catalyzes a reaction while the other releases products. The second and third
aims of the project involve trying to understand how the three-dimensional
structure of carboxyltransferase participates in regulating the genes that code
for the protein. In contrast to biotin carboxylase, carboxyltransferase is
composed of two different subunits. The genes coding for these subunits are
located at different positions in the bacterial chromosome yet the cell requires
equal amounts of each subunit to make a functional enzyme. The fundamental
question here is: how does a bacterium regulate expression of the genes coding
for the subunits to obtain equal amounts? The carboxyltransferase molecule in
bacteria contains a structural motif called a zinc finger that binds to RNA. The
hypothesis is that carboxyltransferase regulates expression of both genes by
binding to the RNA derived from those genes. When nutrients are low,
carboxyltransferase binds to the RNA and inhibits protein synthesis. When
nutrients are abundant and new membranes are needed, the substrate for the
enzyme acetyl-CoA competes with RNA for binding and fatty acids are synthesized.
Thus, carboxyltransferase appears to have two mutually exclusive "duel"
functions: catalysis and translational regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts of the Research: This project addresses fundamental questions in enzyme
catalysis, subunit interactions, and regulation of translation in a model
system. The eclectic approach will provide a detailed understanding of
structure-function relationships that will have considerable impact on our view
of the roles of the enzyme on the physiological level. This project will rely
heavily on diverse graduate and undergraduate students to perform the
experiments, serving as a training platform for the future scientific workforce
using the eclectic tools of biochemistry and molecular biology. In addition,
because the enzyme in this project is a carboxylase (using a form of carbon
dioxide as substrate) the results of the research may have ramifications for
engineering enzymes to reduce the carbon footprint in the environment. Lastly,
because membranes are essential for life, acetyl-CoA carboxylase in plants is a
logical target for herbicides. Understanding the structure and function of the
enzyme can facilitate the design of more potent and environmentally safe
herbicides.