* 0841821
* Genome Structure And Evolution In Crocodylia
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Fiona McCarthy, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2014
* USD 748,247.00

Crocodylia (alligators, gharials, and crocodiles) is one of the major extant
reptilian clades. Therefore,a basic grasp of the structure and function of
crocodilian genomes is essential to developing a comprehensive understanding of
genome evolution, structure, and function in amniotes. Furthermore, because the
crocodilians are the closest living relatives of birds, their genomes represent
the best group through which we can gain an outside perspective on avian genome
evolution and function. To facilitate comparative genomics and the testing of a
variety of hypotheses involving Crocodylia and other amniotes including birds
and mammals, this research focuses on (1) investigating crocodilian genome
diversity and evolution through detailed analysis of mobile elements (MEs), and
(2) providing fundamental information about genome organization, gene synteny
and regulatory sequences in three crocodilian species. These goals will be
accomplished through a combination of molecular and computational tools,
including BAC library construction and analysis, Cot library construction and
analysis, and structure/function analyses of the resulting data via GBrowse and
GO (Gene Ontology) annotation. The research will complement and enhance
international efforts to understand the genetic underpinnings of genome
structure and function by illuminating the impact of mobile elements on genome
structure and function in a critical amniote lineage and by providing
information on important developmental genes and conserved non-coding elements
in the lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The research will
serve as a focal point for local high school teachers to experience current
research in molecular biology and evolution through integration into a
functional research laboratory. The teachers will then be helped in
incorporating their new knowledge and experiences into their teaching for the
benefit of their students. The research will also be part of ongoing
collaborative partnerships between Mississippi State University and student
researchers from local historically black colleges and universities. Finally,
these efforts will inform general aspects of evolution and genomics and
highlight crocodilians, organisms of broad public interest. The use of these
charismatic megafauna will enhance the public's interest in evolution and genome
biology, along with its understanding of both.