* 0841405
* Phylogenetic Diversity of Mycobionts and Photobionts in the Cyanolichen Genus Dictyonema, with Empasis on the Neotropics and the Galapagos Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* James Lawrey, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2013
* USD 407,088.00

Lichens are symbiotic associations of fungi and photosynthetic algae or bacteria
that develop a unique vegetative body. Several lichen-forming fungi belong to
the phylum Basidiomycota, and little is known about their phylogenetic
relationships or evolutionary transition to symbiosis. This project will clarify
the species diversity of the largest and taxonomically most difficult group of
basidiolichens, the globally-distributed tropical genus Dictyonema, using
molecular, anatomical and developmental data. It will also clarify details of
the evolutionary transition from free-living fungi to symbiotic lichen. The
project will also investigate a previously-unrecognized tropical group of
cyanobacteria, first discovered in Dictyonema lichens and apparently uniquely
symbiotic. Existing NSF-funded projects throughout Latin America and selected
Paleotropical locations will make available thousands of new specimens to the
project, and specimens will also be collected throughout the Galápagos Islands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be carried out by scientists and students
from three institutions, George Mason University, the Field Museum of Natural
History and the Charles Darwin Research Station in the Galápagos. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in field collection, specimen curation,
laboratory research, databasing, and data analysis. The Galápagos portion of the
project includes a lichen workshop at the Charles Darwin Research Station
designed to encourage and enhance ongoing lichen research and conservation
efforts at the Station.&lt;br/&gt;