* 0841651
* Studies of Science, Technology &amp; Sustainability: Building a Research Agenda
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Clark Miller, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 76,909.00

The transition of the US and the globe toward greater sustainability has emerged
as one of the central policy challenges of the 21st century. This workshop
examines how research in the field of science and technology studies (STS) can
help contribute to US and global efforts to move toward greater sustainability.
The workshop follows on and helps further advance the objectives of a recent
meeting organized by scholars at Columbia University and sponsored by the
National Science Foundation. The Columbia meeting highlighted the need for NSF
and other funding agencies to begin to develop an ambitious agenda for the field
of sustainability research. The workshop is organized to develop an important
and timely piece of the sustainability agenda: namely, social and humanistic
studies of the dynamic relationships among science, technology, and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop takes place at the National Science
Foundation in early Fall 2008, consisting of two days of thematic panels,
plenary speakers, and open discussions. The workshop is diverse, drawing on
research on a wide range of subfields within STS and neighboring fields of
scholarly inquiry, including history of technology, environmental history,
environmental sociology, sociology of technology, social studies of science and
knowledge, anthropology of development, science and technology policy,
environmental ethics and philosophy, philosophy of technology, and many others.
These fields have already contributed substantially to our knowledge of
sustainability and the environment and are poised to contribute even more
substantially. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop significantly advances STS as
it relates to sustainability. It is designed: (1) to assess and highlight the
current contributions of STS to understanding the sustainability challenge and
possible solutions; (2) to develop a roadmap of future STS research priorities
that would enhance the field's contributions to achieving a sustainability
transition; (3) to begin to form a network of sustainability-oriented STS
scholars that could guide and promote research on this topic within the STS
community; and (4) to begin to identify strategies for connecting STS research
on sustainability to research on sustainability policy, especially in the arena
of science and technology policy.