* 0841840
* CAREER:  Sub-NanoNewton Force Spectroscopy in Liquids with Dual-Frequency-Modulation AFM
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Santiago Solares, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 01/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop a method for rapid mechanical characterization of nanoscale
structures, based on atomic force microscopy (AFM). The new method will rely on
a recently researched controls scheme concept that uses two self-excited
vibration signals to enable simultaneous imaging and 3-dimensional force
spectroscopy. The work focuses on structures submerged in water and consists of
a computational and an experimental phase. The computational phase includes
continuum-atomistic simulation of the fluid, AFM probe and sample during
characterization, while the experimental phase includes incorporation of new
hardware into an existing microscope, development of controls software and
commissioning of the method for the same samples as in the simulations.
Deliverables include a process specification describing fundamental components,
basic mechanisms and controls schemes; modeling and analysis tools,
demonstration and validation via hardware, documentation of research results,
engineering student education, and engineering research experiences for first-
generation pre-college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results
of this work will broaden current AFM capabilities by enabling characterization
of some of the most delicate biological samples in their native aqueous
environment, and will lead to a more systematic, quantitative, and rapid
evaluation of sub-nanometer mechanical properties. This will contribute to
nanoscale engineering initiatives, such as nanofabrication and
nanomanufacturing, which depend on the design of controllable structures with
well-defined mechanical properties. The enhancement of AFM to characterize new
biomaterials will also be beneficial in biological and medical fields like
cancer research, genomics and cell reconstruction, where advances could directly
contribute to improving the quality of life of human beings. Graduate and
undergraduate engineering students and pre-college students will benefit through
classroom instruction and involvement in the research.