* 0841073
* New GK12 GlobalWatershed: Integrating Rural and Global Perspectives with Research and Technological Advances
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Alex Mayer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,499,351.00

Abstract

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5), and meets the requirements established in Section 2 of the
White House Memorandum entitled, Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act
Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer,
that the proposal does not support projects described in Section 1604 of
Division A of the Recovery Act. In project GlobalWatershed, graduate Fellows
will conduct research in watershed science topics, at a range of scales and
cultural contexts, while working with middle/high school teachers to create
lesson plans that transfer this knowledge to their students. The goals of
GlobalWatershed are to (a) expand traditional STEM graduate student training to
allow graduate students to acquire improved teaching and communication skills
and to gain a greater appreciation of the scientific context of their research,
and make this expanded training a permanent fixture at MTU and to enrich STEM
learning and instruction in local K12 schools serving low-income and high Native
American populations and a Sonora, Mexico K12 school system, specifically by
translating state-of-the-art watershed research to the K12 level, and make this
enrichment sustainable at these schools. Fellows will receive training in
effective teaching techniques, learning styles, lesson planning, classroom
management, ways of assessing science proficiency, inquiry-based approaches for
teaching science, teaching concepts of scientific research, and indigenous
perspectives and awareness and sensitivity to other ways of learning. Teachers
will attend professional development workshops to learn about watershed science
research and methodologies. Lesson plans and units will be developed by Fellows
and teachers on a range of watershed topics, to be incorporated into secondary
school curricula, including science, mathematics, and social studies. These
materials will be aligned with appropriate Michigan and Sonora educational
standards.