* 0841729
* Comparative phylogeography of Neotropical birds with cross-Andes distributions
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Robb Brumfield, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2015
* USD 756,980.00

Why is biological diversity so rich in the tropics? One piece of this puzzle may
be found in patterns of bird distributions. In South America, the ranges of many
lowland bird species are delimited by rivers and large mountain chains. For
example, a birdwatcher on the east bank of the Negro River may observe the
White-throated Toucan but, if they crossed to the west bank, they would instead
find Cuvier's Toucan. A similar species turnover is noticed when crossing from
the lowland rainforests west of the Andes to those east of the Andes. These
distribution patterns suggest that the formation of rivers and mountains may
have played pivotal roles in isolating populations of birds and driving
evolutionary diversification in the tropics. This research will analyze genetic
data from 125 tropical bird species to examine how rivers and mountains affected
species formation and diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vital component of this
collaborative project is the research training it will provide to scientists in
developing countries. With labwork and fieldwork planned in Brazil, Colombia,
and Venezuela, scientists from North and South America will be exposed to a
diversity of natural environments and techniques. The collaborations will result
in increased knowledge of how tropical diversity arises and is maintained, and
how habitats should be preserved to maximize diversity.