* 0841658
* Collaborative Research:   Systematic and ecological studies of North American Najas L. (Hydrocharitaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Donald Les, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 02/28/2013
* USD 297,040.00

Lakes and ponds in the U.S. often contain submerged flowering plants in the
genus Najas. Some species of Najas are native to North America, whereas others
are invaders from Europe that take over the ponds that they colonize. The plants
are nondescript, with tiny flowers; they often appear different when they are
grown in various environments, and some species tend to form hybrids. Because of
this, they are hard to identify. It is often difficult for land managers to
determine whether the plants in a particular pond are the noxious invaders,
endangered native species, or hybrids of the two. This project will use DNA
sequencing, examination of chromosomes, and advanced statistical approaches to
produce identification tools for land managers. In addition, the data will help
scientists understand how these aquatic plants have evolved.&lt;br/&gt; The
project represents a unique partnership between an ecologist at a primarily
undergraduate institution (Middlebury College) and an evolutionary biologist at
a doctoral research institution (University of Connecticut). Undergraduate
students will acquire strong interdisciplinary training in ecology and
evolutionary biology, and will be involved in both field investigations and
laboratory work.