* 0841116
* Single-Molecule Studies of Surfactant Mobility at the Solid/Solution Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2013
* USD 502,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry (ASC) program of the Division of Chemistry
supports the research program of Professor Daniel K. Schwartz of the University
of Colorado at Boulder. Prof. Schwartz and his coworkers are developing and
employing total internal fluorescence microscopy methods to study the dynamic
behavior of individual molecules as they adsorb and move at the solid/liquid
interface. They are also developing new methods that can probe molecular
proximity and conformation simultaneously as this behavior is studied. This
project will lead to a fundamentally new understanding of the way molecules
interact with and move on surfaces; this information will impact a number of
technological areas, including microarrays for medical diagnostics, catalytic
conversion of biomass to biofuels, pharmaceutical separations, and others.
Moreover, it will enable advances in nanotechnology -in particular the use of
molecular self-assembly to prepare miniaturized structures and devices. The
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who work on this project are
trained to become innovative researchers or leaders in the high-tech industry.
Through this project, Prof. Schwartz and his coworkers are also providing
research training for undergraduate students as well as enrichment opportunities
for K-12 students through programs including the Colorado High School Honors
Institute and the Science at CU outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;