* 0841399
* Defining Criteria and Good Practice to Facilitate Graduate International Collaborations
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Diana Carlin, Council of Graduate Schools
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 08/31/2010
* USD 199,991.00

Graduate deans and STEM faculty seek clear best practice guidelines on both
internal (intra-institutional) and external (inter-institutional) processes to
ensure quality and sustainability in international collaborations. To that end,
this project is designed to generate a clearer understanding of what is
currently known and what is valued, what the current gaps in our understanding
are, and what areas call for enhanced clarification in international
collaborations between institutions of higher education ranging from joint and
dual degree programs to certificates and student and faculty exchange programs.
Project activities include: targeted survey and focus group research to
understand the perspective and experience of graduate deans and of principal
investigators of NSF-projects with international components; the development of
a white paper synthesizing what is known about the common challenges
institutions face and their particular needs; a hands-on technical workshop for
graduate deans and PI?s on the inhibitors and facilitators of international
collaboration; and a broader international dissemination meeting that addresses
many of these process issues from a global and international perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;National and international
organizations and graduate educators and researchers have called for guidance on
?good practice? so they do not each have to ?reinvent the wheel? when seeking to
build international collaborations to benefit graduate students in STEM fields.
Before such practices can be identified, however, and promoted on a national
scale, in a way that meets the context-specific needs of the wide range of
institutions representing U.S. graduate education, we need a more comprehensive
picture of the variety of issues facing U.S. institutions and graduate programs
that takes into account process issues, especially those within the purview of
senior institutional leaders and STEM faculty. The proposed synthesis research
project addresses a major gap in the current literature on degree and non-degree
collaborations, which has focused on European institutions and intra-European
partnerships or minimal requirements of a profession. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;For American students graduating from STEM programs in the U.S. to be
competitive in the global economy, it is critical that they have exposure not
only to international students but also to international contexts for research
and scholarship. This project is designed to engage and benefit institutional
leaders and researchers, as well as NSF principal investigators and
international policymakers, by producing a set of published materials. CGS will
also leverage its various core activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;