* 0841158
* Collaborative Research:  Shifting pathways toward methane in nutrient impacted tropical and sub-tropical wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Chanton, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 321,586.00

Freshwater wetlands are the largest single source of methane to the atmosphere.
Methane is a potent greenhouse gas (approximately 24 times more potent than
carbon dioxide), such that the pathways that control the production of methane
in wetlands have global implications. Most wetlands, including the Florida
Everglades, are affected by human-derived nutrient additions. The goal of this
research is to determine the enhancement of methane production caused by
increased nutrient inputs, particularly phosphate. Phosphate and other nutrients
result in increased inputs of plant derived-organic matter, which is then
fermented to an array of small molecules in anoxic wetland soils, which are
eventually converted to methane. There are two main pathways by which microbes
form methane. Approximately 70% of global freshwater wetland-produced methane
arises from the acetate fermentation pathway and 30% comes from reduction of
carbon dioxide. Preliminary data indicate that pathways for methanogenesis are
affected by phosphorus runoff from adjacent agricultural lands. Guiding this
work is the hypothesis that in addition to increasing organic matter production
by plants, excess phosphate also results in higher rates of methane production
due to two additional factors affecting these pathways: provision of additional
supply of hydrogen substrate from nitrogen fixation that is unrelated to organic
production; and shunting of methane production from acetate-derived methane to
fermentation of acetate by an unusual group of bacteria, the syntrophic acetate
oxidizers. This shunting benefits the carbon dioxide reduction pathway which has
higher rates of methane production, is less sensitive to competitive electron
acceptors (such as sulfate), is less sensitive to phosphate and ammonium
inhibition, and is affected differently by increased temperature. Thus
predictions of methane emissions based on temperate wetlands may not accurately
forecast methane emissions from warmer climates. A combination of
microbiological, isotopic and biogeochemical approaches will be employed to
determine how these pathways are affected by nutrient pollution. Wetlands in
South Florida and Panama will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important
component of this project is the education of future scientists and secondary
school students in the United States and abroad. The investigators have long
records of involvement in science education ranging from high schools to
undergraduate, graduate and post doctoral education. High school students will
be introduced to a variety of wetlands including those containing carnivorous
plants. The project will aid not only in training the next generation of
scientists at the University of Florida and Florida State University, but will
also will involve students from Bethune-Cookman College, a small predominantly
African American college, and local high schools. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;