* 0841613
* Fungal Mimicry And It's Consequences In The Unique Deceptive Pollination Of Dracula Orchids
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Barbara Roy, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 572,879.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mimicry, the adaptive resemblance of
one organism to another, is one of the most compelling examples of evolution by
natural selection. Although most examples of mimicry concern defense strategies
of animals, floral mimicry also occurs. Dracula orchids (about 150 species)
appear to be a remarkable but poorly known example of mimicry in plants: their
flowers look and smell like mushrooms. However, the key component of mimicry in
Dracula orchids, that the similarity to mushrooms actually benefits the plants,
has never been tested. This project is designed to understand the ecology and
evolution of mushroom mimicry in Dracula orchids through pollination
experiments, chemical analysis of orchid and mushroom fragrances, and testing
for pollinator specificity using field experiments and genetic analysis in
natural populations of the orchids in Ecuador.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will contribute to mimicry theory in general and specifically its extension to
non-animal systems. Furthermore, it will enhance the current, and sometimes
contentious, discussions in pollination ecology about specific versus generalist
pollinators and the ecological forces and genetic mechanisms responsible for
their evolution. This project also has broad implications for the power of
natural selection in shaping the biology of organisms at local scales and the
evolutionary forces resulting from interactions among species that create and
maintain biological diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this
project will include advanced training for students and a postdoctoral fellow,
and international collaborations with Swiss scientists and two Ecuadorian women
scientists. Responsible, sustainable ecotourism will be promoted by providing
the kind of natural history story that draws inquisitive visitors and by working
closely with Fundación Los Cedros, a private organization that protects 17,000
acres of primary rainforest in a biodiversity hotspot. Beyond its intrinsic
value to conservation, remarkable biological narratives about fascinating
organisms inspire new scientists and improve public engagement in science.