* 0841135
* Provision of Ice Drilling Design and Operation Group (IDDOG)
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Charles Bentley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Paul Cutler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 14,800,927.00

Bentley/0841135

This award supports the University of Wisconsin - Madison Space Science and
Engineering Center's Ice Coring and Drilling Services (ICDS) to act as the new
Ice Drilling Design and Operations Group (IDDOG) in response to NSF Program
Solicitation 08-555. In fulfilling its IDDOG activities, ICDS will work with and
directly respond to oversight from the new Scientific Drilling Support Office
(SDSO), which is being formed by a separate award (0841225) to provide
scientific leadership and oversight of ice coring and drilling activities funded
by NSF. IDDOG drilling activities enable scientists to obtain samples of ice
from polar ice sheets and mountain glaciers throughout the world which, when
studied, result in a clearer understanding of past climate and its variations.
Ice cores provide the most comprehensive datasets available for
paleoclimatological research and the intellectual merit of IDDOG activities
resides in enabling this research to take place. In the next five years IDDOG
will complete the initial objectives of the WAIS Divide Ice Core Project by
drilling to the bed. IDDOG will also continue supporting smaller unique drilling
projects, each usually in association with one or two NSF-funded Principal
Investigators. ICDS maintains a suite of augers, drills, and coring equipment
with experienced operators to support this type of project work. Looking to the
future, IDDOG will work under the direction of the SDSO to develop new
techniques and drilling systems as the need arises and funding is identified.
Likely possibilities include: devices for collecting samples of the subglacial
material; methods to take additional samples of ice through depth ranges of
particular paleoclimatological interest -- most likely by deviation drilling off
the main borehole, but possibly by drilling a new hole; an intermediate-depth
drill for drilling to the order of 1000 m under a fluid, and one or more types
of rapid access drills, for investigating the basal interface of ice sheets, the
nature of the underlying material, and, where the ice is afloat, the
characteristics of the water column and lake- or ocean-bottom sediments below.
The broader impacts of this work relate to the personnel who will be involved in
this effort. During the WAIS Divide project IDDOG will attempt to recruit
several new people each season to expand the pool of trained drillers. Core
handlers hired by the WAIS Divide Science Coordination Office, many of whom are
graduate students working on ice core analysis projects, will continue to be
given opportunities to work with the DISC drill. Two of the four IDDOG front-
line drillers for the small projects are women, as are two of the drillers
expected to work at WAIS Divide in 2008-09. The great strength of the IDDOG
activity resides in the extensive drilling equipment and drilling expertise it
will supply in support of glaciological and climatic research; for example,
glaciologists expect extensive, critically important paleoclimatic information
to come from the WAIS Divide deep core. The results of the drilling work are
disseminated principally through the glaciological and climatic research they
support. Drilling technology is shared through occasional international
workshops and regularly through personal contacts, including international
exchange of personnel. Members of ICDS have participated in outreach activities
such as the NSF-supported Polar Palooza program through appearance in videos and
in person as part of their traveling show on polar climate change; such
participation will continue. Another major contribution to broader impacts will
arise in collaboration with the SDSO, since one of the SDSO's primary activities
will be to enhance communication and information exchange related to ice core
drilling technology as a service to the glaciological community and the general
public. This activity will include the implementation of a common website that
describes current ice drilling capabilities, with examples of recent activities,
as well as detailed conceptual descriptions of future drilling systems. The
website will have components designed to be attractive to laypeople as well as
technical pages.