* 0841612
* REVSYS:   Reclassification of the leafhopper subfamily Deltocephalinae (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae) with emphasis on the polyphyletic tribe Athysanini
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Christopher Dietrich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michael Whiting
* 06/30/2013
* USD 278,282.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will produce the first user-friendly identification keys and global
classification for the leafhopper subfamily Deltocephalinae, a diverse,
economically and ecologically important group of plant-feeding insects,
comprising 980 genera and 6329 species. The main goals are to: 1) compile and
analyze morphological data for currently recognized genera; 2) assign genera to
tribes, with particular emphasis on determining the correct placements of the
277 genera currently included in the large, poorly defined tribe Athysanini; 3)
use the data to develop innovative, Internet-accessible interactive keys to
tribes and genera; and 4) publish a revised classification, including
descriptions, taxonomic lists, illustrations of morphological features useful
for identification of all tribes and subtribes, and illustrated keys to tribes
and to genera of Athysanini.

The current lack of user-friendly identification tools for deltocephaline
leafhoppers hinders attempts to track and manage invasive species and
agricultural pests, as well as efforts to assess the conservation status of the
native grassland biota, which is vulnerable to agricultural intensification and
global climate change. Thus, by providing a more stable classification and
facilitating identification of deltocephaline leafhoppers, this project will
positively impact human welfare and conservation of biodiversity, in addition to
facilitating future research on Deltocephalinae.