* 0841298
* The energy -water resources interface: A model for complex systems analysis in rural Wyoming middle schools
* EHR,DGE
* 05/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Don Roth, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2015
* USD 2,895,405.00

Abstract

Energy and water are major constraints to global prosperity and directly
pertinent to global climate change. Their interface is of particular relevance
to Wyoming as the leading US state in the exportation of energy but having major
water limitations. As a model for illustrating principles of complexity and
uncertainty in science, the energy-water interface presents a relevant framework
to enhance STEM learning outcomes. In addition, like many rural, frontier
states, Wyoming faces distinct challenges with respect to STEM awareness,
education, and career opportunities. And a significant proportion of the state
population can be categorized as at-risk relative to socio-economic status and
educational achievement. These challenges will be addressed through a
partnership between schools, the University, and the private sector using a
diverse portfolio of activities designed to increase learning outcomes of
doctoral fellows, 7-10 grade students and teachers, to inform career choice
through motivating STEM experiences, and to institutionalize GK12 goals in the
graduate education infrastructure of UW. Specific deliverables from this project
include: inquiry based curricular units, summer research experiences, diverse
workshops, multiple training events, sustained cyberinfrastructure interactions,
and global research opportunities. This program will promote the competitive
success of the future STEM workforce by providing training in leadership,
communication and project management skills for graduate fellows, by enhancing
the educational pipeline through motivational awareness units, through sustained
professional development of teachers, and by development of new
interdisciplinary graduate programs focused on GK12 objectives.