* 0841388
* SGER:   Online Algorithms for Delay Sensitive Multiparty Session Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Maggie Cheng, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Multiparty communication is an emerging phenomenon on the Internet.
The envisioned applications include Internet teleconferencing, telemedicine and
telesurgery etc. A typical session involves multiple interactions among
participants, and requires data transferring between arbitrary pairs of
participants. These applications usually have stringent delay requirements,
e.g., data delivery must meet individual deadlines, and the shared data must be
received by participants within bounded delay variation. If the group is large,
group members are scattered far from each other in the Internet, and each member
needs a variety of data items, multicasting to the entire group is too costly;
On the other hand, if each request is replied independently regardless of other
requests, optimizing one request may delay the delivery of the next. Existing
approaches that do not consider the interaction of data streams cannot address
the delay requirements effectively. This project aims to establish the
theoretical basis for performance analysis and seek algorithmic solutions for
QoS guarantees on the delay aspect. We will formulate practical QoS problems
into new online problems and try to reach some definitive conclusions on QoS
issues in multiparty communication. The proposed research will advance the
fields of QoS research in networks and online algorithm design/analysis in
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;