* 0841653
* RUI- Whole Genome Analysis of Hepatic Gene Silencing
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Gary Bulla, Eastern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 149,880.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is generally believed that genes are under the
control of positive-acting factors and, therefore, silent genes are those that
simply have yet to be activated. However, there is substantial evidence that
this lack-of-activation hypothesis is too simplistic to explain gene control. In
this project, the phenomenon of gene silencing will be analyzed using whole-
genome microarray analysis. Genome-wide gene expression in liver-derived cells
will be compared with that observed in cell types that have silenced liver gene
expression (cell hybrids and hepatoma variant cells). Validation of data will be
carried out by analysis of gene expression of potentially interesting genes
using cell-based read-out assays to screen for restoration or repression of
liver gene function. The goal is to identify genes involved in gene silencing in
cell hybrids and hepatoma variants. Specifically, genes that show at least
5-fold differences in expression and encode proteins that contain signature
motifs associated with transcriptional regulatory proteins will be analyzed.
These analyses will include placement of genes into classes depending on DNA
sequence similarities to genes of known function. Finally, candidate regulatory
genes will be tested for either activation or repression of target genes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate college students
will play an essential role in each aspect of this research. Microarray data
sets obtained will be used in two aspects of undergraduate teaching and
training. First, this data will be used as a tool in an existing molecular
biology lab course (required for Biology majors) to understand the scope of
tissue-specific gene expression and ask open-ended, broad questions about the
link between gene expression and cellular identity. Using a team approach,
students will also be able to identify and classify candidate genes based on
homologies to genes of known function through BLAST searches, thus gaining
valuable experience in assessing gene function. Secondly, several undergraduate
students will carry out research projects in the PI's lab to screen candidate
genes and even test candidate genes for functional rescue of phenotypes. Data
obtained will be compiled into poster presentations at regional meetings as well
as in publications. This will provide valuable experience in modern molecular
biology and prepare students for graduate or professional schools.