* 0841441
* RUI-LTREB  Long-term coral reef community dynamics in St. John, USVI: 1987-2019
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 04/30/2015
* USD 479,754.00

In an era of growing human pressures on natural resources, there is a critical
need to understand how major ecosystems will respond, the extent to which
resource management can lessen the implications of these responses, and the
likely state of these ecosystems in the future. Time-series analyses of
community structure provide a vital tool in meeting these needs and promise a
profound understanding of community change. This study focuses on coral reef
ecosystems; an existing time-series analysis of the coral community structure on
the reefs of St. John, US Virgin Islands, will be expanded to 27 years of
continuous data in annual increments. Expansion of the core time-series data
will be used to address five questions: (1) To what extent is the ecology at a
small spatial scale (1-2 km) representative of regional scale events (10's of
km)? (2) What are the effects of declining coral cover in modifying the genetic
population structure of the coral host and its algal symbionts? (3) What are the
roles of pre- versus post-settlement events in determining the population
dynamics of small corals? (4) What role do physical forcing agents (other than
temperature) play in driving the population dynamics of juvenile corals? and (5)
How are populations of other, non-coral invertebrates responding to decadal-
scale declines in coral cover? Ecological methods identical to those used over
the last two decades will be supplemented by molecular genetic tools to
understand the extent to which declining coral cover is affecting the genetic
diversity of the corals remaining. An information management program will be
implemented to create broad access by the scientific community to the entire
data set. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this study lies in the extreme
longevity of the data describing coral reefs in a unique ecological context, and
the immense potential that these data possess for understanding both the
patterns of comprehensive community change (i.e., involving corals, other
invertebrates, and genetic diversity), and the processes driving them.
Importantly, as this project is closely integrated with resource management
within the VI National Park, as well as larger efforts to study coral reefs in
the US through the NSF Moorea Coral Reef LTER, it has a strong potential to have
scientific and management implications that extend further than the location of
the study. Outreach activities will be developed to embrace graduate and
undergraduate training opportunities in coral reef science, and a strong K-12
educational component will be designed to provide educational and research
opportunities for children in California and St. John.