* 0841528
* Arabidopsis 2010:   A New Pathway for GSH Metabolism in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* David Oliver, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2013
* USD 477,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Plant growth and crop yields are very sensitive to
toxic chemicals in their environment, including not only heavy metals and
xenobiotics in the soil, but also oxygen in the air, which can react to produce
destructive oxygen radicals. Glutathione (GSH) is a small molecule made from
common amino acids that is key in protecting plants and animals from many toxic
chemicals, and the GSH-ascorbate cycle detoxifies dangerous oxygen radicals.
Creating plants that are more resistant to environmental stresses and therefore
crops that maintain their yields under unfavorable conditions, requires detailed
knowledge of how GSH levels are controlled, both through how it is made and how
it is broken down. While a lot is known about GSH synthesis and regulation, very
little is known about how GSH is broken down. This Arabidopsis 2010 research
project investigates a newly discovered enzyme activity, termed gamma-glutamyl
cyclotransferase, which experiments suggest catalyzes a majority of GSH break
down in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Experiments in this project will
define the gene and protein that are responsible for this enzyme activity in
plants. A combination of protein chemistry and genomics techniques will be
employed to identify the gene in Arabidopsis. Subsequent genetic experiments
will be used to verify that the isolated gene is responsible for GSH turnover
and how GSH turnover is regulated relative to synthesis. Information gained will
enable experiments designed to engineer or select plants with elevated potential
for defending themselves from environmental threats. In addition, because GSH is
found in all organisms, discovery of a new branch in the pathway of GSH
metabolism is transformative with regard to understanding how all organisms
survive in an oxygen containing environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;To benefit the research community, data and information
generated through this project will be made available through the Arabidopsis
Information Resource (TAIR: www.arabidopsis.org). Seed stocks and any unique DNA
materials will be made available through ABRC (http://www.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/abrchome.htm). To enhance education, the
project will engage undergraduate students in research and professional
development activities that are designed to expose them to advanced
biotechnology, and enable them to continue careers in STEM disciplines. A
postdoctoral research associate will be trained in research and mentoring, in
preparation for a faculty career. In addition, undergraduates will work with the
PI and the postdoctoral associate to develop a module on mitochondria to be
included in the "Meta!Blast" virtual 3D cell, a web-based video environment
designed to teach the basics of plant cell biology to precollege and beginning
college students.