* 0841372
* Collaborative: New GK12: Building Ocean Literacy in a Coastal Community through Science Education and Estuarine Monitoring
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Mary Curran, Savannah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,214,887.00

Savannah State University (SSU), the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, and the
Savannah Chatham Public School System (SCPSS) will engage graduate students,
scientists, and K-12 teachers and students in a sustainable research-based
education program to promote ocean literacy, science education, and research in
coastal Georgia. The goal of the ?Building Ocean Literacy Program? is to expand
ocean literacy and cultivate research skills in K-12 classrooms while developing
graduate student skills in communicating science concepts to people beyond the
research community. The program will pair marine science GK-12 fellows from a
historically black university (SSU) with master science teachers and classes
within the SCPSS. African-American students are over-represented in the SCPSS
compared to the national average and the program will reach a wide and diverse
audience. Fellows will engage classes in estuarine monitoring and in their
graduate research activities to enhance research skills and ocean literacy in
the school system. New graduate coursework will develop communication and
teaching skills among GK-12 fellows, while teacher training opportunities will
enhance teacher awareness of marine issues. Research activities of GK-12
fellows, teachers, and public school students, will focus on the local estuarine
ecosystem and will directly support Georgia Performance Standards. Research and
instructional components of this project will collectively 1) promote ocean
literacy in K-12 classrooms, 2) enhance K-12 science instruction in Chatham
County public schools, and 3) train the next generation of scientists to be
competent, comfortable, and engaged in communicating science concepts to a wide
array of audiences.