* 0841622
* Canted Undulator Upgrade for GeoSoilEnviroCARS Sector 13 at the Advanced Photon Source
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Peter Eng, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 766,502.00

0841622&lt;br/&gt;Rivers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This proposal
seeks ~$767K (~1/3 of the total needed) in funding to implement a canted
undulator upgrade for the GeoSoilEnviroCARS (GSECARS) national user facility for
synchrotron research. Partial support (2/3 cost) for this upgrade will be
separately awarded from NASA and DOE. The upgrade will provide new capabilities
and double available beam time. The upgrade will install a new undulator system
in a canted geometry which will, in turn provide two independent x-ray sources.
One undulator will be optimized for lower energies (2.3-23 keV) and be dedicated
for detailed speciation and microprobe light and heavy elemental compositional
research. The other undulator will be configured for higher (5.6-80 keV)
energies and will be applied to high-pressure and surface scattering research.
The new beamline configuration at GSECARS will be used for high-pressure mineral
physics and chemistry, high-pressure non- and nano-crystalline work,
hydrothermal fluid chemistry, mineral-water interface biogeochemistry, magma
oxidation state research, fluid and solid flow dynamics, and extraterrestrial
materials research. The upgrade will provide access to diamond anvil cell or
large volume press high-pressure and high-temperature spectroscopy and
crystallography, single-crystal and powder interface diffraction, inelastic
x-ray scattering, x-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy, x-ray
microprobe analysis, and microtomography. The facility has broad community
usage. GSECARS offers 400+ user-visits per year. The array of research conducted
on current beamlines spans a range of geoscience disciplines with considerable
societal impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***