* 0841392
* New, GK-12: Vibes and Waves in Action: A Cross-Disciplinary Collaborative Network for GK-12 Education
* EDU,DGE
* 04/15/2009,08/31/2016
* Charles Thompson, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,350,875.00

&lt;br/&gt;New, GK-12 Vibes and Waves in Action: A Cross-Disciplinary Network
for GK-12 Education&lt;br/&gt;This project connects researchers from the
Colleges of Engineering, Education and Arts &amp; Sciences at the University of
Massachusetts Lowell to high-school teachers and students in school districts of
Lowell and Lawrence, MA. The project theme, Vibes and Waves in Action, is
focused on the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) of sound
and electromagnetic vibrations and waves and their interaction with the
environment. It anchors the research topics of GK-12 fellows and provides a
context for relating core high school Physics and Mathematics curriculum to the
research. The project goals are to: (i) connect graduate fellows in
interdisciplinary research programs through activities that elicit common
learning experiences while delivering science education in urban high schools;
(ii) provide leadership training that emphasize mentorship, social impacts and
diversity education; (iii) engage visionary teachers to help develop synergy
between targeted high school curriculum content, Massachusetts state curriculum
frameworks, and the fellows? research projects; and (iv) provide high school
students experience in use of high technology equipment and cyber enabled
platforms. An industry mentor network will be developed as a resource to the
graduate fellows and the high school community. Cyber-infrastructure will be
utilized to maintain a dynamic online presence, afford virtual collaboration,
and to connect University compute servers, databases and lab instruments to high
school classrooms for web based experiments. The program activities will be
integrated into Creating Waves: a graduate course available for training all
graduate students in STEM programs. This project will enhance STEM teaching and
learning in school districts with high level of underrepresented students in
STEM disciplines and create sustainable programs linking local school districts,
colleges and regional industry together to improve the scientific and technical
literacy of Massachusetts?s workforce. &lt;br/&gt;