* 0841892
* Habitat Fragmentation: Predicting Long Term Extinction Dynamics from Transient Dynamics and Species Traits
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Kendi Davies, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2014
* USD 412,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The loss and fragmentation of habitat is a primary cause of species
extinction and loss of biodiversity. However, there are few studies of the long-
term effects of a direct experiment in which habitat has been fragmented at the
large spatial scales that typify the effects of land use on the landscape; such
experiments provide direct tests of the mechanisms that are thought to make
species more or less tolerant of habitat fragmentation. Short-term responses to
experimental habitat fragmentation are more commonly documented, but these may
be transient and so may not predict fates of species in the longer term. How
many species that initially decline eventually go extinct? Do species that do
not respond initially to habitat fragmentation go extinct in the longer term?
This project will answer these questions in the Wog Wog fragmentation experiment
(Australia), the longest running large-scale fragmentation experiment in
temperate forest. Existing data from the first five years of the experiment will
be combined with a matching series of new data to be collected now, 23-26 years
after fragmentation, to determine whether the initial transient dynamics of
beetle species predict their fates in the long term and to test which
characteristics predict vulnerability or robustness to environmental habitat
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Habitat loss and fragmentation continue at an
accelerating rate and account for most biodiversity loss. Understanding their
roles as drivers of extinction is of increasing importance to conservation and
land management. The long-running, large-scale Wog Wog experiment provides a
unique opportunity to understand why and how species go extinct, and which
species are most at risk. A technician, a graduate student, and six
undergraduates will receive interdisciplinary training in biology and
mathematics through participation in this project, and outreach materials will
be developed for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;