* 0841550
* Structure Determinations of Conformations by NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* John Roberts, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 399,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor John D. Roberts at the
California Institute of Technology, who will capitalize on and extend an initial
success with the strongly hydrogen-bonded monoanion of succinic acid for
determining experimentally by NMR, the very important values of rotational
dihedral angles of conformers of other 1, 2-disubstituted ethanes oriented in
liquid-crystal or lyotropic solutions. A second objective is to contribute
further to understanding the influences of solvents on the positions of
equilibria between gauche and trans (anti) conformations, especially ones
carrying polar, ionized and potentially hydrogen-bonded substituent groups that,
besides being of substantial chemical interest and importance, are ubiquitous in
molecules involved in living systems. This effort will be extended to compounds
where electronic, hydrogen bonding and solvent effects are to be pitted against
expected substantial steric effects, the latter commonly regarded as the primary
cause of conformational preferences, even though much experience, shows that
steric effects are essentially nonexistent or relatively minor in their
influence on conformational preferences, unless the X and Y substituents are
both tetrahedral groups, such as tert-butyl, trimethylammonium, sulfonic acid
and the like. The research will provide an in-depth understanding of the
conformational properties of disubstituted ethanes and experimental validation
of the associated energetics. The dihedral angle versus energy relation in
substituted ethanes is of direct relevance for developing improved understanding
of both electrostatic and steric contributions to the free energy, impacting not
only organic chemistry but also being relevant to far removed areas, such as
understanding protein side chain structure and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts expected to result from the
proposed activities are several, but especially through integrating research and
teaching for the benefit of university undergraduates and motivated high-school
students. Some are Caltech students, others come country-wide, or from abroad,
more than half are women. A program is in place to expose them to a microcosm of
the experience of a new young faculty member. It starts with writing a research
proposal, then having it reviewed by a knowledgeable faculty group. With success
there, planning on how to get the research work started; learning new techniques
in synthesis or involving sophisticated instrumentation; writing up the results
for publication; and presenting a oral report or poster at a public meeting in
the style used by professional chemistry groups. Over a period of 20 years, 110
undergraduates have participated with 25 papers published and several others in
essentially final draft form. The proposal lists the titles of nine articles
with the names of undergraduates and high school students as co-authors and
thirty project titles listing the students' names. These projects were carried
out during 2003-2007.