* 0841862
* Consumer-Resource Interactions: Impacts of a plant invasion on the individual and colony performance of a native pollinator
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Rebecca Irwin, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 528,450.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Invasive species are a leading component of environmental change and a major
factor associated with biodiversity loss worldwide. There is growing recognition
that plant invaders can affect competitive and mutualistic interactions among
native species, but most work has considered only the direct effects of invaders
on native plants. How invasive plants affect the performance of native
pollinators has received little attention, representing a critical gap in the
study of how invaders affect native biodiversity. This project will combine
observational and manipulative studies to examine how a dominant invasive
flowering plant in the western USA, Linaria vulgaris, affects the performance
and abundance of native bee pollinators. The work will also test the degree to
which short-term and long-term management of the invasive plant affect
pollinator foraging and reproduction, with potential feedback to the pollination
and reproduction of native flowering species. By incorporating the effects of an
invasive plant on the performance of a native pollinator, this research moves
beyond a primarily plant-centered approach to the study of invasive plants on
pollination mutualisms

Worldwide, 90% of approximately 300,000 flowering plant species rely on insects
or other animals for pollination service, and the conservation of pollinators
has both ecological and economic importance for native plant and crop
pollination. Given the widespread abundance of pollination mutualisms and the
role of pollinators in conferring critical ecosystem services, this research has
broad implications for biodiversity, pollination of native and agricultural
plants, and feedbacks to other organisms that rely on flowering plants for
forage, habitat, and protection. This project will couple the active process of
discovery with educational opportunities for K-6, undergraduate, and graduate
students at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory in Colorado. To increase
public awareness of native pollinators and invasive plant species this project
will create an exhibit to be displayed at a local museum.

