* 0841918
* What Makes Microcystis Bloom?  Dissecting the Physiological Ecology of a Toxic Cyanobacterium with Community Level Proteomics
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2014
* USD 464,404.00

Although the toxic cyanobacterium Microcystis continues to be the focus of
studies around the globe, scientists remain unable to definitively answer the
question 'what makes Microcystis bloom?' Using genomic and proteomic
information, researchers at the University of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National
Laboratory will collect 'snapshots' of the biochemical pathways that are
simultaneously active in Microcystis cells before, during, and after bloom
conditions. By comparing these pathways with lab cultures grown under controlled
conditions, researchers will be able to for the first time tease apart the
complicated interactions between the environment and Microcystis population
growth. To accomplish this goal the researchers will integrate new data sets of
recently completed genomic sequences of Microcystis with state-of-the-art tools
that analyze whole cell and community protein expression. The resulting
information will provide an accurate map of the physiological status of cells
under different growth conditions as well as during bloom formation, climax and
termination. The work will also provide information on how the environment
influences cellular pathways, an important step in understanding the connections
between ecological organism response and cellular biochemical processes.

The project will facilitate outreach and diversification at an EPSCoR
Institution (The University of Tennessee) and provide training for undergraduate
and graduate students. The PIs will continue to engage underrepresented groups
in the research and will disseminate results to the public through science-
focused journalism interns.