* 0841720
* Nutritional Endoderm, A Novel Tissue in a Direct Developing Frog
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Richard Elinson, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2013
* USD 496,477.00

About 360 million years ago, vertebrates divorced themselves completely from the
water. This evolution required changes in eggs, so that they could develop on
land. These changes were fundamentally important in generating the type of egg
and embryo, now present in humans. Development of frogs with large eggs provides
opportunities to consider how the land egg originated. One such frog, a Puerto
Rican tree frog popularly called the coquí, no longer has a tadpole and has
radically changed the development of its endoderm, the tissue that becomes the
gut. Some of its endoderm becomes stomach, intestine, liver, and so on, and some
is used only for nutrition. The goal of this project is to determine the
mechanisms involved in this novel setting aside of cells for nutrition only.
Based on gut development in other animals, the hypothesis will be tested that
this evolutionary change in coquí was due to alterations of particular signals,
called nodals. The molecules involved in nodal signaling will be compared
between coquí and other animals, and these molecules will be manipulated in the
coquí embryo to see whether gut development can be altered in predictable ways.
The experiments will not only shed light on a critical evolutionary change in
embryonic development, but they also will provide a novel context for examining
nodal signals, which play many important roles in embryos. In addition to these
basic questions, the coquí itself is an important animal in natural environments
and knowledge derived from maintaining a coquí reproductive colony may
contribute both to rescuing endangered frogs and managing invasive populations.