* 0841807
* Role of the Bti9 LysM-receptor-like kinase in PAMP-triggered immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Gregory Martin, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2013
* USD 465,485.00

Plants rely on a two-layered immune system to defend themselves against
pathogens. The first system relies on extracellular receptors that recognize
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and thereby activates PAMP-
triggered immunity (PTI). In the second system, plants use typically
intracellular receptors to recognize pathogen virulence proteins (effectors)
that are delivered into the plant cell and which have evolved to suppress PTI.
This second line of defense is termed effector-triggered immunity (ETI).
&lt;br/&gt; In this project, the molecular basis of PTI will be investigated
using the interaction between tomato and the bacterial pathogen, Pseudomonas
syringae pv. tomato (Pst). Pst delivers an effector, AvrPtoB, into the plant
cell where it suppresses PTI and promotes bacterial virulence. In preliminary
work, a possible host virulence target of AvrPtoB was identified and termed
AvrPtoB-tomato-interacting protein 9 (Bti9).&lt;br/&gt; Bti9 has characteristics
of a PAMP receptor with a putative extracellular region consisting of three LysM
domains and an intracellular serine/threonine protein kinase. This project will
test the hypothesis that Bti9 is a PAMP receptor that recognizes a bacterial
cell wall component, peptidoglycan, and subsequently triggers intracellular
signaling events via its kinase domain. Furthermore, the project seeks to
determine whether the effector AvrPtoB interferes either with Bti9 kinase
activity, the association of Bti9 with other host proteins, or possibly with
Bti9 localization in the plant cell. This project investigates the function of
Bti9, the structural aspects of the Bti9-AvrPtoB interaction, and the mechanism
by which AvrPtoB may interfere with Bti9. &lt;br/&gt; The recent discovery of
the importance of PTI to plant disease resistance has opened up new
possibilities for the development of crop plants with broad, durable resistance
to pathogens. This research focuses on a key aspect of PTI - a potentially novel
bacterial-directed PAMP receptor and the mechanisms by which a pathogen effector
has evolved to suppress its function.&lt;br/&gt;There are four areas where this
research will have broad impact: 1) the PI and members of his lab will continue
to improve a recently developed web-based module for High School teachers to
introduce their students to plant immunity and to the social and economic
consequences of plant diseases; 2) students from across the country will be
trained as part of the NSF-supported Plant Genomics Summer Research Program
hosted by the Boyce Thompson Institute; 3) the PI will continue to be active in
several outreach efforts (past activities include leadership of an annual 'Field
Day' that introduces summer interns to disease problems in New York
agriculture); and 4) the PI has developed a new course for Cornell freshmen
entitled: Innate Immunity in Plants, Flies, and Humans (BioG 1250) and results
from this research will be incorporated into this course.