* 0841321
* Rational points on varieties in families, and countable unions of varieties over countable fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Bjorn Poonen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2012
* USD 290,278.00

The investigator will work on two projects connected with
arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;geometry. The first project is to study the existence of
rational&lt;br/&gt;points in algebraic families of varieties, and to build a
library of&lt;br/&gt;diophantine subsets of the field of rational numbers, where
a&lt;br/&gt;diophantine set in this context means the set of rational
parameter&lt;br/&gt;values for which the corresponding variety in a family has a
rational&lt;br/&gt;point. In particular, the investigator will explore families
whose&lt;br/&gt;fibers are Chatelet surfaces or more complicated conic bundles,
for&lt;br/&gt;which the Brauer-Manin obstruction produces interesting
diophantine&lt;br/&gt;sets. A long-term goal of the first project is to
construct a model&lt;br/&gt;of the integers using diophantine sets, because this
would disprove a&lt;br/&gt;conjecture of Mazur regarding topology of rational
points and&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously prove the undecidability of the problem of
deciding&lt;br/&gt;whether a multivariable polynomial equation has a rational
solution.&lt;br/&gt;The second project is to study countable unions of
subvarieties over a&lt;br/&gt;countable algebraically closed field, such as the
field of algebraic&lt;br/&gt;numbers, and in particular to prove that in
naturally occurring&lt;br/&gt;situations, there exists a closed point outside
the countable union,&lt;br/&gt;as required for various constructions. Examples
include the union of&lt;br/&gt;rational curves in a non-uniruled variety, the
moduli space locus of&lt;br/&gt;abelian varieties isogenous to a Jacobian, the
locus in the base of a&lt;br/&gt;family of varieties where the Picard number of
the fiber jumps, and&lt;br/&gt;unions of subvarieties arising from iteration of
endomorphisms of&lt;br/&gt;varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arithmetic geometry
lies at the intersection of number theory and&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry: like
algebraic geometry, it studies the solutions&lt;br/&gt;to multivariable
polynomial equations, but it does so under the&lt;br/&gt;number-theoretic
restriction that the coordinates of the solutions be&lt;br/&gt;integers (whole
numbers like -37) or rational numbers (fractions like&lt;br/&gt;-3/5) or perhaps
elements of some other number system different from&lt;br/&gt;the traditional
systems of real numbers or complex numbers. Such&lt;br/&gt;questions were
studied for their intrinsic interest since the time of&lt;br/&gt;the ancient
Greeks, and in the 20th century they found unforeseen&lt;br/&gt;applications to
cryptography and error-correcting codes. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator's research
focuses not on these applications, but on the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental questions
underlying and surrounding them, such as the&lt;br/&gt;question of whether it is
possible to write a computer program to&lt;br/&gt;decide whether an arbitrary
multivariable polynomial equation has a&lt;br/&gt;solution in rational numbers.
The research covered by this grant will&lt;br/&gt;study patterns in families of
equations in the hope of deducing a&lt;br/&gt;negative answer, while also
proving the existence of solutions&lt;br/&gt;satisfying infinitely many
constraints in a larger number system.