* 0841334
* SGER: Adaptive Intelligent Interferometric Imaging Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* David Hyland, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2009
* USD 75,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0841334&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: SGER:
Adaptive Intelligent Interferometric Imaging System&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Suman
Chakravorty&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution: Texas A&amp;M University - Texas
Engineering Experiment Station&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The PI
will develop new technology to improve our ability (and reduce the cost) to
perform high resolution imaging of distant astronomical targets such as exo-
solar systems and protoplanetary disks. These high resolution imaging tasks will
be addressed by using multi-spacecraft interferometric imaging systems (MSIIS).
Such systems synthesize a large optical aperture by interfering the light
collected by smaller aperture telescopes carried by the component spacecraft of
such systems. The state of the art for the maneuver design of such systems
attempts to uniformly fill the Fourier/u-v plane of the image. However, such
maneuvers lead to an exceedingly wasteful expenditure of resources since the
Fourier plane of any image is quite sparse. The new methodology proposed here is
intended to reduce that waste, and thereby substantially reduce the cost of
achieving ambitious goals in astronomical imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of proposal: &lt;br/&gt;The intelligent
imagining methodology is formulated as a stochastic adaptive control problem. It
consists of: (a) intensity correlation interferometry based on the Hanbury-
Brown-Twiss (HB-T) quantum optic effect; (b) forming a constant probabilistic
estimate of the image using noisy interferometric measurements made by the
component spacecraft; and (c) utilizing this probablilistic estimate of the
image to guide the motion of the component spacecraft such that most of the
resources of the system are utilized in exploring the "information rich" areas
of the u-v plane. Intensity correlation interferometry (ICI) based on the HB-T
effect results in relaxation of the precision control requirements by several
orders of magnitude. The image estimation problem will be addressed by a new
methodology grounded in frequentist statistics. The motion planning of the
spacecraft is proposed to be solved using approximate dynamic programming (ADP)
utilizing the probabilistic estimates of the image content from the estimation
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broad impact of proposal: &lt;br/&gt;This new
technology should permit the development of high resolution imaging systems with
effective aperture sizes that are heretofore unheard of. For example, it may
make it far more feasible and affordable for us to detect the spectral signature
of plant life in earth-sized planets within 100 to 100 light years of earth. The
recruitment of graduate, undergraduate and high school students to participate
in the research performed at the ground-based observatory in TAMU as part of
this project will literally opn new worlds for these students. Among these
students will be underrepresented minority students who will be actively
recruited from Bryan High School (BHS).