* 0841848
* Collaborative Research:   Interactive Beliefs, Strategic Uncertainty and Solution Concepts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Marcin Peski, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 109,153.00

What must an analyst hypothesize about the information of agents in order to
characterize their behavior in strategic situations? Traditional analysis
focused on hierarchies of belief. Recent developments in the theory of games
with incomplete information reveals that hierarchies of belief are only part of
the answer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a methodology for
describing strategic uncertainty in a primitive, model-independent language and
to use that language to investigate the foundations of the standard model for
games of incomplete information: Harsanyi type spaces coupled with traditional
solution concepts. One a product of this characterization is a new understanding
of what properties of information, beyond traditional belief-hierarchies, are
sufficient and necessary for various commonly-employed solution
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on this foundation, the project
investigates further the structure of type spaces in order to flesh out the
connection between similarity of behavior as captured by toplogical notions to
the more familiar and intuitive concept of common p-belief. The project
identifies the regular hierarchies at which behavior is "robust" in all games.
The remaining hierarchies are "critical types." It is shown that critical types
are exactly those types for which some non-trivial common p-belief statement
holds. As a consequence of this fact, two extreme results are established.
First, all types considered in applied analysis are critical types. On the other
hand, almost all hierarchies are regular. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A clear understanding of non-cooperative solution
concepts is crucial for the field of game theory. While it has become
indispensable in applied economics, there remain some significant gaps in the
foundations of game theory, especially in the context of incomplete information.
Most economists apply the Harsanyi methodology without fully understanding its
meaning. Indeed, few textbooks even at the graduate level include a careful
introduction to the fundamentals of incomplete information and the reduced-form
role of the Harysanyi model. A broader goal of this project is to clarify and
extend our understanding of the translation between fundamental assumptions and
the reduced-form models used to capture them. This will empower applied
economists to bring more transparency to the assumptions about interactive
beliefs that play an operational role in their models. The art of transforming
such fundamental assumptions into tractable but transparent models will
eventually become standard material in graduate textbooks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;