* 0841610
* REVSYS:   Systematics and taxonomy of the tarantula spider genus Aphonopelma (Araneae: Mygalomorphae:    Theraphosidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Jason Bond, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 09/30/2011
* USD 363,021.00

The spider family Theraphosidae, commonly referred to as 'tarantulas', is the
most diverse lineage among a group of spiders that includes trapdoor and funnel
web spiders. Tarantulas are the world's largest spiders, can live for over 30
years and have decidedly infamous reputations. Despite their diversity and
notoriety, theraphosid spiders are relatively understudied. The classification
of tarantulas is in shambles and is widely regarded as 'a taxonomic and
nomenclatural nightmare'; members of the family are morphologically similar,
taxa have been described on the basis of only one or few specimens, and few
studies have taken an evolution-based approach to classification. In this REVSYS
project Jason Bond and Brent Hendrixson will carry out a three-year plan to
stimulate a renaissance in theraphosid systematics by tackling the most diverse
(90 species) and 'close to home' genus, Aphonopelma. As part of this study they
will employ multiple types of character evidence (morphological and molecular)
to enhance biodiversity documentation of the genus Aphonopelma through
evolutionary, biogeographic, and alpha-taxonomic revisions, develop online
taxonomic keys and tools, collect rare spiders through extensive fieldwork in
North and Central America, and train students in basic biodiversity research.

Training the next generation of taxonomic and organismal expertise forms a
thread that runs through this project's research endeavors. The educational goal
will be to provide students comprehensive training in theraphosid systematics
that involves research addressing fundamental conceptual issues in systematics,
biodiversity conservation, and evolutionary biology. The computerization and
outreach objectives of this project will greatly enhance general accessibility
to theraphosid diversity and increase the visibility of these spiders to the
general public. Finally, the unique life history characteristics of tarantulas,
coupled with their extensive distribution throughout global biodiversity
hotspots, makes this group an ideal model for conservation related studies and
assessments.