* 0841794
* Computational Upgrade for the SOEST Geophysics and Tectonics Group
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Robert Dunn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 70,000.00

0841794&lt;br/&gt;Conrad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This proposal
seeks $70K funding to purchase upgraded computing equipment to upgrade the
Geophysics and Tectonics group cluster computing facility - funded through SOEST
and NSF in 2002. Current computing resources have supported 4 PIs, 13 students
and 1 post-doc. However, the new hire PI along with increased computational
needs warrants upgrade to a new 128 processor cluster, having 16 nodes each with
two quad-core processors and 16 GB RAM. The proposed system integrates a high-
speed inter-node communication system. While available to others, the PIs will
be the principal users. The requested computing equipment will be incorporated
into disciplines ranging from mantle flow modeling at regional and global
scales, high-resolution seismic tomography, 3D seismic reflection processing,
and integrating geodynamic models. Specific projects are outlined by the PIs and
include mantle and lithosphere geodynamics using finite element analysis, plate
tectonic motions associated with mantle convection, understanding lithospheric
stresses, dynamic topography, constraining seismic anisotropy flow,
understanding rheology at scales ranging from whole Earth down to cm scale (by
studying grain-size evolution), convection and mantle melting impact on oceanic
basalt geochemistry, understanding magnetism and faulting at mid-ocean ridges,
understanding plume-ridge interactions and geodynamics, mid-ocean ridge seismic
modeling, mantle-plate upwelling dynamics, and crustal accretion, seismic
reflection imaging. The upgraded cluster system will directly support graduate
students advised by the PIs. In addition, the cluster will be incorporated into
a graduate class in computational science. Code developments, models and data
will be shared through the NSF-funded CIG center. Data and outputs will be
interfaced with NSF-funded programs like Margins, Ridge2000, CIG, Earthscope and
CSEDI. Results will be published in peer-reviewed literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***