* 0841797
* Technician Support for a new multi-collector ICP-MS facility for Terrestrial and Marine Geochemical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Gregory Ravizza, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2012
* USD 60,000.00

0841797&lt;br/&gt;Rubin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the
PIs request $300K for technician support to cover partial salary for a new hire
full-time ICP-MS facility technician. This technician will support a new ICP-MS
purchased through GEO/EAR and GEO/OCE funds. The technician will serve several
key duties. He/She will obviously have a major roll in keeping the instrument
running and well maintained. In addition, the technician will be responsible for
student training and integration. Another major responsibility (and a driver for
hiring a PhD-level applicant) is in method development. The instrument will be
incorporated into a multi-user facility and will be an open-access and work
under a cost recharge model. This request is responsive to the solicitation in
that the new hire will be partially-funded through the University and after the
term of the proposed grant, will be fully funded through UH, recharge and grant
support. The PIs have a strong research footprint in NSF-EAR and OCE projects.
The new MC-ICP-MS was associated with a EAR-IF grant. General research efforts
revolve around U-series, Pb, Nd, and Sr isotope measurement s for volcanology,
mantle geochemistry, environmental science and marine research. Applications
include U-series measurements to link volcanic conditions to eruption style,
development of 231Pa isotope dilution analysis to elucidate biogenic sediment
geochronology, U-series measurements to reconstruct Hawaiian and other regional
sea level histories and determine munitions contaminant biogeochemistry, and Ra
isotope measurements in hydrothermal fluids in order to proxy rock ages and
water-rock exchange processes. The new MC-ICP-MS will allow Sr, Nd, Pb and Hf
isotope analyses as Earth history proxies - however, much development work is
needed to convert existing TIMS methodologies to more sensitive laser ablation
and wet-chemical ICP-MS analyses. These isotopes will serve as provenance
tracers and be used to elucidate deposits, weathering and paleoclimatology.
Adding Os isotopes will help elucidate pelagic carbonate and chert sequences.
Additional efforts will involve tracking volcanic and anthropogenic isotopes
during basaltic lava volatilization and condensation - Se, Cd, Tl, Te, Zn and Cu
isotope fractionation will serve as the analytical proxy. Finally, Mg isotope
analysis will be used to better understand oceanic Mg cycling through
hydrothermal systems. The new analytical capabilities will allow additional
synergies amongst faculty, students and outside users. The new technician will
assist in training new users ? thus helping to produce tomorrow?s geoscientists.
The facility will support a diverse researcher and student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***