* 0841748
* Regulation of the anaphase-promoting complex by pseudosubstrate inhibition
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Mark Hall, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2012
* USD 596,640.00

Research Project Description. The process of cell division, by which a single
parent cell gives rise to two identical daughter cells, is amazingly complex. At
its core are the duplication of the cell's entire genome and the accurate
distribution of one intact copy of the genome to each of the two daughter cells.
Remarkably, almost all non-bacterial species use the same basic machinery and
regulatory controls to achieve cell division. How the complex steps involved in
cell division are regulated is still only partially understood. In this project,
budding yeast will be used as a simple model system to study one essential
component of cell division control, regulated protein destruction. The project
aims to understand how a key enzyme responsible for protein destruction during
cell division is activated and inactivated, and the mechanism by which it
specifically recognizes its targets. By using the yeast model system, a broad
array of molecular techniques spanning the fields of cell biology, genetics,
biochemistry, and biophysics will be applied to achieve the aims. The project
will help advance the general understanding of molecular mechanisms of 1) cell
division control, and 2) regulated protein destruction.

Broader Impact. The research project is associated with graduate and
undergraduate programs in biochemistry. A major focus is education and training
of students in critical thinking and the scientific method, essential skills for
future careers as independent research scientists and important skills for any
science-related career. A secondary focus is development of research skills in a
broad array of fundamental molecular biological techniques that will prepare
students for a variety of research-related careers. Finally, a third goal is
development of effective scientific communication skills. The culmination of
this goal is presentation of research results at national scientific meetings by
students and publication of research papers in peer-reviewed scientific
journals. In summary, this project will help train the next generation of
research scientists and contribute to the public collection of basic biological
knowledge.