* 0842686
* C1-Oxidation Pathways in Proteobacteria: Function and Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Marina Kalyuzhnaya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2013
* USD 540,154.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single carbon (C1) compounds commonly
found in the environment include methane, methanol, methylated amines,
halogenated methanes, and methylsulfonates. These compounds are of particular
environmental concern as some of them (methane, methylsulfonates) directly
contribute to the greenhouse effect, while others (methanol, and methylated
amines) serve as precursors for methanogenesis. Microbial oxidation of methanol
and methylated amines are important parts of environmental cycling of C and N as
well as an essential step in preventing formation of greenhouse gases such as
methane and N2O. While some of the pathways for primary oxidation of these C1
compounds are well established, others remain poorly characterized. The amino
acid-mediated pathways for methylamine utilization were once discussed as an
important part of both plant and microbial metabolism, however these pathways
are still invisible for genome-based predictions. This research aims to obtain
new genetic insights into the metabolic mechanisms of microbial utilization of
methylamine and methanol. Uncovering these mechanisms will allow for development
of probes for detecting these systems in the environment, and thus in turn will
provide a more complete understanding of C1 cycling in the environment, in a
global sense. The project will provide valuable insights into the fundamental
understanding of metabolism of single carbon compounds, as well as the evolution
of methylotrophy as a metabolic capacity. The purified and characterized enzyme
will expand the database of enzymes for production of N-methyl amino acids (such
as N-methyl-phenylalanine derivative and theanine) and could be further explored
for industrial applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Briefly, the specific aims
include the following: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1. Obtain draft sequence and
annotate the genome of a novel methylotroph. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 2. Identify genes
involved in methylamine and methanol oxidation via comparative gene expression
studies and transposon mutagenesis. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 3. Identify proteins involved
in primary oxidation of methylamine via protein purification and proteomic
studies, complementing the data from Aim 2. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 4. Perform functional
analysis of the genes of interest, using genetic and biochemical approaches.
These analyses will complement the data from specific Aims 2 and 3 and
ultimately confirm the activities and functions proposed as parts of Aims 2 and
3. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will support extensive
undergraduate research and will interface with existing outreach programs. This
project will support the laboratory tradition of involving high school students
in research projects, and provide them with opportunities to participate in
biological discoveries. Graduate, undergraduate and high school students
involved in the project will be encouraged to participate in two outreach
programs at a local K-6 elementary school that include lectures describing the
importance of bacteria for humans, plants and the environment as well as a
"hands-on" science experience.