* 0842621
* RNA Operons in Coordinated Gene Expression and Horizontal Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Jack Keene, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2014
* USD 930,000.00

Recent developments at the interface between cell and molecular biology suggest
that membrane-bound particles called exosomes may serve as a vehicle to transmit
genetic information through the extracellular milieu in mammals in the form of
RNA-protein complexes. This is believed to occur via release of exosomes by one
cell and subsequent uptake by neighboring cells, thereby providing a modular
form of cell-cell communication. While a rudimentary understanding of the
consequences of exosome mediated information transfer has begun to emerge, the
organizing principles of the RNA-protein complexes contained within these
particles remain to be elucidated. A likely possibility is that they correspond
to RNA regulons, that is, modules of RNA and protein in which the RNAs are
functionally related and thus comprise coherent packets of genetic information.
Knowledge of exosome content and transmission will serve as a foundation for
understanding the horizontal transfer of information at the level of RNA-protein
complexes, which is dramatically different from the better understood vertical
transfer of information through germ-line DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Understanding how information is transmitted from cell to cell in
metazoan animals such as humans is fundamental to biology. Moreover, it has
profound implications for the development of tissues, organs and ecosystems in
which mixtures of cells and cell types improve their fitness and communal
adaptation by reprogramming surrounding cells and thereby advancing the rate of
evolution. Although RNA-mediated horizontal transfer of information is not yet
included in textbooks at any level, the concepts surrounding RNA regulons and
coherent information exchange among cells through exosome release and uptake are
beginning to find their way into university courses and onto the internet. Under
this award, the Keene laboratory will continue to integrate cutting edge
research in this area with educational and training opportunities, thereby
bringing novel ideas to young minds and stimulating the development of ideas
through feedback and reinvestigation. Advances in the field of RNA-mediated
horizontal transfer of genetic information will be included in outreach programs
sponsored by Duke University, including those targeted to traditionally minority
schools, in order to inform the next generation of students and teachers about
this emerging field.