* 0842397
* Systematics and Influence of Coral Reefs on Diversification in Tetraodontiform Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Michael Alfaro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Coral reef fishes are an astonishingly diverse group of vertebrates. They are
rich in number and extraordinarily varied in shape, size, and ecology. This
project will investigate how coral reefs have shaped marine fish biodiversity by
examining diversification patterns and processes in tetraodontiform fishes (a
group including pufferfishes, porcupine fishes, and triggerfishes). The
investigators will construct an evolutionary tree for this group by analyzing
DNA sequences, key morphological features, and the fossil record. This tree will
provide a framework for comparing rates of evolution of fins, body shape, and
jaws between reef and non-reef species. The research team will test whether reef
species have evolved changes in their feeding and swimming systems more quickly
than non-reef species and whether major evolutionary changes correspond with key
historical events, such as the closing of sea-ways or periods of rapid climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide important new insights into
how coral reefs, one of the planets most unique habitats, have shaped
biodiversity in marine fishes. By revealing how paleoclimatic events have
affected historical patterns of species richness, this study will improve the
understanding of the impacts of human-caused global changes on reef fish
biodiversity. Outreach efforts - including mentoring, seminars, and workshops -
will provide training for new scientists from underrepresented groups and
advance the use of newly developed analytical methods to the national research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;