* 0842832
* HCC-SGER: Social and Moral Interaction Patterns with a Personified Robot
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Peter Kahn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 199,960.00

A genre of robots has begun to move from the pages of science fiction to the
research laboratories, and even into society at large. These robots, in various
ways and to varying degrees, have a persona, are adaptive and autonomous, and
can communicate, learn, use natural cues, and self organize. Such "personified"
robots, which will become part of people's everyday lives, form the focus of
this research wherein a new approach to their design will be explored that
builds on a concept the PI terms "interaction patterns." By an interaction
pattern the PI means characterizations of essential features of social
interaction between humans and robots, specified abstractly enough such that
many different instantiations of the pattern can be uniquely realized given
different types of robots, purposes, and contexts of use. A simple example of an
interaction pattern between humans takes place when we are introduced to a new
person. In Western society, we often shake hands, say "hi," exchange our names,
and perhaps engage in a little chit-chat about the weather. In other cultures,
people might bow to one another, or offer a namaste greeting. We can call this
universal social activity an "Introduction" and its purpose is to facilitate
further social interaction. While the Introduction is never enacted exactly the
same way twice, the activity is structured and follows a recognizable pattern.
The PI argues that this pattern is but one of many that can be used to help
structure human-robot interaction. In the current project, the PI will generate
between 50-75 social and moral interaction patterns. He will specify a
methodology for designing interaction patterns (which, in part, draws from
characterizing successful patterns of interaction in human-human interaction and
human-nature interaction), will articulate the optimal levels of
characterization between abstraction and concretization for interaction
patterns, will show multiple instantiations of individual patterns (to highlight
that patterns are not rigid molds but engender a multitude of varied
instantiations), will implement technically a sequence of these patterns with an
actual robot, either autonomously or (more often) through a "wizard-of-oz?
technique, will establish a beginning set of guidelines for validating
interaction patterns, and finally will begin to validate a handful of sequenced
patterns. The technical implementation and beginning validation of the patterns
will occur using the humanoid robot Robovie from Advanced Telecommunications
Research (ATR) in Japan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If the PI's
approach proves successful, and is then taken up by other laboratories, it will
reshape the existing landscape in the human-robot interaction (HRI) research
community. Furthermore, it is likely in the near future that the public will
raise serious concerns about the introduction of personified robots into modern
society; this research will provide a proactive design agenda that recognizes
the legitimate societal concerns and shows how we can "do it right" with robots.