* 0842491
* Structural and Dynamic NMR Studies of RNA Polymerase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Charalampos Kalodimos, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Roy Welch
* 01/31/2013
* USD 777,668.00

Intellectual merit: The objective of this proposal is to use solution NMR
spectroscopy to study RNAP in various transcriptional stages. The DNA-dependent
RNA polymerase (RNAP) is the principal enzyme of gene expression and regulation
in all cellular organisms. RNAP is a remarkable protein machinery capable of (i)
specifically binding to promoter sites along the DNA, (ii) melting the double-
stranded DNA (dsDNA) to form the transcription "bubble", and (iii) synthesizing
the RNA chain complementary to the DNA template strand using nucleoside
triphosphate (NTP) substrates. The essential core component of the bacterial
RNAP (subunit composition alpha 2, beta, beta prime and omega) has been
evolutionarily conserved from bacteria to humans. Sequence conservation points
to structural and functional homologies, rendering the simpler bacterial RNAPs
excellent model systems for understanding the basic principles at work for all
cellular RNAPs. Recent progress in the structural, biochemical and biophysical
characterization of RNAP has highlighted this enzyme as a complex,
multifunctional protein machinery that functions by using an intricate balance
of structural and dynamic changes. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
obtain integrated structural and dynamic information of the intricate mechanisms
that underpin RNAP functionality by studying global and subtle structural
changes as well as the amplitude and the time scale of functional motions.
Towards this goal, the project will (1) develop strategies and methodologies to
overcome the large size and complexity of RNAP, and (2) acquire structural and
dynamic data on RNAP by applying an integrated NMR approach involving
experiments tailored for (i) obtaining long-range structural information, (ii)
detecting transiently populated conformational states, and (iii) determining
both fast and slow time-scale motions and assessing their significance.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Accomplishment of these objectives will have a
tremendous impact on various fields. First, it will provide site-specific
structural and dynamic information of RNAP during its action in solution,
thereby offering unprecedented insight into the functional mechanisms of this
important enzyme. Second, it will provide a model study about how NMR can be
applied to obtain integrated structural and dynamic information on
supramolecular biological systems. Third, it will establish NMR as a powerful
tool for the dynamic characterization of large, intricate protein machineries by
complementing static structures offered by X-ray crystallography. &lt;br/&gt;In
addition to addressing fundamental biological questions, this project will be
used to train students in structural biology, biophysics, and molecular biology,
areas that are rapidly becoming integrated in 21st century science. Postdocs,
graduate and undergraduate students will have the opportunity to be involved in
a multi-disciplinary project that aims at the development of groundbreaking
methodologies to enable characterization of supramolecular protein complexes by
high resolution NMR spectroscopy. This will enable participants in the project
to approach problems from a multidisciplinary and interactive perspective, thus
experiencing first hand the utility of applying state-of-the-art methodologies
to important biological problems. Two graduate students, supported by training
grants and teaching assistantships, will do their theses on this project. They
will be involved in the development of new labeling protocols and in the
application of advanced NMR methodologies towards the dynamic and structural
characterization of RNAP. The paradigm of combining structural, dynamic,
thermodynamic and kinetic approaches to study complex protein systems will be
included in a new course, currently designed by the PI, to exemplify the value
of using an interdisciplinary and quantitative approach to answer questions of
scientific and biomedical importance. The course is intended for a large,
diverse audience consisting of graduate and advanced undergraduate students in
the programs of Molecular Biosciences, Chemistry &amp; Chemical Biology,
Biomedical Engineering and BIOMAPS at Rutgers University.