* 0842743
* Dissection of Promiscuous Enzyme-Ligand Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Engin Serpersu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 09/30/2013
* USD 782,240.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit: Aminoglycosides are a large group of antibiotics produced by
actinomycetes as a defensive measure against other bacteria. To avoid effects of
these antibiotics, they also produce enzymes that modify aminoglycosides (AGMEs)
and render them harmless. A large majority of these enzymes (more than fifty
known today) are capable of modifying a number of aminoglycosides; conversely a
single aminoglycoside can be modified by a large number of enzymes. Such
intertwined interactions between these molecules render the structural and
functional studies quite challenging. This project is designed to dissect
dynamic, thermodynamic, and structural properties of various enzyme
aminoglycoside complexes using three enzymes, as representatives of each of the
three catalytic categories, with the ultimate goal of understanding the
molecular properties of these promiscuous enzymes as a whole group. This project
also involves efforts to bridge computational and experimental aspects of a
biologically significant and challenging problem. Identification of sites on
ligands and proteins that are affected by the global properties of the enzyme
versus those affected only by sub-global and local structural perturbations may
yield valuable clues to understand promiscuity of these enzymes. Common
properties of complexes of three different enzymes with similar ligands should
yield important leads towards understanding of molecular determinants of enzyme-
ligand interactions by AGMEs as a group. Combined use of experimental and
computational data will lead to design new strategies to expand horizon of both
approaches as applied to enzyme ligand complexes in general. Broader Impact:
This project involves interdisciplinary and international collaboration, which
will provide training opportunities for experimentalists in computational
aspects of ligand-protein interactions. This project will also provide hands on
training opportunities through several programs that include Biochemistry
Cellular and Molecular Biology graduate program, NSF-funded, Scalable Computing
and Leading Edge Innovative Technologies (SCALE-IT) and National Institute for
Mathematical and Biological Synthesis (NIMBioS), NIH-funded, Program for
Excellence and Equity in Research (PEER) (Minority directed), and Genome Science
Technology Program (jointly between the University of Tennessee and Oak Ridge
National Laboratories) for graduate student and postdoctoral scientist training;
Biological Sciences and Chemistry majors, Chancellor's Scholars, and McNair
Scholars (for undergraduates from predominantly minority schools) for
undergraduate training; and Pre-Collegiate Research Scholar Program, Math and
Science Center (directed to students mostly from rural areas of Tennessee), and
Tennessee Junior Science and Humanities Symposium for training of high school
students at the University of Tennessee Knoxville. In addition, this project
will help in raising the scientific literacy of public in quantitative and
molecular aspects of biological sciences by outreach activities through several
programs at UTK including Research Experience for Preservice Teachers, Academic
Outreach, and Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Programs.