* 0842892
* Carbon Flow through the Etylmalonyl-CoA Pathway
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Birgit Alber, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2012
* USD 497,705.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Recently, there has been a paradigm shift in microbial metabolism: the focus is
no longer solely on the elucidation of how substrates are converted to products
(inputs and outputs), but rather also includes a concerted effort to understand
the connectivity of pathways in the context of the whole organism's metabolic
activities. This project provides an example of what necessitates this new
thinking. The well-known glyoxylate cycle and the recently described
ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway are apparently equivalent ways to convert acetate to
precursor metabolites used for cell carbon biosynthesis. However, the two
pathways differ drastically. The glyoxylate cycle provides a simple strategy for
converting acetyl-CoA to malate relying on enzymes of the citric acid cycle in
addition to two specialized enzymes, isocitrate lyase and malate synthase. The
ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway of isocitrate lyase-negative bacteria is much more
complex. It requires at least five unique enzymes and novel metabolic
intermediates are involved. The question then arises why one pathway is used
over the other by a given organism or even by the same organism under different
growth conditions. The hypothesis is that the distinct intermediates for the two
pathways and/or differential regulatory events necessitate carbon flux through
either pathway. The ultimate goal of this research is to place the ethylmalonyl-
CoA pathway in the context of central carbon metabolism of R. sphaeroides, a
photosynthetic purple non-sulfur bacterium used as a model organism.
Specifically, several steps of the ethylmalonyl-CoA are not yet understood and
will be elucidated. Comparative genomic studies, mutant analysis, 14C-tracer
studies, in vitro detection of enzymatic activity, heterologous gene expression
and characterization of recombinant proteins will be used to identify further
intermediates and genes/proteins of the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway. It is possible
that the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway replaces the glyoxylate cycle in certain
organisms because various substrates may enter the pathway at different points
through peripheral routes. Wild type R. sphaeroides and mutants of the
ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway will be examined for photoheterotrophic and
chemoheterotrophic growth on a variety of organic compounds. The mechanism by
which the key enzyme of the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway, crotonyl-CoA
carboxylase/reductase, is regulated in R. sphaeroides will be elucidated using a
genetic approach. Furthermore, other genes that may be part of the same
regulatory circuit will be identified.

Broader impacts: These studies will provide further insights into the control of
central carbon metabolism in bacteria and should enhance our understanding of
transformations underlying the carbon cycles in a given habitat. Graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the project will be sensitized to this
emerging aspect of microbial metabolism and will be able to contribute towards
solutions in their own research. A student with a strong background in modern
microbial metabolism will realize the seemingly unlimited potential of
biological transformations and will subsequently be able to apply this knowledge
in an educational, academic, or industrial setting.