* 0842564
* Domestic Terrorism &amp; Political Violence:   Empirical Models of Government &amp; Dissident Tactics and Strategies in South &amp; Southeast Asia
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Stephen Shellman, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 168,319.00

This research explores the causes and consequences of domestic terrorism and
government counter-measures. Domestic terrorism refers to home-grown political
violence against non-combatants by non-state actors who wish to generate fear in
a larger audience in order to achieve political objectives. Though domestic
terrorism consists of about 91% of all terrorism events (for the period of
1998-2006), few systematic empirical studies of this phenomenon populate the
terrorism literature. The core purpose of the project is to evaluate the
consequences of government countermeasures on the frequency and lethality of
domestic terrorist attacks. The project draws on the contentious politics and
transnational terrorism literatures to apply and develop theories about the
timing and effects of dissident leaders' different tactical choices (e.g.,
bombings v. armed attacks) and target selections (e.g., state targets or
civilian targets; attack marketplaces or rail stations) over the course of a
political struggle. The study then subjects the implied hypotheses to rigorous
empirical testing. Preliminary findings suggest that empirical data are
consistent with the theoretical expectations that certain types of policies
impose different costs on dissident movements causing leaders to substitute
costly tactics for less costly tactics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
the first to systematically examine the frequency and severity of domestic
terrorism incidents across multiple countries. It is also the first set of
statistical studies to examine the interrelationships among domestic terrorist
tactics and an array of other non-terrorist, non-violent, and facilitative
tactics. Finally, it is the first set of systematic empirical studies to examine
the effects of government tactics, policies, and strategies on domestic
terrorist tactics and strategies. Previous studies mostly concerned themselves
with (1) transnational terrorism and/or (2) studied political violence or
terrorism, as opposed to both within the same theoretical and empirical
framework. Those that did study terrorist and non-terrorist acts within the same
model ignored that terrorism ? attacking civilians ? might be different than
other forms of political violence, like guerrilla ambushes on military
personnel. One of the main goals of this research is to analyze whether or not
these distinctions can and should be made. Are their different causal processes
that lead some groups to employ terrorist methods to achieve their goals and
others not to use terrorist methods to achieve their goals? Until now, previous
research on domestic terrorism and political violence has been impeded by a lack
of systematic data for empirical testing of propositions about the choice and
timing of government and dissident tactics, including terrorist tactics, over
the course of a contentious struggle. By collecting information on domestic
terrorism, non-terrorism, violent, non-violent, and cooperative events committed
by a multiplicity of actors, government countermeasures in 17 South and
Southeast Asian countries, recent data produced from Project Civil Strife (PCS)
is able to overcome these limitations. Using these data, different models
identify trends and variation in different domestic terrorist tactics among an
array of other violent (but not terrorist), non-violent, and cooperative
tactics. The statistical models are then used to forecast patterns and trends
for different countries in South and Southeast Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project makes contributions in both the academic and policy arenas ranging from
improved academic understanding of government and dissident leaders' tactical
decisions in domestic conflict to informing the efforts of practitioners
involved in confronting domestic challenges. At the present time, the academic
community has little to offer in the way of practical advice to governments
fighting domestic terrorism. This project has implications for how to constrain
and limit domestic terrorism around the world and particularly in South and
Southeast Asia. &lt;br/&gt;