* 0842727
* SGER: Collaborative Research:  Exploring a Long-term Record of Plastic Pollution in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Christopher Reddy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2010
* USD 39,981.00

Plastics have emerged as a major contaminants in the ocean. The durability of
plastic is manifested by a lifetime in the marine environment that may range
from a year to decades, depending on its physical and chemical form. Its
buoyancy also allows it to be transported great distances by winds and currents,
often pooling in convergent zones. These properties and processes have lead
plastic to become the most predominant form of marine litter, varying between 60
and 80% of total marine debris. Remarkably, oceanographic trends in its
abundance and distribution are not well constrained either temporally or
spatially. Yet, this information is necessary for developing records so that
current and future trends can be placed in the context of long-term variability
and to determine the success of current and future control measures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from this Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER), researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the
Sea Education Association (SEA) will explore a record of plastic sampling
performed by SEA in the North Atlantic. SEA is an educational institution
dedicated to the study of the ocean environment and its relationship to the
Earth and to human affairs. For the past 24 years, SEA with a scientific crew
including undergraduates has performed hundreds of neuston net tows and
quantified plastics as well as zooplankton. This record, which has been
virtually untapped, could provide invaluable insight into the distribution and
behavior of plastics in the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team -- an
environmental chemist and a physical oceanographer -- will synthesize these data
and place the results in an oceanographic context. They expect to achieve the
latter by taking advantage of the extensive data for plastics and ancillary
oceanographic data using rigorous statistical analysis. They anticipate that
their findings will serve as a model for a shorter record of plastics in the
North Pacific that SEA has collected. Finally, they will use these data to
consider other chemical oceanographic processes that plastic may either drive or
modulate, such as export from the surface ocean into sediments, sorption of
natural organic matter, and the impacts on particulate organic matter
measurements and cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This effort
will join two neighboring marine institutions in a collaborative effort that has
not often occurred despite their proximity. Approximately 20 undergraduates will
be involved over the course of this project (~3 students per cruise over 7
cruises). These SEA students will become part of an active research project that
can be expected to yield significant understanding of the marine environment and
excitement about marine pollution research. &lt;br/&gt;