* 0842626
* Extreme Performance at Low Temperature:   Ballistic Tongue Projection in Salamanders and Chameleons
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Stephen Deban, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2013
* USD 243,728.00

Environmental temperature has profound effects on the physiological processes of
animals whose body temperature is determined by their surroundings, such as
reptiles and amphibians. The ability of such animals to be active at low
temperatures is limited by the slowing of physiological processes such as the
speed of muscle contraction. The explosive movements of ballistic tongue
projection in salamanders and chameleons are unusual in maintaining extremely
high performance across a broad range of temperatures. This study will examine
the physiological and biomechanical processes that confer this high performance
and temperature insensitivity. Tongue projection is powered by rapid elastic
recoil of collagen tendon-like structures (in a "bow and arrow" mechanism) which
frees the dynamics of the movement from the dynamics of muscle contraction. This
mechanism may endow this system and other musculoskeletal systems with an
expanded thermal breadth of high performance, because the elastic recoil of
collagen has a much lower temperature sensitivity than muscle contraction speed
and power. This study will use high-speed digital imaging and recordings of
muscle activation patterns during tongue projection, and measurements of the
speed and power of muscle contractions, each at a range of temperatures. The
combined data will enable a robust test of this elastic recoil model, and data
from two independently evolved systems -salamanders and chameleons - will permit
a test of the model's generality and predictive power. The results will further
our understanding of the complex interplay of environment, biomechanics and
physiology, which cannot be confidently predicted from first principles. Results
will also provide testable predictions about the thermal responses of diverse
biological systems with elastic components. Tongue projection is a highly
engaging and effective vehicle for communicating discoveries in physiology and
biomechanics, and is ideal for recruiting and training students in all aspects
of scientific research. The results may also have practical applications in the
design of prosthetic devices and sports equipment that improve performance and
the functional range of muscles.