* 0842868
* Cross-Disciplinary Science and Investigation of Olfactory Receptor Gene Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Robert Lane, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2011
* USD 299,955.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of this project:
The genome is the cardinal instrument of development that encodes the genetic
parts and genetic programs of an organism. With the sequencing of many genomes
now complete, and indeed, most if not all the genes identified, a next great
frontier in the quest to understand the relationships between genotype and
phenotype is to decipher how genetic information is regulated. This frontier
encompasses two essential biological attributes: regulatory code "hardwired" in
genomes that specify when, where, and under which conditions each gene will be
expressed, and epigenetic influences that specify biological context to which a
genome responds. This project investigates a complex odorant receptor gene
regulatory system that is likely to reveal both novel genetic and epigenetic
properties of the genome, and thus provide additional insights into how
transcriptional regulation is coordinated genome-wide. In order for the
olfactory system to function properly, the &gt;1000 odorant receptor genes
clustered at multiple chromosomal locations must be co-regulated such that each
sensory neuron of the nose expresses only one of these genes. In this research,
we will use an in vitro model system to study the mechanisms that stabilize
mutually exclusive OR expression in developing sensory neurons. We also
investigate a novel discovery about the regulation of OR mRNA export during
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project: Wesleyan
University has an exceptional academic environment for teaching and scholarship,
because it uniquely combines a highly selective undergraduate program with the
research resources of a much larger institution. Within Wesleyan's new
Integrative Genome Science program, this project will integrate research on
genome regulation with course materials on these same topics. In addition,
Wesleyan University embraces cross-disciplinary opportunities that contribute to
a well-rounded, integrated liberal arts education. This project will provide
undergraduate and graduate students at Wesleyan with a variety of scientific
experiences, spanning fields of evolutionary biology, genomics, bioinformatics,
molecular biology, genetics, and neuroscience. Thus, this project aims to
advance integrated approaches in science that foster broader modes of thinking
and approaches to problem solving. In addition to addressing specific questions
pertaining to the field of olfaction, this project will potentially provide more
wide-scoping insights into the functional organization of genomes, and
epigenetic contributions to gene co-regulation and cell differentiation. The
development and characterization of an olfactory sensory neuronal cell culture
system will be of particular interest to the neuroscience community, especially
in consideration of the fact that olfactory sensory neurons are one of the only
known central neuron types in mammals that are capable of regeneration
throughout the life of an organism. In summary, the research and educational
components of this project will contribute to our understanding of olfactory
development, genome organization, and gene regulation, and will contribute to
the development of interdisciplinary research fields and inquiry-based science
education.