* 0842751
* Merging of Observations and Models for the Earth's Schumann Resonances
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Earle Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2013
* USD 477,976.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative measurements of the global
electric circuit, in which lightning plays a key role, are important both in
terms of basic description of the earth-atmosphere system and as a proxy measure
for changes in global climate. One key means through which global electrical
activity may be measured is through so-called Schumann Resonances (SR), which
are extremely low frequency (ELF) electromagnetic waves channeled over long
(~hemispheric-scale) distances through a natural "waveguide" constituted by the
earth's surface and the ionosphere. Work supported under this project will both
maintain a key ELF signal detection station (located in Rhode Island) and allow
access to and comprehensive analysis of calibrated digital observations from a
worldwide ELF network over extended time periods. This analysis will take
advantage of specialized shorter-duration observations of intense convective
systems over Africa, as obtained during the AMMA (the African Monsoon
Multidisciplinary Analyses) project, as well as benefitting from recent improved
knowledge of the asymmetry in SR propagation associated with day-night
differences in ionospheric behavior. While prior analyses resting on single-
station ELF data have been fruitful, the integration of data from multiple
stations around the globe in this study promises to surpass previous
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research rests in
our improved ability to both monitor and understand the structure of the lower
ionosphere and its modulation by lightning, and by extension determination of
upper-atmospheric influences rooted in the meteorology of the troposphere. This
effort will have broader impacts through the education of undergraduate
students, who will be directly involved in maintenance of the Rhode Island ELF
receiver as well as analysis of data so-collected. These data will be shared
with international collaborators maintaining other ELF stations in the global
network to facilitate cross-checking of accuracy and more comprehensive analyses
than would otherwise be possible. This work will also provide means for a highly
integrated, independent measure of global trends in the amount/intensity of
atmospheric convective (e.g. thunderstorm) activity within the evolving climate
system.