* 0842324
* NSF-CISE-CCF-EMT Workshop on Emerging Models Technologies for Computations in Nanoelectronics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jun Ni, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

NSF-CISE-CCF-EMT Workshop on Emerging Models Technologies for Computations in
Nanoelectronics&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is an
exciting field with many potential applications. Its impact is already being
felt in materials, engineering, electronics, medicine, and other disciplines.
Current research in nanotechnology requires strong multi-disciplinary knowledge
and emerging models technologies for computations in the field of
nanoelectronics with promising. Nanoelectronics become the main research domain
that successes in today?s microelectronics. It brings an unprecedented
revolution in not only communications and computing, but also in other
scientific and engineering fields such as nano-scale measurements in
industrials, bioscience, medical and environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;A NSF
workshop, funded by a NSF grant from the Emerging Models and Technologies (EMT)
for Computation (EMT) Program was organized by Drs. Kathleen Meehan and Yong Xu,
Virginia Tech. on October 15-16, 2007 in Arlington, Virginia. The primary
objective of the workshop was to allow the current principal investigators and
leading researchers in the field of nanoelectronic systems to review the impacts
of the EMT Program for the nanoelectronics program element on various fronts:
research, technology transfer culminating into better competitiveness of the USA
and establishing new start-up companies, undergraduate and graduate education,
promotion of cross-disciplinary teaching and research activities, training of
engineers, and societal benefits, namely engendering enthusiasm amongst high
school students and society in general. The workshop focused several challenge
topics: molecular electronics, nanoarchitecurre, and CAD tools for uncertainty
and defects in quantum electronics. The attendees also recommended NSF to create
student exchange programs for information and experience sharing, to develop
short course training, interdisciplinary conference/workshops with tutorials at
different levels, and to create high-level lectures on the state-of-the-art
research, and as well as interdisciplinary grant proposals for small but
collaborative investigations.&lt;br/&gt;Based on the recommendations, the PI
proposes to organize the need-based external NSF funded workshop to enhance the
existing EMT Program in nanoelectronic systems research. The proposed workshop
aims to providing an opportunity to share and develop education components. In
addition to promote a series of short courses and lectures in nanoelectronics,
the workshop will have a training session for undergraduate students, high
school teachers of science and selective K12 students.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this education workshop is a great opportunity fro faculty to share their
experience and course curriculum which are related to emerging model
technologies for nanoelectronics and to discuss how the current research topics
can be integrated into existing graduate credit courses, and to develop short
and knowledge-based courses for undergraduate students, and how to create off
school program to encourage K12 students and their teachers to participate in
and involve to nanotechnology learning and exploration.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will provide (1) basic courses about fundamental nanoelectronics in
nanotechnology for K12, undergraduate and graduate students, (2) provide online,
open-access repository and course curriculum developments for public; thus to
promote college education in this interdisciplinary field, (3) Develop short
courses for college students and PIs to learn multiple subjects and materials
that are related to nanoelectronics, (4) provide advanced tutorials for workshop
participations and organize a tutorial sessions, and (5) solicit scientific
papers; and organize workshop technical presentation, poster sessions; and
process workshop paper proceeding publication and selected paper recommended for
journals.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this proposal lie in the shortage
of existing internal workshop and education program mechanism the
multidisciplinary domain in nanoelectronics. The proposed workshop attempts to
organize a national-recognized workshop in this domain and make it available not
only to research institutes but also to public. There are three major scientific
merits in this workshop. The first is to coordinate a workshop for education at
all levels, and the second is to remain the state-of-the-art of technical
tutorials and lectures in nanoelectronics, especially through EMT Program to
provide the linkage between nano-computation promoted by NSF-CISE-CCF and other
NSF programs. The third one is to promote nanoelectronics device inventions and
its applications.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this proposal is considered
that the area of nanoelectronics has great potentials for future applications.
Nanotechnology has emerged as a significant and exciting field, primarily with
respect to the basic sciences, and will undoubtedly have a broad impact on nano-
electronic devices, nano-structured materials, and nano-medicine in the near
future. As a result, powerful nanoelectronics CAD design tools are needed to
bring this technology to fruition and to stimulate the nanotechnology
revolution. Consequently, the project bridges the research and development
communities of nanotechnology and EMT. In addition, the proposed effort includes
a training component at all levels, including courses and a nanotechnology
education for science engineering undergraduate and graduate students in this
nanoscience and technology fields, thus to increase the competitiveness for the
nation.