* 0842695
* Collaborative Research: CT-T: Towards Behavior-Based Malware Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Dawn Song, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 12/31/2012
* USD 270,000.00

Dawn Song&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:
CT T Towards Behavior-Based Malware Detection&lt;br/&gt;0627511&lt;br/&gt;Panel
P060975&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Malware is
code with malicious intent that can adversely affect the&lt;br/&gt;host on which
it executes or the network over which they are&lt;br/&gt;transmitted. A malware
detector classifies a program as malware or&lt;br/&gt;benign. Malware writers
continuously test the limitations of malware&lt;br/&gt;detectors in an attempt
to discover techniques to evade&lt;br/&gt;detection. This leads to an arms race,
where malware writers find new&lt;br/&gt;ways to create malware that are
undetected by commercial malware&lt;br/&gt;detectors, and where researchers
working on malware detection respond&lt;br/&gt;by devising new detection
techniques. Attackers create new malware&lt;br/&gt;using two main approaches:
program obfuscation and evolution. There is&lt;br/&gt;strong evidence that
malware writers are using obfuscation and&lt;br/&gt;evolution because the number
of new malware families is growing at a&lt;br/&gt;much slower rate than the
number of malware instances. For example,&lt;br/&gt;according to Symantec threat
reports, in the first half of 2005 there&lt;br/&gt;were 10,866 new virus and
worm variants but only 170 new families of&lt;br/&gt;malware. This data also
indicates that signature-based techniques for&lt;br/&gt;malware detection will
not be able to cope with the increase in the&lt;br/&gt;number of malware
instances. Recent results by one of the PIs also&lt;br/&gt;suggests that current
commercial malware detectors are not resilient&lt;br/&gt;to obfuscation and
evolution techniques used by malware writers. All&lt;br/&gt;this evidence
clearly suggests that we need a new approach to
malware&lt;br/&gt;detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to explore
behavior-based malware detection: our algorithm&lt;br/&gt;focuses on detecting
malicious behavior (such as mass-mailing behavior&lt;br/&gt;used by certain
worms) rather than searching for syntactic&lt;br/&gt;patterns. We specify
malicious behavior in a formal language and then&lt;br/&gt;perform static
analysis on the code to determine whether it contains&lt;br/&gt;the specified
behavior. Prior work by the investigators demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;that this
behavior-based malware detector can detect families of&lt;br/&gt;malware using a
single specification. However, there are challenges&lt;br/&gt;that need to be
addressed in the context of behavior-based malware&lt;br/&gt;detection. We
propose tasks to address these challenges. Solutions to&lt;br/&gt;the proposed
tasks will lead to malware detection techniques that will&lt;br/&gt;resist
evasion techniques used by malware writers better than
existing&lt;br/&gt;malware detectors. Behavior-based malware detectors can also
detect&lt;br/&gt;new malware that are variants of old malware.. &lt;br/&gt;