* 0842201
* Integration of appendage and Hox networks during Drosophila development
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2015
* James Mahaffey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 04/30/2015
* USD 698,078.00

Understanding the genetic control of animal body patterning is the long-term
goal of the Mahaffey laboratory. Hox genes are master regulators of body
pattern, specifying anterior-posterior anatomical structures along the body axis
of all animals. The Hox genes encode transcription factors that activate
downstream genes required for proper embryonic development along the anterior-
posterior body axis. However, it is not clear how specific Hox proteins regulate
distinct downstream genes because they all bind to similar DNA sequences in
their target genes. Likewise, it is not clear how such highly conserved factors
generate the diversity of animal body forms observed throughout nature. What is
clear is that these genes specify similar body parts in diverse species and also
contribute to developmental defects and cancers when miss-expressed in the wrong
tissues. With this award, the Mahaffey lab will study how Hox proteins integrate
with other transcription factors to specify body patterns, using the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism. Drosophila has proved to be an
excellent model for biomedical research. In their studies, the Mahaffey lab is
taking a two-pronged approach. One relies on the extensive genetic tools
developed in the fruit fly to discover molecular processes of developmental
regulation by Hox genes. The other involves taking a less-standard, population
genetics approach for systems biological studies. In this manner, they hope to
extend what is known about the function of Hox proteins and how they integrate
into the network of genes governing animal development. While medical relevance
of this work has been mentioned above, this award will provide opportunities for
undergraduate and even high school students, in addition to graduate students,
to have an opportunity to participate in and learn about scientific research.