* 0842871
* Integration of Computer Simulation and Neutron Scattering in the Characterization of Protein Dynamics.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jeremy Smith, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 410,277.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Motions in and between proteins play key roles in the functioning of the cell.
This project will provide a framework for understanding functional protein
dynamics by integrating high-performance computer simulation with dynamic
neutron scattering experiments on the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. The complexity of biological systems is such that optimal
use of next-generation neutron sources in biology will require judicious
computer simulation analysis. Computational methods will be developed for
obtaining simplified descriptions of protein dynamics from simulation that are
suitable for direct interpretation of neutron scattering experiments designed to
detect motions. Further, neutron experiments will be combined with simulation so
as to probe motions between protein molecules in crystals. The research combines
concepts in physics, chemistry, biophysics, structural biology and computer
science to employ simulation as a stepping stone between experiments on
biomolecular systems and simplified physical descriptions.

This project involves a strong graduate and undergraduate teaching component in
a highly international research group, and will provide tools for general use by
the neutron and biosimulation communities. Outreach activities will include
lectures in the local community and web-based press articles. A number of
applied scientific disciplines will benefit from the research in that a physical
understanding of protein dynamics is a prerequisite for the rational design of
biofuels, bionanomaterials, catalysts for environmental science and other useful
systems.

