* 0842364
* Collaborative Research: Human-induced Phenotypic Variation in an Endemic Livebearing Fish
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Randall Langerhans, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2013
* USD 273,219.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most critical
threats to biological diversity is the habitat fragmentation and degradation
caused by human activities. Significant advances in our understanding of the
ecological effects of human activities have been made in recent years, however
the evolutionary impacts of human-induced environmental changes are still
largely unknown. This research program will investigate the effects of habitat
fragmentation in a group of small fish in the Bahamas. The work combines field
surveys, analysis of body form/musculature, whole-organism performance trials,
laboratory-rearing experiments, and DNA studies to examine whether ecosystem
fragmentation drives predictable and rapid evolution of body form and swimming
performance.&lt;br/&gt;Estuary fragmentation is widespread in the Bahamas. This
fragmentation results from construction of roads without effective tidal flow-
conveyance structures, such as bridges or culverts. The resulting rapid and
dramatic changes to these coastal systems leads to predictions of substantially
altered natural selection regimes for resident organisms. This study will use
evolutionary theory to develop and test predictions regarding changes in species
traits following fragmentation, centering on endemic fishes, Bahamas Gambusia.
The work will test the predictability of evolution in the face of anthropogenic
impacts, as well as the ability of ecological restoration efforts to restore
previous evolutionary trajectories. &lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate
science and education in a variety of ways. In addition to training at least
seven undergraduate students, the work will create a new outreach program,
?Everyday Evolution.? This program will be integrated with the science
curriculum of a Bahamian high school, hopefully initiating a longer-term, and
more wide-reaching educational module designed to teach the fundamentals of
ecology and evolution to high-school students. With an understanding of
evolution so low for much of the general public, there is no better time to
demonstrate how natural processes can lead to rapid evolution, and how
evolutionary ecologists rigorously test well-articulated hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;