* 0842778
* SGER: Science of Opportunity:  A SGER proposal to develop methods for the quantitative measurement of calcification rates of planktonic foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Victoria Fabry, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2009
* USD 35,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will support the rapid
development of a new method to quantify calcification rates in planktonic
foraminifera. Planktonic foraminifera are a major group of biogenic carbonate
producers in the world?s oceans, contributing an estimated 25% to 65% of the
total deep marine calcite budget. Direct quantitative measurement of
calcification rates in planktonic foraminifera is necessary for determination of
calciu carbonate (CaCO3) production rates ? a key component of the global ocean
CaCO3 budget, for documenting baseline planktonic calcification rates in today?s
ocean for comparisons in future decades ? particularly in regions where warming
and ocean acidification are projected to substantially change the physical and
chemical environment of the upper ocean, and for investigating the response of
planktonic foraminifera in CO2-perturbation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator on this project, a
researcher at the California State University at San Marcos, will work with
paleoceanographers this at the Wrigley Marine Science Center (University of
Southern California) on Catalina Island to devise methods that will provide
quantitative measurements of calcification rates of diver-collected and net-
collected planktonic foraminifera. The new methods to be developed would combine
her previous experience using radioisotopes as an index of calcification in
shelled pteropods with the techniques used by colleagues at the Wrigley
Laboratory and the University of California at Davis . Because the collection
and culture methods of the USC and UC-Davis collaborators are very labor
intensive and because they will soon close down their foraminiferal culturing
facility, this collaborative venture is likely to be the last opportunity for
this kind of multidisciplinary knowledge transfer for some
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed here will be published and
new protocols and data made available via the Internet (e.g., OCB web site and
data base; planned IOCCP guidelines to best practices in ocean acidification
research) so that others may use these methods in developing estimates of CaCO3
production, ocean acidification research, field measurements, and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The new methods developed
are certain to be of great use to the broader community, particularly in ocean
acidification research (perturbation experiments and measurements of field
populations) and constructing budgets of the oceanic CaCO3 cycle. One
undergraduate student and one graduate student will participate in all aspects
of the work at Catalina Island and interact with UC Davis researchers and
graduate students. Because nearly all CSUSM students must work to support
themselves, funds for students are necessary for them to be able to participate
in this unique opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;