* 0842410
* Quantifying the effects of groundwater and hydrology on trophic structure in desert riparian ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* John Sabo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2013
* USD 865,914.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water and energy are essential
ingredients of life and key commodities for humans and other living organisms
that make up food webs. Curiously, although the role of energy in determining
the inner workings of food webs has been thoroughly explored, water has been
mostly ignored in food web ecology. The goal of this project is to fill this
critical research gap by working to understand how the balance between supply
and demand of energy and water affects patterns of abundance and biodiversity in
terrestrial food webs. The research will involve a combination of large scale
field experiments, stable isotopic tracers, and measurements of the metabolism
and water use of individual animals. The research will be conducted in the
forest ecosystem neighboring the San Pedro River, one of the last free flowing
and perennial rivers in the Desert Southwest (USA). Arid lands occupy 1/3 of the
Earth's terrestrial surface and drought is prevalent even in mesic and humid
biomes. Thus, results from this project should provide general guidance for
conservation planners about how changes in local energy and water balance
associated with climate change will alter biodiversity in terrestrial
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve K-12 outreach and
education to enhance science curricula in schools in rural areas. This will be
accomplished through a novel collaboration between graduate students and K-12
teachers as well as a web-based monitoring of river flows on the San Pedro
River.