* 0842384
* Ensemble-Based Hurricane State Estimation, Intensity Prediction, and Targeting
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Gregory Hakim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anna Hallar
* 09/30/2013
* USD 394,950.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much has been learned about
hurricane structure and intensity change from observational analyses and
mesoscale model simulations, much less is known about the predictability of
these features. Arguably the most important contribution to the well-known lack
of improvement in dynamical forecasts of intensity change is the need for
dynamically consistent initial conditions. The challenge in creating initial
conditions is the assimilation of observations in a hurricane environment, which
has large spatial variability. To address this issue, the Principal Investigator
(PI) will apply an ensemble approach to hurricane state estimation,
predictability, and targeting, with an emphasis on structure and intensity
change. The research builds upon recent work by the PI and collaborators using
ensemble techniques for data assimilation, predictability, and targeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities include assimilating observations
using an ensemble Kalman filter in a systematic manner, starting with updates of
only the axisymmetric structure, and proceeding thereafter by including updates
to increasing azimuthal wavenumbers. The predictability time scale of each
component will be evaluated using standard error metrics and more recently
developed methods based on information theory, including predictable component
analysis. Storms to be investigated include: Rita, Katrina, and Ophelia from the
Rainband and Intensity Experiment (RAINEX); Emily from the Tropical Cloud
Systems and Processes (TCSP) experiment; and Bonnie (1998). Storms will be
analyzed using two experiment types: (1) actual observations, and (2) simulated
observations drawn from truth simulations constrained to approximately follow
the track and intensity of the actual storms. Ensemble-based sensitivity
analysis will be used to assess the impact of observations, including targeting,
through observation denial in the real-data cases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research plan builds a bridge
between observational studies, which have established properties of hurricane
structure and intensity change but lack dynamical continuity, and theoretical
and modeling studies that have the spatial and temporal continuity to assess the
dynamics of these features, but lack a close link to the observations of real
storms. The assimilated datasets that result from the research offer the spatial
and temporal resolution of numerical simulations, but should also remain
faithful to available observations. These data will be used to systematically
assess the predictability of storm structure and intensity, which is a crucial
aspect of hurricane dynamics, for which little is known.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The broader impact to society of improved
forecasts of hurricane intensity is well known. Given a successful execution of
the research, a transition to operations seems feasible. Moreover, demonstrated
ability to target observations to routinely improve predictions of hurricane
intensity would have a transformational impact on operational hurricane
forecasting and thus also on emergency planning for these storms.