* 0842059
* Rare-species advantage: consequences of phylogenetic and numerical rarity of hosts for disease pressure and pathogen communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gregory Gilbert, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 583,349.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Locally rare species are expected to
have a survival advantage because rarity reduces their risk of damage from
pathogens. This "rare-species advantage" may help maintain plant diversity in
natural systems and explain how introduced plant species become invasive weeds.
Plant species are considered rare if few individuals are present; this assumes
pathogens are specialized on individual species. In fact, most pathogens are
able to infect a variety of different hosts and closely related species are more
likely to share a pathogen. Thus rarity is not simply a function of species
density (numerical rarity), but of the combined density of species with which it
shares a pathogen. The PIs will evaluate the relative importance of phylogeny
and abundance in the rare-species advantage in seven plant communities along the
Central Coast of California. They will measure disease prevalence, host ranges
of pathogens, and the ability of the pathogens to reproduce on different hosts.
Results will be compared to local host abundance and relatedness between host
species, in the first attempt to evaluate how the overall structure of a plant
community affects the amount of disease suffered by each species in the
community. &lt;br/&gt;The project will provide ecological training for a
postdoctoral fellow with a background in molecular biology, as well as train
graduate and undergraduate students in both molecular and ecological research.
Continued support for the UCSC Forest Ecology Research Plot will help extend
substantial educational and research synergies. This research will inform
policies that regulate international trade of plants and plant products.
Finally, the results will shed new light on whether introduced species
systematically escape natural enemies, an idea that is highly influential in the
biological control of weeds and other aspects of introduced species
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;