* 0842144
* Ecological and evolutionary impacts of ecosystem engineering: Wood-boring beetles, arboreal ants, and trophic interactions in Brazilian cerrado
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Robert Marquis, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2013
* USD 451,614.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some organisms have impacts on the
ecosystems in which they live that are much greater than would be expected based
on their abundance or biomass. The goal of this study is to understand the
influence of wood-boring beetles on associated ant species that live in the
cavities made by those beetles, and also quantify the effect of those ants on
their insect prey and the plants upon which they live. The study will be
conducted in the savannah region of Brazil, where insect and plant diversity are
high, but the tree canopy is sufficiently low to the ground that manipulations
can be carried out at the tree level. Experimental and observational studies
will be conducted to determine (1) the impact of tree size and density on the
relationship between wood-boring beetles, cavity-nesting ants, their prey, and
the plants on which they live, (2) the impact of variability in cavity size on
these relationships, and (3) how wood-boring beetles have influenced the
evolution of the ants, which depend on beetle-produced cavities for shelter and
rearing their offspring. This study will provide unique information about the
relationship between animals that modify their environment, in this case the
beetles, and those that are influenced by such modification. By clarifying the
mechanistic basis for how one species influences the number of other kinds of
animals in the environment, the study will provide important insight into how
species are maintained in complex natural systems. The proposed project will
provide unique summer research opportunities for three undergraduates, targeting
females and underrepresented minorities, and highly valuable training for a
postdoctoral researcher. The project will also foster strong international
collaboration and help solidify a lasting USA-Brazilian institutional link.