* 0842551
* Experimental and Computational Analysis of Merotelic Kinetochore Formation, Dynamics, and Correction
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Daniela Cimini, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2013
* USD 943,737.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research.
Animal cells maintain a correct chromosome number by equally partitioning their
chromosomes into two daughter cells at each mitotic division. Upon mitotic
entry, each chromosome is composed of two sister chromatids, each possessing a
specialized protein complex, the kinetochore (KT), that interacts with
microtubules (MTs) of the mitotic spindle. For accurate chromosome segregation,
the two sister KTs must interact with MTs from opposite poles. However,
erroneous KT-MT interactions can occur. The primary objective of this project is
to study merotelic KT orientation, a specific KT mis-attachment in which a
single KT binds MTs from both spindle poles rather than just one. This type of
mis-attachment represents a major source of chromosome mis-segregation in
mammalian tissue cells. However, much about merotelic KT formation, dynamics,
and correction is still unknown. Tissue culture cells will be used as a model
system and the experimental data, mostly obtained through high-resolution
microscopy and live-cell imaging in the Cimini lab, will be complemented by
quantitative and computational modeling, performed by the Co-P.I. Dr. Gul
Civelekoglu-Scholey and collaborator Dr. Alex Mogilner, to investigate the
following specific objectives: 1. Effect of mitotic spindle geometry on
establishment of kinetochore mis-attachments; 2. Molecular and mechanistic
understanding of merotelic kinetochore behavior before anaphase onset and the
pre-anaphase correction mechanism; 3. Chromosome segregation errors due to the
persistence of merotelic orientation into anaphase. Understanding merotelic KT
formation, dynamics, and correction will elucidate several molecular and
mechanistic aspects of KT-MT attachment, chromosome dynamics and segregation.
The specific biological questions addressed in this project will be investigated
by integrating the experimental approach with a theoretical / computational
modeling approach. This combined approach offers obvious advantages: theoretical
/ computational modeling allows quantitative testing of qualitative models
emerging from experimental data and the capacity to make predictions. Such
predictions can then be tested in further experiments to validate, refine, or
modify the model, and the process can start over. This creates an efficient
feedback loop in which the experimental results feed the computational model,
and the model makes predictions that can be tested experimentally, thus
significantly accelerating the learning and discovery process. The combined
experimental-computational approach undertaken here will generate comprehensive
models of various mitotic processes and will be crucial to move one step closer
to building a systems-level model of mitosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The proposed project will make contributions to both education and
research. At least three graduate students and several undergraduate students
will be involved in the research project. Besides learning state-of-the-art
microscopy and cell biology methodologies, these students will have the
opportunity to develop critical, analytical, independent, and interdisciplinary
thinking skills. They will learn how to analyze biological problems from
different perspectives and will learn how to integrate the knowledge arising
from different fields of study (i.e., experimental and computational biology).
Undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;in the Cimini lab are strongly encouraged to be
active participants in ongoing research projects (one current student is co-
author on two research papers recently submitted for review in high profile
journals). This type of training will likely encourage them to pursue a career
in science. The findings of this work will be regularly presented at relevant
meetings, such as the American Society for Cell Biology annual meeting, the
Mitosis FASEB summer research meeting, the Chromosome Dynamics Gordon
Conference, and the Chromosome Segregation and Aneuploidy International
Workshop. In addition, several publications on peer-reviewed journals are
expected to be produced during the course of this project. Finally, some of the
high resolution images and videos obtained during this study will be submitted
to the Image and Video Library of the American Society for Cell Biology. This
on-line image and video library is an open access collection of images and
videos of cells, and it is a valuable source of information for educators,
researchers, and students of any age and background.