* 0842371
* SGER: Healing the Rifts: A Study of Intraparty Factionalism at the Presidential Nominating Conventions
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Joanne Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2010
* USD 16,129.00

The Democratic Party's contest for the 2008 presidential nominee went on longer
and divided the party more deeply than any other such contest in recent history.
By contrast, the Republican Party's nomination race was relatively quick and did
not generate deep fissures within the party. This research will shed light on
the nature of modern political parties. The party is not the formal hierarchy it
may have been a century ago, in which bosses could dictate the choice of nominee
to the rank and file with little expectation of resistance. Today's parties are
better thought of as networks of formal party groups, interest groups, and
donors. It is these networks that allow parties to manage a crisis, such as an
intraparty rift during a competitive election.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will investigate these intraparty rifts and the role of social
networks as part of the effort to heal them by conducting interviews of
delegates to both the Republican and Democratic National Conventions in August
and September of 2008. Respondents will asked their opinions about the major
candidates for the presidential nominations, their previous involvement in party
activities, their membership in various interest groups, and their cultural
beliefs about the importance of intraparty democracy. Respondents will be
contacted for follow-up interviews in the late fall to determine the effect of
fall campaigns on intraparty factionalism. The researchers will test the
hypotheses that involvement in expanded party networks (including interest
groups and party posts) mitigates this factionalism and that participation in
such networks promotes loyalty to party rather than to a specific
candidate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have broader impacts on the
way this presidential election season is understood by political observers.
Rather than making assumptions about the fractious nature of the primary season
and its effect on the general election, journalists and other observers will be
able to draw upon our this research for concrete measurements and qualitative
assessments of these rifts. Additionally, this research will also involve the
use of graduate and undergraduate students at multiple institutions as survey
administrators. These students will receive specialized training that will
enrich their academic experiences.