* 0842624
* Consequences of Lipid Restructuring During Temperature Variation on the Susceptibility of Biological Membranes to Lipid Peroxidation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Elizabeth Crockett, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 02/28/2014
* USD 484,626.00

Life in the presence of oxygen involves the regular production of reactive
oxygen species (including free radicals) and other highly reactive molecules.
Some of these compounds can initiate lipid peroxidation (LPO), a series of
reactions that can significantly alter the chemical, physical, and functional
properties of biological membranes. Although LPO may damage cells, a certain
level appears necessary for a variety of cellular processes. Poikilothermic
animals (i.e., animals that live at a variety of body temperatures) represent
the vast majority of animals that live on earth. In order to keep membranes at
or near an optimal fluidity, poikilotherms alter the chemical compositions of
their biological membranes with changes in body temperature. At low
temperatures, poikilotherms have membranes particularly rich in the phospholipid
phosphatidylethanolamine and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. In addition,
their cells often have higher contents of energy-producing mitochondria, the
primary source of reaction oxygen species. These changes could make animals at
cold temperatures more vulnerable to LPO than their warm-bodied counterparts. At
the same time, low temperature slows rates of LPO and production of reactive
oxygen species. Using a fish model (the striped bass, Morone saxatilis), this
work will test the central hypothesis that membrane susceptibility to LPO is
maintained over a range of body temperatures. Other objectives include
quantification of LPO products and antioxidant defenses. Recently developed
fluorescent probes and chromatographic techniques will be used to address
hypotheses. LPO is intensively studied in biomedicine and aging biology, yet the
significance of membrane peroxidation, within the contexts of temperature
physiology, has yet to be elucidated. Studies aimed at determining
susceptibilities to LPO are necessary to clarify how poikilotherms avoid
potentially damaging peroxidation of biological membranes. This research will
contribute to a mechanistic understanding of biochemical factors that make life
possible over a range of temperatures. The project will incorporate mentorship
and training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students (including
research at a marine laboratory), collaboration with a faculty member from a
predominantly undergraduate institution, consultation with an established
researcher in the field of biomedical research, and outreach designed to educate
children about how organisms adapt to life at different temperatures.