* 0842057
* Collaborative Research: High Pressure Calibration at High Temperatures
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Alexander Goncharov, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 276,639.00

0842057 / 0842345&lt;br/&gt;Goncharov / Bass&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). This proposal seeks ~$478K in funding to support developing a high
pressure, high temperature calibration scale for diamond anvil cell (DAC)
studies. Existing pressure scales are plagued with issues particularly at high
temperatures. Developing a pressure scale is proposed by performing density
measurements by x-ray diffraction and concurrent sound velocity measurements
using Brillouin scattering on cubic boron nitride (cBN). In addition, Raman P
and T measurements will be made. The PIs propose to reference other materials
though their equation of state to cBN at varying temperatures and pressures by
coupling methodologies into a single pressure scale. Because material properties
change under high pressure and temperature, it has been difficult to ascribe
pressure exerted on materials in DAC studies. Pressure and temperature effects
have been noted for numerous materials and measurement techniques (X-ray,
optical, fluorescent, etc). cBN is suggested as a potential pressure scale
calibrant as it's crystal structure is theoretically stable to phase
transformation up to at least 1000 GPa within the range of DAC studies. DAC
studies along with the calibrated pressure scale will allow studies into
material phase transitions in the Earth's interior, Earth material thermal
property studies and equation of state determinations, and material phase
stability and chemistry. This study will result in a primary pressure scale -
calibrated on an inert material and suitable for high T&amp;P work. The outcome
will allow accurate X-ray diffraction, X-ray spectroscopy, and X-ray scattering
measurements under high T&amp;P. This, in turn, will allow theoretical equation
of state calculations for deep Earth materials. Results will broadly impact
geophysics, mineral physics, geochemistry and geodynamics. Studies will involve
REU students (2-3 per summer). Graduate students are post-docs are also proposed
for training.