* 0842376
* SGER: Generalization of musical experience to listening to speech in noise
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Nina Kraus, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2010
* USD 198,338.00

Generalization of musical experience to listening in
noise&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noise is ubiquitous in our lives: the whir of a
computer, the chatter of a busy classroom, the din of a noisy restaurant.
Children, older adults, and the hearing impaired are especially vulnerable to
the disruption that background noise has on listening and learning. The degree
to which noise affects the ability to understand spoken words differs from
individual to individual. Why? One theory is that musical experience may be a
key to success in overcoming noisy environments. In this project, brain
responses will be measured using sensitive recording electrodes while
participants listen to speech embedded in background noise. The degree to which
the brain is able to ?pull? the speech out of the noise will be discernable in
the brainwaves. This ability will be examined with respect to the amount of
musical training that each participant has had in the course of their lives. The
brainwave results will be complemented with thorough listening-in-noise testing.
As such, this study stands at the crossroads of two previously nonintersecting
lines of research: musical experience?s effect on the nervous system and the
effects of noise on the neural processing and perception of speech.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide a better understanding
of the role of music training on the sensory processes that are necessary for
successful communication and learning. Understanding how the ?normal? auditory
system is impacted by musical training will provide a baseline for future
studies addressing music?s role in disabled populations, such as hearing- and
reading-impaired individuals. Hearing words accurately and forming associations
between sounds and letters are keys to learning to read. If it turns out that
musicianship affects the ability to hear words accurately, there would be
profound ramifications for advocating music education in public schools. At the
other end of the age spectrum, music may prove to be a check for the well-known
speech-in-noise perception decline in older adults. Finally, the proposed work
will provide diverse scientific training opportunities in human perception and
neurophysiology for graduate, undergraduate and area high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;