* 0842246
* Infrared Spectroscopic Studies of Plant Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Bridgette Barry, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2014
* USD 708,640.00

Protein dynamics play a key but poorly understood role in enzymatic mechanisms.
The development of new methods to identify protein structural changes that
facilitate chemical reactions will have a transformative effect on our
understanding of biological catalysis. Photosynthetic reaction centers provide
an example of biological reactions in which protein dynamics play an important
role and in which the reactions are light-inducible. Therefore, the
photosynthetic reactions serve as a model system in which kinetic mechanism can
be investigated using laser flashes to synchronize and start reactions. To
identify protein structural changes important in catalysis, novel, time-resolved
spectroscopic studies of the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) in photosystem II
(PSII) will be conducted. PSII consists both of integral, membrane-spanning
subunits and of extrinsic subunits. The OEC contains a tetranuclear manganese
(Mn) cluster and accumulates the four photon-derived oxidizing equivalents
necessary for oxygen production from water. The sequentially oxidized forms of
the catalytic site are called the Sn states, where n refers to the number of
oxidizing equivalents stored. Chloride plays an important but not completely
understood role in the S state cycle. Despite decades of study, many aspects of
the water oxidation mechanism remain to be elucidated. The intellectual merit of
these activities is that new fundamental understandings of the role of protein
dynamics in catalysis will result. The photosynthetic oxygen-evolving reactions
are responsible for the maintenance of aerobic life on earth and thus are of
intrinsic importance in biological chemistry. These reactions also serve as a
model of other enzymatic reactions involving molecular oxygen.

BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impact of these activities results from the
advancement of teaching, training, and learning, as well as from broadening the
scientific participation of underrepresented groups. The principal investigator
has had the privilege of training individuals from underrepresented groups,
including both graduate and undergraduate students. Several of the principal
investigator's former students and postdoctoral associates have gone on to teach
at undergraduate or Ph.D.-granting institutions. The principal investigator has
collaborations with individuals who teach at non-Ph.D. granting institutions,
and these individuals are co-authors with the principal investigator on
publications, which have been broadly disseminated to the scientific community.
In addition, the principal investigator is program director for a new Georgia
Tech Molecular Biophysics training program, which will enhance the
infrastructure for research and training at Georgia Tech. The principal
investigator teaches at both the undergraduate and graduate levels at Georgia
Tech, and she incorporates research and literature-based exercises in these
courses. Further, the principal investigator has been involved in outreach to
the community through science fair activities. Plans for the next funding cycle
include broadening graduate and undergraduate student involvement in the
Molecular Biophysics research program by outreach to historically black
institutions in the Southeast and Atlanta area. Also, the principal investigator
will recruit summer students through the NSF REU program in the summer and
through Georgia Tech research opportunities during the academic year.