* 0842181
* A Comparative Approach to Dating the Diversification of Hawaiian Diptera
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Brian Moore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2013
* USD 48,066.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hawaiian Islands provide an
unparalleled system for understanding species formation. This biodiversity
hotspot contains large numbers of species that occur nowhere else in the world.
One very diverse group is the Hawaiian files (Diptera). DNA sequences will be
used to determine the evolutionary history of the flies, and then the history
will permit testing of biogeographic, ecological, and evolutionary hypotheses.
Powerful methods for determining the timing of historical events will permit
assessment of when the flies dispersed from one island to the next. With the
information on relationships among species and timing of dispersal, it will be
possible to investigate evolutionary processes (e.g., speciation, extinction,
adaptation) that occur in disparate groups of Hawaiian flies, each of which
exhibits unique genetic and ecological
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work include
education and outreach, participation of underrepresented groups, and the
development of analytical and computational approaches to investigate island
evolution, biogeography, speciation, divergence-time estimation, and
biodiversity conservation. The field and laboratory components will train
Berkeley graduate and undergraduate students, as well as native Hawaiian high
school students. Extensive field data on distribution and abundance of Hawaiian
insects, summarized in searchable online databases, will facilitate conservation
management decisions. Finally, this work will provide a unified methodological
framework for understanding the evolution of biodiversity in island
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;