* 0842770
* RNA Polymerase-Specific Transcription Complex Assembly on snRNA Genes:   Structural and Functional Relationships
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* William Stumph, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2013
* USD 485,997.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: The small nuclear RNAs
(snRNAs) known as U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 comprise a highly abundant class of
metabolically stable, non-polyadenylated RNA molecules that are required for
pre-messenger RNA splicing in eukaryotic organisms. The spliceosomal snRNAs are
synthesized by RNA polymerase II with the exception of U6, which is synthesized
by RNA polymerase III. Despite this difference in RNA polymerase specificity, U6
genes and the RNA polymerase II-transcribed snRNA genes utilize similar cis-
acting regulatory signals and overlapping sets of transcription factors for
their expression. The main goal of the project is to gain an understanding of
the structure-function relationships that are involved in polymerase-specific
transcription complex assembly, with emphasis on the TATA-less U1 promoter, More
generally, this project will help us understand how very subtle changes in
macromolecular interactions and assembly can lead to significantly different
biological outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Transcription of both classes of
snRNA genes requires a unique multi-subunit transcription factor most commonly
referred to as the snRNA-activating protein complex, or SNAPc. This factor
recognizes an essential promoter element termed the PSE located within the
region 40-75 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site. In the fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster, SNAPc is composed of three subunits that together
carry out sequence-specific recognition of the ~21 base-pair PSE (known more
specifically as the PSEA in fruit flies). Even though a U1 PSEA and a U6 PSEA
differ at only 5 of 21 nucleotide positions, this sequence difference plays a
major role in determining the RNA polymerase specificity of insect snRNA genes.
Furthermore, the three subunits of DmSNAPc adopt a different conformation when
bound to a U1 vs. U6 PSEA. This conformational difference is believed to be
responsible for the recruitment of the correct RNA polymerase.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To better understand the structural arrangement of the
SNAPc subunits bound to a PSEA, a novel technique that combines site-specific
protein-DNA photo-cross-linking with specific chemical proteolysis of the
protein will be employed. These experiments will determine the orientation or
polarity of each of the SNAPc subunits on the DNA. In flies, the TATA-binding
protein (TBP) is used for U1 transcription by RNA polymerase II, but the TBP-
related factor TRF1 is utilized for U6 transcription by RNA polymerase III. The
domains of the individual SNAPc subunits involved in interactions with TBP or
TRF1 will be identified. The fly U1 gene will serve as an excellent model for
investigating transcription complex assembly on TATA-less RNA polymerase II
promoters. Toward that end, the mechanism by which SNAPc recruits TBP to the
TATA-less U1 promoter will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts: The research will be performed by students working on their B.S., M.S.,
and Ph.D. degrees in biochemistry/molecular biology. The project will provide
training for their future careers in the biotechnology industry, for advancement
to graduate and professional schools, or to careers in academia. San Diego State
University, due to its border location and emphasis on undergraduate as well as
graduate instruction, serves a large body of undergraduate students from
underrepresented ethnic groups. The principal investigator is active in
undergraduate classroom teaching and has a strong track record and history of
involving underrepresented students in NSF-funded research. The results of the
project will be disseminated in peer-reviewed scientific journals and will
contribute widely to the areas of transcription regulation and gene expression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;