* 0842284
* Arabidopsis 2010:   Regulation of the proembryo boundary in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Wolfgang Lukowitz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 04/30/2014
* USD 497,442.00

Wolfgang Lukowitz&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number IOS-0842284&lt;br/&gt;Arabidopsis
2010: Regulation of the proembryo boundary in
Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant body is produced by two groups of
stem cell, the root and shoot apical meristems. It remains largely unknown how
these stem cell niches are first established in the early embryo. The proposed
research will analyze the role of HAN, a predicted regulator of gene activity,
in positioning the root stem cell niche. Preliminary work, largely by the
methods of genetics and molecular biology, reveals that HAN determines the
position of an instructive boundary between two different cell types, termed the
"proembryo boundary". Signaling across this boundary, which is set up when the
embryo has only eight cells, subsequently organizes the root stem cell
niche.&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive approach, including standard genetic and
molecular biology techniques, genomics, microscopy, and biochemistry, will be
followed with the aim to mechanistically understand how the proembryo boundary
is established and regulated. Special emphasis will be placed on analyzing the
role of HAN and closely related HAN-like factors this process. The expected
results will make a significant and novel contribution to our fundamental
understanding of patterning processes in plants and possibly inform targeted
approaches for initiating root stem cell niches in culture.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will lead to the training of a postdoctoral fellow and a graduate
student in plant genetics, molecular biology, genomics, and advanced microscopy.
Participation of high school and undergraduate students is an integral part of
the research plan. Students will be recruited through programs of the Plant
Biology Department, as well the University's Summer Undergraduate Research
Program (SURP) and the NSF-sponsored Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (PSLSAMP).