* 0842500
* Electrochemical Studies of Redox Cofactors in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James Rusling, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2013
* USD 475,171.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Photosynthetic systems use reaction
center proteins to direct electrons across membranes to convert solar energy
into chemical energy. The products of green plant photosynthesis are
carbohydrates and oxygen, which form the basis for life on earth. Reaction
center proteins are ideal experimental systems for examining these processes
because they can be readily isolated, purified, and modified for studies seeking
to establish the details of how they function. In addition, reaction centers
serve as excellent model systems on which to base solar energy collection
devices. This project aims to develop a functional understanding of reaction
center proteins in photosynthetic systems utilizing advanced electrochemical
studies. Ultrathin films containing the proteins will be used to facilitate
electrical communication with electrodes and to provide rapid analysis of the
protein-bound charge carriers. Advantages to this approach are that only tiny
amounts of protein are required, and the films provide environments similar to
that found in nature. Computer simulations of the experimental data will extract
basic parameters that characterize key reactions and energies of the
photosynthetic charge transfer processes. Such knowledge is critical for
understanding how reaction center proteins achieve directional charge transport
across membranes to produce carbohydrates and molecular oxygen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this project include making
fundamental contributions to the understanding of photosynthesis as a basis for
the design of novel solar energy conversion devices. New graduate students and
existing staff will be supported to assist in the research, thus providing
employment for these individuals as an aid to the American economy. The project
will provide a rich training ground in modern, interdisciplinary, bioscience
research and education for the participants, which if possible will include
underrepresented minorities and women. The modern techniques learned and the
research experience gained will help to prepare them for productive scientific
careers in the future.