* 0842586
* Second Workshop on Neutrino Detection for Nuclear Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* William McDonough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 28,927.00

Significant progress has been made in exploiting the practical utility of
antineutrino detection for nonproliferation purposes, in particular, reactor
monitoring, and for geophysics purposes, by mapping the earth's core, crust, and
mantle. Despite these remarkable successes, these inter-related communities have
had only modest overlap. As a result, the fields of applied and basic
antineutrino physics lack an overarching strategy that would allow efficient
exploitation of the resources and strengths provided by each stakeholder. This
workshop aims to develop the basis for such a strategic alignment of interests
between the fundamental and applied antineutrino physics communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop reporters will summarize the state of the art in
current antineutrino detection; technologies and applications, and participants
will work intensively to create an environment for collaborative research across
the community. Further, participants will examine the practicality of
establishing a National Center for Neutrino Study (NCNS) similar in nature to
the Space Telescope Science Institute or the Advanced Photon Source. User
community members will be invited to participate in the workshop and will be
asked to describe their vision of utilizing neutrino detection devices
nationally with the intent to integrate their use globally. These visions will
be informed by a clear understanding of the prospects and limitations intrinsic
in antineutrino physics provided by the US neutrino science community attendees.
The importance of this workshop will be to unite disparate groups of multi-
disciplinary scientists with shared goals in antineutrino detection research and
applications. A goal of the workshop is to develop stronger bonds of
communications between these fields. This step is necessary in order to fully
understand the various the components of an antineutrino spectrum and identify
correctly the sources of the signal.