* 0842798
* Collaborative Research: Participation in the MICE Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Pierrick Hanlet, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 05/31/2011
* USD 76,829.00

There is increasing interest in using particle accelerators to form very intense
beams of high-energy muons. However, due to its short average lifetime (2.2
microseconds), it has not been possible to accelerate a muon beam. A key step in
demonstrating the feasibility of muon accelerators is the Muon Ionization
Cooling Experiment (MICE). The main obstacle to accelerating an intense muon
beam is that the way such beams are created makes them too large to fit into the
vacuum chamber of a synchrotron, and the short muon lifetime leaves little time
to shrink the beam. Ionization cooling is a new technique to shrink, or cool a
muon beam quickly. The goal of MICE is to build a section of an ionization-
cooling channel, instrument it to measure its cooling performance, and use a
muon beam produced at a particle accelerator to demonstrate that it works as
designed. A collaborative effort of some 150 physicists and engineers from
Europe, Asia, and the US, MICE is being mounted at England's Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory. Construction of the apparatus is currently in progress, and the
running of the experiment and analysis of its results is expected to take place
during the 3-year period of the grant proposed here. This proposal requests
renewal funding for the Illinois Institute of Technology MICE group in support
of continued US leadership in muon cooling and in the muon accelerator
facilities that might be constructed, in the US or elsewhere, once the
feasibility of ionization cooling is demonstrated. The broader impact of this
work is most evident in the use of an accelerated muon beam for a Neutrino
Factory recognized as the most powerful tool yet conceived in the quest to
understand the mysterious oscillatory behavior of the neutrino and its possible
role in the evolution of the matter-dominated Universe in which we live. In
addition, the pace of MICE development, running, and analysis is particularly
well suited to the training of students. MICE will take approximately three
years to complete, a good fit to the typical physics student?s graduate
training.