* 0842946
* Fluctuating tidewater glaciers, chemical weathering and survival of reef-dwelling organisms: the Marinoan snowball, South Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Adam Maloof, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 03/31/2013
* USD 202,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluctuating Tidewater Glaciers, Chemical Weathering and
Survival of&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reef-Dwelling Organisms: the Marinoan Snowball,
South Australia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adam Maloof&lt;br/&gt;Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The snowball Earth hypothesis posits that the
oceans were sealed in ice for millions of years, at least once or twice, between
720 and 635 million years ago. However, three observations have caused some to
question this backbone of the snowball Earth hypothesis: (1) There is geological
evidence for dynamic wet-based glaciers, in the form of thick glacially derived
sediments and deep glacial erosion. How was sufficient snow delivered to ice
sheets to keep them flowing when the oceans were covered in ice? (2) There is
geological and geochemical evidence for thermal episodicity during a single
snowball interval in the form of interbedded glacial and non-glacial sediments.
How would ice advance and retreat and how would variable temperature/humidity
conditions develop on a deeply frozen Earth with ice-covered oceans? (3)
Photosynthesizing eukaryotes appear to survive the glaciation, unscathed. How
did photosynthesizers survive millions of years of freezing conditions in
isolated refugia without having a major influence on the course of evolutionary
biology? &lt;br/&gt;The Marinoan (ended 635 Ma) glacial succession of South
Australia (SA) contains the most reliable paleomagnetic evidence for equatorial
sedimentation of any Neoproterozoic glacial deposit worldwide. Additionally, the
Flinders and Gammons ranges of SA boast superb outcrop for hundreds of
kilometers along and across paleo-shoreline strike, allowing for detailed
reconstruction of sedimentary environments and lateral chemical and isotopic
gradients, all in the context of 3-dimensional stratigraphy and basin analysis.
With the possible exception of northern Namibia, nowhere else in the world
provides such an opportunity to study the sedimentary and geochemical record of
Neoproterozoic glaciation. The proposed study will document the Marinoan low-
latitude glaciation in South Australia through a multidisciplinary study of the
pre-, syn- and post-glacial deposits exposed in the Flinders and Gammon Ranges.
Our work will evaluate the intensity of the hydrological cycle, the thermal
regime of equatorial glaciers, and the evidence that multicellular life predated
and survived a snowball Earth episode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;