* 0842134
* Acquisition of a High-Pressure High-Temperature Load and Flow-Through System for Research and Teaching
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Derek Elsworth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 207,226.00

0842134&lt;br/&gt;Elsworth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of a high
temperature (up to 200Â°C), high pressure (up to 70 MPa) capable, multi (3)
triaxial cell, rock deformation apparatus with sample ports to allow for
chemical analysis of ingoing and outgoing fluids (via in line gas
chromatography) and which can be mounted in Penn State?s X-ray computed
tomography gantry to allow for concurrent nondestructive imaging of the samples.
The apparatus will also be adapted to allow for observation of in situ p-wave
velocities and resistivity in sample materials. The design will allow for long
term (1-6 months) high P/T samples runs so as to simulate in situ conditions
representative of the shallow crust. The equipment will be used to examine the
evolution of deformation, pore fluid pressures, deformability, and chemically
assisted compaction and micro-fracturing in a variety of rock samples in order
to advance understanding of the evolution of basin rocks, fault gouges,
proppants, caprocks and natural fractures in natural and engineered systems. The
system will be unique in Penn State?s Energy Institute PSU and will complement
other NSF-funded rock deformation experimental facilities in the Department of
Geosciences and elsewhere in the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences. Research
applications described include several of high intellectual merit and broader
societal impact including understanding the evolution of fluid transport
(including liquid CO2 and radionuclide bearing fluids) and chemistry in
fractured and granular media. The equipment to purchased be purchased is made in
the U.S.A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;