* 0842877
* Interception of the Fungal Haustorium by the Broad-Spectrum Plant Resistance Protein RPW8
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Shunyuan Xiao, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 629,748.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many fungal and fungus-like oomycete
pathogens breach the plant cell wall and develop a feeding structure named the
haustorium to steal photosynthate from the host cell. The haustorium is encased
by an enigmatic extra-haustorial membrane (EHM) believed to be derived from the
host cell plasma membrane. Although this interfacial membrane is of critical
importance to the host for defense and the pathogen for pathogenesis, until
recently not a single EHM-resident protein has been identified. Preliminary data
from the PI's group now demonstrate that the broad-spectrum disease resistance
protein RPW8.2 is specifically targeted to the EHM for defense against isolates
of Golovinomyces spp. that cause wide-spread powdery mildew diseases. This
project aims to characterize the structure-function relationships of RPW8.2 in
relation to its defense and intracellular trafficking activities. The
trafficking pathway of RPW8.2 from its site of synthesis to the EHM will be
elucidated via pharmacological, biochemical and genetic approaches and the role
of a 14-3-3 protein in this process will be determined. Through its analysis of
RPW8.2-mediated broad-spectrum mildew resistance, this project will provide
fresh insights into the molecular warfare between plants and pathogens. In
particular, cellular mechanisms of targeted protein trafficking will be analyzed
as an important component of host innate immunity. The basic mechanisms to be
characterized in this project may open new avenues for engineering more
effective, focused defense systems against numerous haustorium-forming fungal
and oomycete pathogens, thereby leading to gains in crop production and
environmental protection. Furthermore, the proposed project will integrate
research with education by providing ideal hands-on training opportunities for
high school internship students, undergraduates, graduates, and postdoctoral
researchers in plant genetics and molecular plant pathology.