* 0842947
* ARRA: CONTEXTUAL CONTRIBUTION IN BRAIN AND COGNITION
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Moshe Bar, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 01/31/2013
* USD 649,196.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objects, people and events around us
tend to occur in typical contexts. Ovens appear in kitchens, traffic lights tend
to appear in streets, and a beach-umbrella appears next to a beach-chair and a
towel. Contextual relations that are typical in our everyday lives are used by
the brain to generate predictions and provide a universal element in the
operation of the human brain. Context-based predictions enable us to recognize
scenes, objects, people, and emotional and social cues in complex images with
great efficiency. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Moshe
Bar and colleagues at the Massachusetts General Hospital are combining methods
from cognitive psychology and human brain imaging to investigate the neural
basis of contextual processing. This research program is focused on three goals:
to define empirically different associative relations between objects, to use
this knowledge to characterize how these relations are clustered and represented
in the brain, and to specify the cognitive and neural mechanisms that use
context to generate the predictions that help us understand our environment so
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characterization of the underlying neural
mechanisms of contextual processing is expected to add to our knowlege of the
specific cortical dynamics underlying real-world vision and the general dynamics
of large-scale brain networks. A clear understanding of how contextual
processing guides perception (and subsequently decision-making and action) will
have a profound impact on how cognitive, social and clinical psychologists,
neurologists, and computer scientists approach visual cognition. Understanding
how context is used in the brain to facilitate behavior may inform our
understanding of how object recognition is impacted by brain injury, how to
improve assistive devices, and how to design more efficient algorithms and
hardware for machine vision. This research program involves the training of
several post-doctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;