* 0842009
* Collabrative Research:  Does productivity drive diversity or vice versa?  Empirical and theoretical investigations of the multivariate productivity-diversity hypothesis in streams
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Bradley Cardinale, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 10/31/2011
* USD 389,496.00

The relationship between species diversity and the productivity of ecosystems is
one of the most important yet controversial topics in biology. Historically,
biologists have assumed that the productivity of an ecosystem limits how many
species can coexist in that system. Over the past two decades, experiments have
suggested that the opposite is true; that the number of species present in the
same ecosystem limits the productivity. This has led to an apparent paradox: is
species diversity the cause or the consequence of productivity? This study seeks
to resolve this paradox by testing the Multivariate Productivity-Diversity
hypothesis. This hypothesis proposes that the relationship between productivity
and diversity can be distilled into three types of effects: 1) an effect of
nutrient supply that sets an upper bound on an ecosystem's potential
productivity, 2) an effect of species richness that determines how productive an
ecosystem actually is for a given nutrient supply, and 3) an additional effect
of nutrient supply on production that occurs as nutrients control the number of
competing species that can coexist. This research will use field and laboratory
experiments to quantify these effects and fit them together into a mathematical
model that predicts both the biomass and number of species of plants and animals
in an ecosystem.

This research will have significant broader impacts on the management of
ecosystems that are undergoing rapid environmental change. Species diversity is
being lost worldwide at an unprecedented rate, and the productivity of
ecosystems is being altered by over use of fertilizer. This work will be at the
forefront of developing models that help forecast how two of the most pervasive
aspects of environmental change (biodiversity loss and excessive nutrients)
jointly impact ecological communities. This project will also provide research
training to graduate and undergraduate students.