* 0842753
* New Insights into the Fine-scale Behavior of Subducted Slab Around the Transition Zone and in the Deep Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 266,795.00

The formation and evolution of the North American continent is characterized by
the assembly and dispersal of smaller continental masses over the last three
billion years. Understanding the origin of this continent thus provides
important clues to long-term mantle dynamics, and by the same token,
understanding the global framework of mantle dynamics is vital to properly
interpret fragmentary geological records and assimilate them into a unifying
model for continental evolution. This project hinges on the notion that
substantial progress in a regional perspective would be achieved most
efficiently if concurrent development is also made in a global framework, and is
motivated by a unique and exciting opportunity provided by the USArray to make
considerable progress toward resolving first-order issues such as the structure
of mantle convection and its chemical evolution. The style of mantle convection
has been debated intensely in the last few decades, and migration imaging has a
potential to make a breakthrough, by providing a new kind of seismic evidence
complementary to tomographic imaging. Subducted slab is not only cooler than the
ambient mantle but also composed of two chemically distinct layers, namely thin
garnet-rich oceanic crust and olivine-rich mantle lithosphere. The thermal
signature of subducted slab becomes more difficult to detect in the deep mantle
because seismic velocity becomes less sensitive to temperature with increasing
pressures, but its chemical signature remains robust, which may be detected by
analyzing seismic array data. Also, mantle differentiation responsible for the
chemical layering of subducted slabs points to another important role played by
migration imaging in understanding chemical geodynamics, namely the seismic
mapping of the fate of subducted oceanic crust. In order to advance our
understanding on the style of mantle convection and its chemical evolution, the
PI and his colleague apply new-generation migration methods to the USArray data
to image the three-dimensional distribution of fine-scale scatterers throughout
the mantle beneath Central America. Central America is one of the few regions
where subducted slab seems to penetrate into the lower mantle according to a
number of tomographic models, and it is well situated in terms of the
distribution of seismic sources and receivers, i.e., deep-focused earthquakes in
South America and a large-aperture seismic array in North America (USArray).
This research is also coupled with undergraduate education, by designing a new
laboratory session for a core course in geophysics and recruiting students to
array seismology data processing. The source code of the advanced migration
methods is planned to be distributed, together with a user manual and a
tutorial.