* 0842386
* International Workshop on Power System Operation and Planning.  To be Held in Nigeria, August 17-19, 2009.
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* James Momoh, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 09/30/2010
* USD 49,999.00

The intent of this proposal is to organize the first international workshop
devoted to evaluate options for "Expanding Renewable Energy to Reduce Global
Emissions - A Case Study for US and Africa". The workshop will involve energy
experts, researchers, and university scholars / students as well as policy
makers and market players as participants and invited speakers at plenary and
panel sessions. The venue for the workshop in Sub-Saharan Africa will provide
the US participants with knowledge of renewable energy issues and related
environmental problems on the African continent that may affect climate change
on a global scale. In addition, it promotes interaction and collaboration of US
participants with colleagues from Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of the proposed workshop include (1) new understanding of renewable
energy resource applications for achieving its adaptation to Climate Change
impacts; (2) development of fundamental understanding of computation methods for
mitigation and control of energy use as well as identification of necessary
control applications and computational intelligence needed to address
environmental pollution from greenhouse gases; and (3) understanding new trends
in US and Sub-Saharan African power industry that are focused on meeting the
energy balance through various energy sources through development of innovative
ways to tackle global climate change issues; cost benefit and social
implications of renewable energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
include (1) promoting and developing renewable energy resources to meet energy
demand and promote national security; (2) promoting integration of research and
education activities and training of students among US and Africa collaborations
on areas of climate change and renewable energy and the economic and social
impacts on standards of living; (3) promoting activities that lead to joint
research activities between US and African participants as documented by
increased joint journal publications.