* 0842814
* Confined Protein Hydration & Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Joshua Wand, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2012
* USD 728,687.00

Intellectual Merit: Proteins perform the majority of functional tasks in living
systems and to do so they must be dynamic. Internal protein motion is well known
to be dependent on the solvation environment. Though the interaction between
solvent water and protein has been extensively studied computationally, site-
resolved experimentally derived information on this critical interaction is
severely lacking. This project will help to fill this void by quantitatively
describing the hydration and dynamics of model proteins under nanoconfined
conditions. Both specific water-protein interactions and bulk solvation
properties have critical effects on protein structure and function. Solvation
conditions under nanoconfinement are now known to differ considerably from bulk
solvation, raising the question of how the altered solvation environment in the
tight spaces of the cell affects protein behavior. Reverse micelles have become
a primary model for studying physicochemical properties of nanoconfined species.
Over the past decade, reverse micelle encapsulation has also been adapted for
the structural study of proteins using high-resolution NMR. This project will
take advantage of the favorable properties of the reverse micelle system to
answer fundamental questions of how confinement alters protein hydration and
dynamics. Advanced NMR methods will be employed to characterize the effects of
confinement on the picosecond-nanosecond-microsecond-millisecond time scales.
Hydration waters will be detected and characterized also using NMR-based
methods. The data yielded by these studies will permit analysis of the
correlations between protein structural character, hydration properties, and
protein motion. Such data will help fill the gap between theory and experiment
in the exploration of the protein-solvent dynamic landscape.

Broader Impacts: The project will be carried out in a laboratory that has a long
history of involving undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral trainees in
cutting edge research. In addition, personnel affiliated with this project are
engaged in the NSF SPARK program in Philadelphia. SPARK is designed to nurture
the participation of under-represented minorities in the sciences. The results
of the research project will be disseminated in high profile journals providing
significant exposure not only for the scientific product itself but also for
those who have generated it. Finally, the project rests on an emerging
technology NMR spectroscopy of encapsulated proteins in low viscosity fluids -
and will illustrate the utility and capabilities of this approach thereby
continuing to bring a new and innovative technology to the biophysical
community. This project is jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division.