* 0842510
* Paralogous VDRs in Teleosts:   Transition of Nuclear Receptor Function Through Sub- and Neofunctionalization
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Seth Kullman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 02/28/2014
* USD 378,088.00

Fishes comprise approximately 24,000 existing species and are among the most
diverse and successful groups of vertebrates. These organisms represent an
extensive array of biological characteristics and maintain considerable genetic
diversity. It appears that much of the complexity of these organisms is a result
of successive rounds of genetic duplications resulting in multiple copies of
many important genes. The presence of multiple gene copies is believed to have
had a large impact on the evolution of fish and their diversity. The retention
of multiple genes in fish provides the opportunity to gain insights into how
genes evolve through specific processes. This research will examine whether
multiple vitamin D receptor genes (VDRs) present in most fish species have
evolved new functions and/or partitioned ancestral functions subsequent to
duplication. Through three specific aims, critical vitamin D receptor structure-
function dynamics, spatial-temporal patterns of VDR gene expression, and role of
vitamin D receptor during embryo development will be investigated. The proposed
approach provides a systematic and comprehensive investigation that enables a
detailed evaluation of functional change of the vitamin D receptor across a
number of evolutionary diverse fish species. Results of this work will support a
scientific understanding of the evolution of fish endocrinology by enhancing the
conceptual framework of how retention, loss or diversification of gene
duplicates contributes to endocrine innovation in these species. Training of
undergraduate and graduate students as part of this research plan will provide a
unique opportunity to educate and engage young scientists. In addition to yearly
training, students will participate in the summer research program at the Mount
Desert Island Biological laboratory (MDBL) in Maine. The MDIBL facility has a
long-standing dedication to undergraduate education with an emphasis on the
exploration of timely questions involving marine and freshwater biology in a
diverse array of aquatic fauna.