* 0842960
* RUI: Ion Pairing and Aggregation of Bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) amide Ionic Liquids in Media of Low Polarity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Markus Hoffmann, SUNY College at Brockport
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 236,329.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Professor
Markus Hoffmann of The College at Brockport, State University of New York, and
his students will investigate the ion pairing and aggregation behavior of ionic
liquids dissolved in low polarity solvents. Specific focus will be on ionic
liquids containing the bis (trifluoromethansulfonyl) amide anion, which have
unusually long ion-pairing lifetimes in these low polarity solvents. The
research will employ nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods, specifically
diffusion ordered spectroscopy (DOSY), to measure molecular diffusion
parameters. The NMR data will be augmented by classical viscometric,
conductivity and tensiometric measurements. Additional calorimetric studies,
done in collaboration with Prof. Dr. Ondruschka and Dr. Stark from the Institute
for Technical Chemistry and Environmental Chemistry at the Friedrich-Schiller-
University (FSU) in Jena, Germany, are expected to result in a complete
thermodynamic description of the ion-pairing and aggregation
equilibria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids have been the subject of
increasing interest in science and industry because they have the potential to
replace traditional organic solvents that are volatile and hazardous. This
research will contribute to our fundamental understanding of ionic liquids, and
in particular the connection between their intermolecular (and inter-ionic)
interactions and their observed bulk behavior. The participating undergraduate
students will benefit immensely from the research experiences with respect to
their professional preparation. In this regard, the additional involvement of
ACS SEED high school students is a valuable contribution to encourage students
from underrepresented groups early in their educational development to pursue
careers in the sciences. In an attempt to bring the excitement of research into
the chemistry curriculum at The College at Brockport some of the experiments
will also be integrated as project-based experiments into the physical chemistry
laboratory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;