* 0842606
* U12-Dependent Spliceosomal snRNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Girish Shukla, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 368,363.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Removal of non-coding segments known as
introns from precursor (pre) to messenger (m) RNAs in eukaryotic nuclei via
splicing is an essential step in gene expression. The two-ste splicing reaction
is carried out by a large complex of protein and RNA known as the spliceosome.
Many metazoans contain two types of introns that have distinct sequences at
their boundaries (GU-AG or AU-AC) and are removed by spliceosomes that contain
different sets of small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs). The major class of introns is
designated U2-dependent and the minor class U12-dependent according to the
spliceosomal snRNA that recognizes the branchpoint. Despite a billion years of
divergence, not only the fundamental chemical processes, but many of the RNA-RNA
interactions required for splicing are conserved between the major and minor
spliceosomes. Although significant parallels exist in the arrangement of the
RNAs and in the splice site recognition events, only one snRNA is common between
the two splicing systems. Recently, it was demonstrated that U4 snRNA can base
pair with U6atac snRNA to splice a U12-dependent intron in vivo, raising the
interesting question as to why two distinct sets of snRNAs are present in the
major and minor spliceosomes. In this project, this question will be addressed
by exploring finely tuned RNA-RNA interactions that are unique to the
U12-dependent spliceosome. Since a number of intermolecular RNA-RNA interactions
appear to be analogous and contain interchangeable functional elements between
the two spliceosomes, the study will address evolutionary relationships between
the major and the minor spliceosomal snRNAs. Furthermore, the mechanisms that
ensure the selection of respective sets of snRNAs to form the appropriate
ribonucleoprotein complexes will be defined. The research project will continue
to exploit genetic suppression systems to achieve a greater understanding of the
relationship between structure and function within the U12-containing
spliceosome, thereby shedding light on evolutionary questions regarding the
origin and retention of U12-dependent introns and the correspondings
spliceosomes in the plant and animal kingdoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The broader impacts of this research include an enhanced understanding
of the origin and significance of the co-existence of two spliceosomes. Results
obtained from the proposed research will be communicated to undergraduate and
graduate students through lecture and laboratory courses taught by the principal
investigator. The research will influence undergraduate and graduate students
working on the project by introducing them to RNA molecular biology methods in
an intensive, active learning environment. In terms of outreach activities, this
project will host and promote research involving high school students and
underrepresented minority as well as non-minority students from a community
college. These students will be given the opportunity to undertake independent
research studies in the laboratory, thereby enhancing their prospects for long-
term careers in research.