* 0842677
* SGER: Liberal Democracy Under Pressure
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2011
* Paul Sniderman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2011
* USD 116,356.00

The inclusion of Muslim immigrant communities is arguably the most demanding
political challenge facing liberal democracies in Western Europe. A large
research literature has addressed one dimension of this challenge -- the rise of
radical right parties (e.g., Stubager 2008; Green-Pederson and Odmalm 2008;
Bjørklund and Andersen; Togeby 1998). An emerging literature is documenting
another dimension - the conflict of cultural norms (e.g., Sniderman and
Hagendoorn 2007). This project explores potentially the deepest strain of all -
between the norms of liberal democracy on the one side and the requirements of
religious inclusion on the other. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Danish "Cartoon
Crisis" is one of the most dramatic examples of the strain between the values of
liberal democracy and the honor of the Muslim faith. Denmark is accordingly the
focus of this study. But its findings have broad relevance to liberal
democracies in Western Europe. This exploratory study focuses on two questions.
First, does an intense clash over colliding values increase popular intolerance
toward Muslim immigrants? Second, is popular opinion responsive to elite
interventions in support of democratic values? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The answers
to these to questions will help illuminate the scope of choices open to
political leaders during moments of crisis. If the answer to the first question
is no, and the answer to the second yes, political elites have room to chose
policies that are experimental and inclusive. If the answer to the first
question is yes and the answer to the second is no, political elites have less
room to maneuver and will be under, at least in the short run pressure to adopt
"tough on Muslim" policies -- for example, making the standards to acquire
citizenship more demanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For its empirical base, this
study relies on three separate - but temporally overlapping - surveys of the
general public conducted under the direction of Professor Lise Togeby. This set
of partly overlapping surveys provides a unique record of public reactions
spanning two distinct intervals -- when the Cartoon Crisis was in the forefront
of public attention and when it had receded into the background. The surveys
also include randomized experiments that both replicate previous research and
extend it in innovative ways.