* 0842956
* Protein DNA Specificity  Determinants by Paramagnetic Metal Based ESR Distance Measurements
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Linda Jen-Jacobson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 03/31/2012
* USD 585,800.00

This project will probe the linkage between molecular structure, molecular
motions and function in proteins that recognize and associate specific sites on
DNA, in order to deduce general principles of site-specific protein-DNA
recognition. Past research using EcoRI endonuclease as a model has suggested
that when a protein binds to its "correct" site on DNA, both the protein and the
DNA suffer losses of conformational-vibrational mobility, but that these changes
are much less pronounced when the protein binds at an incorrect DNA site. If
verified, this would provide deeper insight into how a protein chooses among DNA
sites. This hypothesis cannot be readily tested since the incorrect protein-DNA
complexes are presently inaccessible to crystallography or nuclear magnetic
resonance methods in solution. Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy
provides an exciting alternative route to assessing structural and dynamic
differences between the various classes of complexes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Early results on a DNA-protein complex
by pulsed ESR establish an entirely new methodology that can measure the
solution structure and range of conformational states for complexes with
different classes of DNA sites. Such comparative measurements can provide
information on how microscopic differences in molecular motions and structure
contribute to the macroscopic differences in affinity and catalytic rates. In
order to better quantify differences among the complexes, ESR methods that
exploit bound copper(II) ions and site-directed nitroxide spin labeling will be
developed, and applied to EcoRI-DNA complexes. Preliminary evidence shows that
copper(II) coordinates exclusively between His114 and a DNA phosphate in the
EcoRI-DNA complex, thus providing a unique reference point. Copper(II)
coordination prevents significant motion of the ion, so that the resulting ESR
signals aid in deconvoluting protein flexibility from motions of the spin label.
The specific scientific aims are to:&lt;br/&gt; (1) Establish a pulsed electron
spin resonance (ESR) method to measure large metal-metal and metal-nitroxide
distances in proteins. &lt;br/&gt; (2) Leverage metal-spin label measurements to
determine point-to-point distances and the range of conformational states of the
endonuclease in specific, miscognate and nonspecific DNA complexes.&lt;br/&gt;
(3) Combine research with outreach to 4-year colleges, local high schools and
undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Two to three undergraduate
researchers and graduate students working on this project will be trained at the
interdisciplinary interface between chemistry and biophysics. The PI will seek
to recruit undergraduates from 4-year colleges by actively presenting research
at those institutes. Research ideas and themes developed in the project will be
used to modernize the undergraduate Physical Chemistry laboratory. This
initiative is in line with the American Chemical Society's call for the
incorporation of interdisciplinary and integrative trends of chemical research
into undergraduate curriculum without the creation of new course work. An annual
workshop will be organized for high-school teachers in the Pittsburgh area to
orient them with this research. Software for the extraction of distances from
metal-based ESR data will be disseminated. This grant supports ESR training for
females.