* 0842482
* Understanding the processes affecting 'clumped isotopes' composition in speleothems and their implication to paleo-temperature reconstruction
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Hagit Affek, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2013
* USD 329,311.00

The aim of the proposed research is to study the mechanism that controls
"clumped isotope" values in speleothems, in an attempt to apply the newly
developed carbonate "clumped isotopes" thermometry to paleo-temperature
reconstruction using carbonate cave deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oxygen
isotope composition of carbonate minerals is widely used as a proxy for climatic
variations, based on the temperature dependency of the isotope exchange
equilibrium between the carbonate mineral and the water in which it was formed.
It is increasingly applied in carbonate cave deposits, speleothems, that provide
an excellent source material for efforts to reconstruct past climatic conditions
on land. However, using carbonate oxygen isotopes suffers a major disadvantage
in that their values reflect a combination of variations in temperatures and in
the isotope composition of the water in which the carbonate is
formed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This can be overcome by the newly developed
"clumped isotopes" thermometry. "Clumped isotope" values are based on mass 47 in
CO2 extracted from carbonates and reflect a temperature dependent preference of
13C and 18O to create a bond with each other. Being an internal characteristic
of the carbonate mineral, it is independent of the isotopic composition of the
water in which the carbonate is formed and can therefore be used to
independently determine carbonate growth temperatures. This approach has been
applied to growth temperature reconstruction of a wide range of marine
organisms, in which the observed values in modern carbonate shells followed a
"clumped isotopes" temperature calibration that was produced by equilibrium
precipitation of synthetic calcite. Modern speleothems, however, deviate from
this calibration. This deviation is consistent with a theoretical description of
a kinetic isotope effect associate with degassing of CO2 from a bicarbonate
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will explore the
differences in "clumped isotopes" between carbonate precipitation in bulk
solution (as in marine organisms) vs. precipitation in a thin film of solution,
as in speleothem formation. Further, it will examine the effect of precipitation
conditions (such as temperature, film thickness, and rate of CO2 degassing) on
the extent of deviation from the equilibrium. It will test the hypothesis, based
on preliminary work in speleothems from Soreq cave (Israel), that the deviation
is not sensitive to precipitation conditions so that a simple correction can be
performed by comparison to modern speleothems, to allow paleo-climate
reconstruction using "clumped isotopes" in speleothems. This will be performed
by (1) "clumped isotopes" analyses of different types of modern speleothems in
Soreq cave, precipitated at varying film thickness (from stalagmites formed
under slow water drips that result in a very thin film, to carbonate
precipitating in water pools, equivalent to precipitation in bulk solution) in
order to identify the cause of the deviation from equilibrium and test the
hypothesis that it is related to thin film precipitation;(2 examining "clumped
isotopes" in laboratory carbonates, precipitated synthetically from a thin film
solution, at a variety of controlled conditions, to test the sensitivity to
precipitation conditions; (3) obtaining a speleothem specific temperature
calibration by analyzing modern speleothem samples from caves of a wide range of
modern-day temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. "Clumped
isotopes" thermometry is a powerful new technique in paelo-climate research. Its
combination with speleothems, that provide a well-dated archive material, would
significantly improve the ability to reconstruct past climatic conditions on
land. However, the application of the "clumped isotopes" technique in
speleothems is hindered by not yet understood kinetic isotope effects. The
proposed research will clarify these effects, adapting the ?clumped isotopes?
thermometry to speleothems, and will thus enable future efforts of continental
paleo-temperature reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The
proposed project will provide educational training for a postdoctoral scholar
and a graduate student as well as a potential undergraduate student, providing
them the opportunity to learn a novel and complex geochemical technique. This
project will establish a "clumped isotopes" laboratory beyond the one existing
facility, providing an opportunity for testing the methodology and developing
standardization. It will thus significantly extend the accessibility of "clumped
isotopes" analyses to potential collaborators within the paleo-climate
community.