* 0842395
* Collaborative Research: Ants of the Southwest Indian Ocean and East Africa (ASWEA): assessing phylogenetic diversity and biogeographic linkages across the Mozambique Channel
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Alex Smith, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,908,517.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The islands of the Southwest Indian
Ocean are renowned for exceptional biological diversity and high concentrations
of endemic species. A complex process of continental fragmentation, island
emergence and habitat isolation has produced a unique flora and fauna. Yet the
insects of this region remain incompletely documented. Ants and other arthropods
of the Comoros and Seychelles Islands and adjacent coastal portions of
Mozambique and Tanzania will be collected and compared with existing inventories
from Madagascar and the Mascarenes. Collaborative taxonomic tools and molecular
genetics will uncover evolutionary relationships. Interactive identification
keys will be developed and placed online and other arthropods will be analyzed
by specialists. In addition, the project will capture detailed digital images of
over 3000 species of African ants, the vast majority of ant species known from
the continent. Species descriptions and detailed photographs will be published
on AntWeb (www.antweb.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovering and documenting
the arthropods of the Southwest Indian Ocean islands and adjacent portions of
east Africa will provide insight into island biogeography, evolution and
speciation in this biodiversity hotspot. The project will use a novel
combination of tools to provide baseline information about existing species, and
identification resources will assist future efforts to monitor biodiversity.
Data provided to regional collaborators will help prioritize conservation
initiatives and the digitization efforts will make these ants globally
accessible for study. A large pool of ant taxonomists will be fostered through
student training and support, graduate student recruitment, mentorship, and ant
taxonomy workshops.&lt;br/&gt;