* 0842465
* Collaborative Research:   Spatiotemporal models of phenology:   Integrating the effects of climate change on plants and animals
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Ines Ibanez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2014
* USD 179,838.00

The global climate is undergoing changes in temperature and precipitation that
are altering the abundance and distribution of species around the world. Species
that are important from conservation, ecological, cultural, and economic
perspectives may face decline and extinction in coming decades. Phenology, the
timing of biological events, has emerged as a key indicator of species response
to global warming and other aspects of climate change. Phenology includes the
flowering and leafing out dates of plants, first arrival dates of birds, and
other events throughout the year. The ability of scientists to predict how
climate change will affect species and biological communities remains very
limited, especially at the scale of countries and continents. Researchers in
this project will study the year-round phenological trends since 1953 of
numerous plant and animal species using data from 176 meteorological sites
across Japan and South Korea. These records cover more species, a longer time
period, and more sites than any comparable data set from the United States, and
can be used to develop innovative methods of analysis that can be applied to
species in the United States and elsewhere. At field sites in Japan, the
researchers will examine ecological interactions, e.g., between plants and
pollinators, to determine the potential for ecological mismatches among species
with different responses to climate change. The U.S. researchers will train
undergraduate and graduate students and will work with scientists from Japan,
South Korea, China, and Europe, and the new U.S. National Phenological Network,
thereby strengthening international connections among climate change
researchers.