* 0842475
* Translational Control of Growth and Apoptosis in C. Elegans Development by Initiation Factor Isoforms
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Brett Keiper, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2014
* USD 525,500.00

New gene expression is required for cells to begin to grow and divide
(proliferation) or to alter their fate (differentiation). The development of egg
and sperm (gametes) likewise involves crucial periods of gene expression and
differentiation. Early cells divide and then differentiate into either sperm or
oocytes. Gene transcription is active early in gametogenesis, but becomes
silenced as cells enter meiosis, and thus mRNAs that have been stored during the
proliferative phase become the sole means to produce new proteins.
Developmentally important mRNAs become translated into protein on ribosomes in
the oocyte, spermatocyte or embryo, and the new proteins direct either continued
differentiation or cell death (apoptosis). This research project is focused on
proteins called eIF4 factors, which contact the mRNAs to be translated as the
first step in recruiting them to the protein synthesis machinery. Specifically,
the activities of eIF4 factors that lead to new protein synthesis in gametes and
embryos will be investigated. Animal model systems such as the soil-dwelling
nematode worm, Caenorhabditis elegans, are essential in this research because
they are generally simpler than human embryos. The C. elegans embryo develops
from a fertilized egg to an organized multi-cellular embryo in a manner very
similar to that of higher animals. Fortunately these worms have a far simpler
body plan made up of just a few muscles, neurons, digestive and reproductive
organs. More importantly in the present context, the critical genes required are
very similar in this simple model system. Because protein synthesis mechanisms
are well conserved in animals, research findings using C. elegans will shed
light on gene expression in vertebrate gametes and embryos, where such methods
are not feasible or practical.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact and Educational Benefit:
This project directly impacts the education of a minority and a female graduate
student who are completing Ph.D. thesis research in Dr. Keiper's laboratory, as
well as Masters and undergraduate students from ECU's Biology and Chemistry
departments. As in the past granting period, the project also involves
collaborators and students from other universities and high schools with an
interest in molecular gene expression during development. The research
capitalizes on the lab's experience in the biochemistry of mRNA translation and
provides broad laboratory training in molecular techniques, genetics and
transgenesis to young scientists. These students find the C. elegans system both
tractable and significantly more accessible intellectually than mammalian
systems. They receive the greatest educational benefit from first-hand
involvement in new discoveries as well as opportunities to present their
findings and publish their accomplishments in scientific journals. In recent
years, several students who participated in this project have taken positions in
the biotechnology industry or entered graduate research/medical professional
academic programs.