* 0842546
* SGER/Collaborative Research: Handling Negations and Temporal Aspects for Opinion Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Clement Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this collaborative exploratory research project (0842546, Clement
Yu, UIC and 0842608 Weiyi Meng, SUNY Binghamton) is to investigate two important
problems in opinion retrieval. The first is to determine whether a negation word
flips the sentiment of an opinionated word and the second is to examine how the
opinions about a topic change over time and what causes significant changes.
This project aims to demonstrate within 18 months that within two domains
(consumer products/services and medical/health), whether a negation word flips
the polarity of an opinionated word or phrase can be accurately determined when
there is a single occurrence of such negation word in a sentence, and the
significant time points and words/phrases that characterize the changes of
sentiments for a given topic can be accurately obtained. The research results
from this project will lay the foundation in achieving longer-term goals that
include determining the polarity of the sentiment of a feature with reference to
a given query in any given domain, identifying the events that cause the
significant change of sentiments, measuring the intensity of sentiments and its
change over time, and studying the interactions between the negation and
temporal aspects of opinion retrieval. It is expected that the proposed project
can have a significant impact on future search engine technology, information
retrieval, text mining, and blog retrieval and analysis. Research results will
be incorporated into several courses the PIs teach and students will be
recruited to participate in the research activities. Research results will be
disseminated through published papers. The project Web site
(http://www.cs.binghamton.edu/~meng/OpRetSGER.html) provides access to research
results.