* 0842367
* Acquisition of a stable isotope mass spectrometer for Earth science and ecological research
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2012
* USD 376,603.00

0842367&lt;br/&gt;Kohn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PIs
request ~$376K to purchase a continuous flow isotope ratio mass spectrometer.
Requested is either a Thermo Delta V+ or GV IsoPrime with H/D capabilities.
Instruments will be fitted with gas, water, and carbonate digestion handling
capabilities. An elemental analyzer will allow bulk carbon, nitrogen and sulfur
isotope analyses. The system will also be fitted with a TC-EA pyrolysis unit
allowing D/H, and water and phosphate oxygen isotope analysis. Due to the number
and type of peripherals, the finished system will be extremely flexible in the
type, number and matrix of sample analyses possible. The new system will be
housed in the Department of Geosciences at BSU. Recent renovations (~$500K) have
provided ample space and power resources. The PI (Kohn) will be the overall
instrument administrator while day-to-day operation will be a technician?s
responsibility. The technician will train new users, maintain, and operate the
instrument. Scheduling will be done by the PI and technician. The tech will be
funded ½ time by the University. Remuneration (~$10-$20 per sample) will be
assessed for all users with priority given to funded sample analyses. Higher
fees will be charged for samples requiring extensive oversight, preparation or
instrument time. The PIs will use this instrument for research in a diverse
array of scientific investigations. Broad scientific thrusts include
paleoclimatology and paleoecology ? fossil bone and teeth are analyzed as a
proxy for precipitation in regions with varying climate and rain dynamics. These
measurements are coupled with other geochemical proxies in order to estimate
mountain elevations. Isotopes are also used to understand the Eocene-Oligocene
transition using the differential correlation between local water isotope ratios
and bone and teeth records. Bone and teeth isotopes will also be used to infer
mammalian dietary patterns in the Pleistocene. Pleistocene hominid ecology will
also be assessed in terms of paleoclimatology. A coPI will use stable O and H
isotopes as tracers for streamflow, precipitation, and catchments dynamics
(inputs, outflows, residence time, etc). Paleozoic paleoclimate will be assessed
using radiogenic isotopes and stable isotope biostratigraphy. In other work,
stable isotopes will be used to understand trophic relationships in terrestrial
habitats. A number of future research directions are presented which build on
and expand themes presented above. Student training will span high school
through PhD graduate students. This instrument will be incorporated into
existing outreach programs and through seminars and laboratory tours. The PI
recently received an Undergraduate Research Mentor of the Year award for
incorporating undergraduates in laboratory efforts. The instrumentation will be
incorporated into teaching curricula and research results will be disseminated
through the literature and through collaborative
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;