* 0842418
* Upgrade of the Multi-Anvil High-Pressure Facility at Arizona State University
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Kurt Leinenweber, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 125,913.00

0842418&lt;br/&gt;Leinenweber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." This
proposal seeks ~$126K funding to purchase a second multi-anvil high pressure
device. The current multi-anvil systems are fully booked ? and have been so for
the past four years. Requested is a 1000 ton capacity, 8800 psi press with a 15"
vertical and 17" horizontal opening. Components of a pumping system of the PI?s
design are also requested. The press will be installed in the high-pressure
facility at ASU. The new press will enter into service for mineral physics,
geochemistry and experimental petrology, and other high-pressure studies. The
new multi-anvil press will be used in understanding Earth mantle transport
properties to include deuterium-hydrogen inter-diffusion in olivines and mantle
material electrical conductivity. Olivines will be further studied through
simulating subduction zone pressures and observing anhydrous and hydrous
transformation kinetics. High-pressure studies will also be conducted to better
understand shocked meteorites in terms of impact history, pressure, temperature
and duration. Experimentally, hydrated olivines will be tested under varying
temperatures and pressures with the long-term goal of determining hydration
effects on slab mechanics. Diffusion, electrical conductivity, phase equilibrium
and melting behavior of mantle materials will be assessed under controlled
conditions. Silicate chemistry will also be determined under pressures and
temperatures typical of the lower mantle using the press. Other sample types
will also be studied under high temperatures and pressures in the cell,
including glasses, perovskite, and novel hydrides. Aside from representing an
available resource for high-pressure work among academic scientists, the
facility will be used in undergraduate geology laboratories, be an integral part
of undergraduate and graduate research, and serve as a foundation in existing
ASU outreach programs designed to encourage underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***