* 0842280
* Understanding the Causes of Geographic Variation in Sex Ratio of a Gynodioecious Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Christina Caruso, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 10/31/2014
* USD 447,690.00

Evolutionary biologists have long been interested in understanding how
populations of organisms become different from one another, because it is a
necessary precursor to speciation. Variation in population sex ratio (for
example, the number of females vs. males, or females vs. hermaphrodites)
provides an excellent model for investigating mechanisms of population
differentiation. Because the population sex ratio determines the identity and
number of available mates, it affects how genetic variation is distributed
within and between populations. This project will investigate why the proportion
of females vs. hermaphrodites in a flowering plant (Lobelia siphilitica) are
higher in small populations and at warmer sites. We will test whether female
frequencies vary because of natural selection, or if other evolutionary forces,
such as genetic drift and gene flow, are preventing many populations from
reaching an equilibrium sex ratio. Distinguishing the effects of these different
evolutionary mechanisms is important because they produce distinct patterns of
population genetic structure.&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a framework
for evaluating how breeding systems influence the ability of species to modify
their range in response to climate change, particularly global warming. If
female L. siphilitica plants are more common in areas with higher annual mean
temperatures because of natural selection, then populations should become more
female-biased in response to global warming, which could affect migration rates
and species persistence.&lt;br/&gt;