* 0842289
* Building the systematic framework for research on biodiversity, biogeography, and evolutionary biology of ensign wasps (Hymenoptera:   Evaniidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,10/31/2012
* Andrew Deans, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Whiting
* 10/31/2012
* USD 368,866.00

Ensign wasps (Hymenoptera: Evaniidae) develop as larvae and eat eggs within the
egg cases of cockroaches. These wasps exhibit many fascinating biological
attributes, including extreme variability in wing venation, the existence of
unrelated forms that mimic one another in appearance, variable egg-laying
behaviors, possible impacts on cockroach evolution, and the possible use as
biocontrol agents of cockroach pests. Yet, until recently, Evaniidae have
largely been neglected by biologists, due to an inadequate classification system
and the absence of a robust phylogeny necessary to address evolutionary
questions. This research is designed to tackle these problems by using data from
DNA, morphology, and fossils to test species concepts, explore ensign wasp
biodiversity, and to estimate relationships between taxa and divergence times of
major lineages. At least four researchers will be trained as part of this
project and the results will produce a revised taxonomic infrastructure, a
robust phylogenetic framework, and the revised and well documented species
concepts that are required for deeper exploration of evolutionary questions. The
species descriptions and phylogenies will also be available on the World Wide
Web using the latest biodiversity information standards and tools such that
scientists and non-scientists alike can share in this ongoing discovery.