* 0842620
* Social Power and Action
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Kaschak, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 07/31/2013
* USD 392,277.00

Social power is a fundamental element of human society. Having power over others
(or, lacking power) profoundly affects people's experiences of emotion, their
social relationships, and the kinds of decisions they make. Several recent
scientific studies suggest that being in a position of power makes people
especially decisive and action-oriented. This can help powerful leaders take
appropriate action when necessary, but it can also result in overly quick and
risky types of decision-making. With funding from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Michael Kaschak and Dr. Jon Maner will help uncover the basic
psychological processes underlying these consequences of power. Their studies
explore the hypothesis that the experience of power has a fundamental effect on
people's motor systems (the bodily systems responsible for physical movement),
essentially gearing up the neural systems responsible for planning and executing
physical actions. The investigators will examine this idea by conducting
laboratory experiments that place people into positions of power and then
measuring both their ability to perform basic motor responses (such as moving
their arm to press a button, or moving a computer mouse to select a response on
the computer screen), and their propensity to make risky decisions. The
investigators will examine the extent to which power promotes forms of risky
decision-making via power's effects on the motor system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the choices of corporate CEOs to the actions of major
world leaders, the decisions of those with power dramatically shape the world in
which we live. Indeed, some form of power or hierarchy exists within virtually
every type of social context, from informal interactions between friends, to
professional relationships within an academic or business environment, to
decisions made at the highest levels of government. The research being conducted
by Drs. Kaschak and Maner will help identify the basic psychological mechanisms
underlying choice and action and so has implications for understanding and
informing the decisions and actions of leaders across a wide range of social and
professional domains.