* 0842706
* RUI:   Environmental modulation of nociception
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Wendy Sternberg, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 05/31/2013
* USD 314,024.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the effects of
the immediate social and physical environment on pain sensitivity (nociception)
in laboratory mice, primarily utilizing behavioral measures of nociception.
Other measures include examination of activity in the spinal cord (in areas
where nociceptive input is received), and blood-borne hormones involved in the
stress response. One aim of the project is to better understand the factors that
underlie variability in nociception, both between and within individuals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will study how the immediate presence of
familiar and unfamiliar conspecifics (members of the same species) affects the
expression of pain behaviors. The project also examines how physically,
socially, and cognitively enriching housing environments (that include running
wheels, toys, climbing apparatus, etc.) affect behavioral responses to noxious
(pain-producing) stimuli. In a broad sense, this project will contribute to the
understanding of how the brain modulates pain experience in response to stimuli
in the environment. Researchers studying nociception in laboratory animals will
gain valuable information about the effects of social and physical housing
environments on these behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another goal of this
project is to understand how the expression of overt pain behaviors in mice
affects other animals that observe them. Preliminary studies in a variety of
species suggest capacity for a rudimentary level of empathy for others' pain,
usually at the level of "emotional contagion". This project attempts to explore
that phenomenon further, by assessing the social behaviors (i.e., approach or
avoidance) in mice that are exposed to a familiar or an unfamiliar conspecific
that is displaying pain behavior. These studies will contribute to the growing
field of social neuroscience, the study of the biological mechanisms of social
behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a Research in Undergraduate Institutions
project, the investigators will be undergraduate students working under the
supervision of the PI. Thus, a broader impact of the research is to participate
in the training of bright and promising behavioral scientists.