* 0842157
* Chromosome Condensation in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Duncan Clarke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 540,000.00

Cell division produces two new cells and it can only occur after the DNA in the
cell has been duplicated. The two identical duplicate sets of genetic
information have to be packaged into highly compact bodies called mitotic
chromosomes in order for them to be accurately divided between the two new
cells. This packaging of the DNA is termed chromosome condensation and without
this process mitotic chromosomes fail to be distributed evenly to the new cells,
resulting in cell death or abnormal cell function. Although it is a fundamental
and essential biological process, the activities that perform chromosome
condensation are not well understood. This project employs new methods applied
to the study of chromosome condensation in a model organism, budding yeast.
Budding yeast chromosomes are too small to be visualized, thus condensation
cannot be examined directly. To overcome this problem, the project uses
fluorescent-tagged chromosomes to visualize condensation inside living cells.
The long-term goal of the project is to understand the mechanism of chromosome
condensation. There are two known factors, called topoisomerase II and
condensin, which contribute to chromosome condensation, but neither of these is
sufficient for the process. The project will identify new factors that drive
condensation and will also determine how topoisomerase II and condensin are
regulated as this is not currently understood. The Specific Objectives of the
project are to: (A) Identify and characterize novel chromosome condensation
factors, (B) Determine the mechanisms that drive chromosome condensation, (C)
Orchestrate multi-disciplinary research and training and disseminate the
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The use of yeast as a
model system lends itself well to the education and training of undergraduate,
graduate and post-doctoral students because it allows multi-disciplinary
research that combines genetics, cell biology and biochemistry. Moreover, yeast
methods and yeast genetic screens in particular are well suited to undergraduate
research because of the ease of manipulation and forgiving growth properties.
This project will involve a team of undergraduate students who will be trained
in many aspects of yeast genetics and cell biology. A graduate student and a
post-doctoral student will gain further expertise in yeast research and will
gain skills in the mentoring of undergraduate students. The scientific outcomes
of the project will have broad impact on the scientific community, beyond the
primary goal of identifying the condensation mechanism, because the project will
identify new proteins involved in several aspects of chromosome dynamics,
structure and segregation.