* 0842736
* Gravitational Force Spectroscopy of Single Myosin Molecules
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Douglas Root, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 231,431.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The coiled coil of myosin is among the longest in nature and contains
functionally diverse elements that will be characterized using a newly developed
gravitational force spectrometer that facilitates the application of
subpiconewton forces to specific regions of single molecules. The subpiconewton
forces can be applied at multiple orientations, while the absolute length of a
single molecule under force can be measured with a precision in the nanometer
range. Dynamic changes in this molecular length can also be quantified at speeds
in the millisecond time scale. Using this gravitational force spectrometer,
several fundamental hypotheses will be tested about the dynamics of different
regions in the coiled coil and their roles in the functions of myosin molecules.
The first hypothesis examines whether the coiled coil stretches more readily due
to forces applied perpendicular rather than parallel to the long axis of the
coiled coil. If so, the associated stretching could facilitate the properly
oriented binding of the myosin head to actin, since in muscle, the myosin coiled
coil is perpendicular to the direction of the crossbridge joining thick and thin
filaments. The second hypothesis tests whether the hinge regions are more
susceptible to stretching under force than other regions of the coiled coil. If
the hinges do stretch preferentially in response to the application of
subpiconewton forces, then these elastic elements could be an important relay in
the transmission of force from the power stroke in the myosin head to filament
sliding and the development of tension in muscle which has been implicated from
physiological data of muscle contractions. In the third hypothesis,
intermolecular interactions of coiled coils between myosin molecules or myosin
binding proteins will be carried out to affect the coiled coil's susceptibility
to subpiconewton or piconewton forces. These experiments will determine the
extent to which the myosin's coiled coil susceptibility to force can be
modulated by binding events that are likely to occur in vivo.

In addition to some of its unique measuring capabilities, the gravitational
force spectrometer is more affordable than other equipment suitable for single
molecule assays, so a broader availability for its usage may be possible
especially in areas of educational instruction. It is feasible to equip student
laboratories with multiple workstations of these devices which would enable
hands-on experiences with single molecule assays for science students. To
facilitate this possibility, instructional laboratory units will be written with
introductory and background descriptions, methods, principles of setup and
operation, description of data analysis and acquisition, study questions, key
words, and learning outcomes. These instructional laboratory units will be
evaluated and distributed to encourage the incorporation of single molecule
assays into student laboratories which will better prepare future scientists to
exploit these developing technologies.