* 0842118
* Sexual Characters and Diversification in Empidine Dance Flies (Diptera: Empididae: Empidinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Jeffrey Cumming, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Whiting
* 02/28/2013
* USD 479,851.00

The dance flies (Diptera: Empididae: Empidinae), a lineage of over 2,000
species, exhibit a suite of specialized mating behaviors and morphology that
place them among the most commonly cited examples of sexual selection in
insects. They are the subject of many detailed behavioral studies and textbook
examples. This collaborative study integrates molecular, behavioral and
morphological data collection to develop a comprehensive evolutionary
classification for the Empidinae. Evolution of behavior and sexual morphology is
studied within specific focal clades to identify key traits involved in
swarming, sex-role reversal, presentation of nuptial gifts ("ballooning"), and
intersexual conflict. Genetic data are used to frame and inform tests of
evolutionary hypotheses concerning generation of diversity in dance flies and
examine the implication of these findings other organisms. Project results will
test long-standing hypotheses on mating system evolution and provide key
empirical evidence in support of the hypothesized link between sexual selection
and diversification rate dynamics in a diverse lineage of insects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project involves academic training and a program of
outreach, including educational material that will be presented via the project
website, and online resources for undergraduate and K-12 levels.