* 0842073
* Collaborative Research:  Recovery and analysis of historical Poaceae viruses to examine microbial dispersal and evolution during an era of global change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ulrich Melcher, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2014
* USD 129,351.00

&lt;br/&gt;Wheat, oats, rice, and other cereal grains are key pillars of human
societies worldwide. Along with other members of the grass family, these plants
provide the majority of the calories humans eat, either directly as grains or
indirectly as meat and milk produced by grazing animals. Unfortunately, these
important grasses are plagued by several families of plant viruses, including
the barley and cereal yellow dwarf viruses, which damage cereal grain production
worldwide. These viruses also harm wild grasses and can advance the spread of
invasive species in nature. How have influential viruses like these emerged and
what factors have contributed to their spread and diversification? To find clues
about virus history, the project team will recover and analyze genetic sequences
of old viruses preserved within historical collections of dried plants around
the world. Phylogenetic analysis of the viruses will reveal how these viruses
have spread over time and permit estimates of dates of key events in their
history. The research will also provide information on the influence of humans
on the spread of plant viruses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human development of
agriculture and global trade are two factors that have likely influenced the
emergence and spread of potent viruses. This research will provide missing
information about virus dynamics in the past and produce new insight into the
ways by which human activities influence the development of virus threats. The
project?s broader impact will include training of educators and students from
underrepresented groups, contributions to microbial ecology outreach efforts
through a science museum, and the addition of information about virus
relationships to curated plant collections.&lt;br/&gt;