* 0842167
* Acquisition of an X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer for Research in Petrology and Paleoclimatology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Allen Glazner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 121,988.00

0842167&lt;br/&gt;Glazner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of a x-ray
fluorescence spectrometer (XRF) equipped with a wavelength dispersive
spectrometer (WDS). PIs Alan Glazner and Stephen Myers will acquire and oversee
management and operation of a Rigaku benchtop XRF model with a 200 W air cooled
x-ray tube. The instrument will largely supplant in-house use of an aging direct
current plasma (DCP) spectrometer for analysis of major, minor and some trace
elements in acid digested solid geological materials and natural waters. XRF is
ideally suited for whole rock elemental analysis for major and minor elements as
samples are fused into glass disks for analysis, problems associated with acid
digestion of materials are avoided and sample analysis is not time sensitive.
The WDS-XRF will support PI research on the genesis of silicic plutonic rocks
and rhyolitic lavas with a focus on the petrogenesis of crustal materials in the
Sierra Nevada region. Additional UNC and Research Triangle faculty research on
the origin of layered igneous intrusions, petrogenesis of volcanics, including
pyroclastic deposits, silicic and basaltic lavas, and studies of the provenance
of lithic archaeological artifacts will also be supported by the requested XRF.
The instrument will complement an existing XRF core scanner at UNC that is
largely dedicated to paleoenvironmental research. Undergraduate students will be
trained in XRF sample preparation techniques, instrument operation data analysis
through engagement in research applications that require bulk elemental
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;