* 0842555
* Collaborative Research: Ion Adsorption on Nanocrystalline Mineral Surfaces: Towards a Fundamental Understanding of Nanoparticles in the Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* James Kubicki, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2013
* USD 166,499.00

The chemical and electrostatic interactions occurring at interfaces of
crystalline metal-oxides and aqueous solutions are of fundamental importance in
myriad geochemical, materials sciences and technological processes. Reactions of
particular importance to geochemists that take place between minerals and fluids
include, soil formation and weathering; uptake, transport and release of
inorganic and organic contaminants; biomineralization; dissolution, aggregation
and precipitation; and numerous other natural processes. A comparable broad list
of interface reactions of relevance to the materials sciences and industry could
also be presented. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this proposal is
to investigate the effect of particle size on the chemical and electrostatic
interactions between nanocrystalline metal-oxides and aqueous solutions.
Nanosized particles are ubiquitous at the Earth?s surface, and may play a
considerable role in biogeochemical and environmental processes. Furthermore
engineered metal-oxide nanomaterials are used extensively in a variety of
industrial applications and commercial products. The growing use of manufactured
nanomaterials raises concern for the potential release of these particles into
the environment. The role of nanoparticles (natural and manufactured) at the
Earth?s surface is of importance because of the variation in the chemical and
physical properties of these particles as a function of particle size. Equally,
the large surface area of nanoparticles and variations in atomic structure
possibly will change the surface reactivity of nanoparticles towards aqueous
solutions as a function of particle size. &lt;br/&gt;No single experimental or
theoretical technique will provide a coherent and comprehensive view of the
properties of nanoparticle-solution interfacial reactions in the environment.
Accordingly, the proposed research will integrate macroscopic experimental
studies, molecular-scale computational studies, and surface complexation models.
All three focus areas of this proposal will primarily investigate the
interfacial behavior of anatase (TiO2) powders of discrete nanosize;
additionally, the surface properties of MnO2 nanophases will be explored. The
experiments will for the first time, provide a systematic, coherent and
extensive experimental data set that will document fundamental differences in
surface reactivity between nanoparticles and macroscopic particles of the same
bulk material. The experiments will be performed over a range of temperatures (5
? 75 Â°C) and solution compositions representative of those encountered at the
Earth?s surface. The variable temperature studies will be the first to document
the effect of temperature on nanoparticle surface reactivity. The experimental
studies will be strongly coupled with theoretical studies. The molecular
simulation studies will probe the atomic-scale properties of hydrated anatase
nanoparticles, and will provide detailed information on surface bonding
structures, H-bonding distributions, surface relaxation, and adsorption
geometries. The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to merge the
experimental and theoretical results into surface complexation models that can
describe and predict interfacial properties that govern particle-size effects.
Such an integrated approach is the state-of-the-art for interface science.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed studies will considerably advance
fundamental understanding of the behavior of nanoparticles interacting with
aqueous solutions at the Earth?s surface. Furthermore, the anticipated results
will have wide-ranging application and relevance that extends well beyond the
earth and environmental sciences; for instance, to materials sciences,
chemistry, industry, and medical fields. For example, the controlled growth of
nanoparticles and larger crystals from nanoparticles depends on aggregation,
which in turn is influenced directly by particle-water interface chemistry. The
students and post-doctoral associates involved in the project will receive
training in both experimental and theoretical methods, learn how to integrate
results from these approaches, and develop a more comprehensive understanding of
nanoparticle interfaces. Moreover, the proposed studies are well suited to the
involvement of both graduate and undergraduate students. All research results
will be disseminated via publications in peer reviewed journals, and presented
at national and international meetings. &lt;br/&gt;