* 0842785
* SGER: Determining Equatorial Upwelling Rates with a Novel Geochemical Tracer Technique
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* David Kadko, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2010
* USD 124,544.00

In the exploratory project, the investigators propose to develop a novel
isotopic technique, based on the isotope Beryllium 7, to infer rates of
upwelling along the equator. Beryllium 7 samples will be collected on an NSF-
funded research cruise to the equatorial eastern Atlantic in April, 2009. The
cruise track is ideal for the proposed study. Several stations away from the
equator will be occupied to make numerous mixed layer measurements and several
profiles of Beryllium 7 within the areas of upwelling in the cold tongue region,
focusing primarily on the region between 5°E and 10°W. The Beryllium 7 profiles
will be collected simultaneously with the CTD stations using well established
techniques developed by the investigators. The key hypothesis to be tested is
the idea that the observed mixed layer Beryllium 7 concentration is an extremely
sensitive indicator of the upwelling rate. Two properties of Beryllium 7 make it
an ideal tracer for investigation of upwelling. First, its source function and
water column distribution (high contrast between mixed layer and sub-mixed layer
depth) allow it to be a sensitive indicator of upwelling. Secondly, its
characteristic time scale is long enough to integrate upwelling over periods of
weeks but still be sensitive to variations on seasonal timescales, unlike
tracers with significantly longer half-lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Upwelling is an important physical process affecting climate dynamics
and biogeochemical cycling within the global ocean. Direct measurements of
upwelling are difficult because of the relatively small velocities involved, and
it must therefore be inferred by indirect methods such as those provided by
tracer observations. If successful, this method will provide an important tracer
tool to the oceanographic community. The findings will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses that the co-investigator teaches.