* 0842219
* Inferring Species Phylogenies Under the Coalescent Model with Hybridization
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Laura Kubatko, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2013
* USD 226,946.00

Understanding evolutionary relationships among a collection of species is one of
the most fundamental objectives in evolutionary biology. Advances in DNA
sequencing technology have resulted in a shift toward the use of multiple genes
to infer such phylogenetic histories. With this shift has come the realization
that each gene in the genome has its own history, which may differ from the
overall evolutionary history of the species. In this project, two processes
known to cause discord between gene and species histories will be modeled
statistically. The first, termed "incomplete lineage sorting," leads to
substantial differences in the evolution of individual genes and occurs in
virtually all organisms. The second, hybridization - the mating of individuals
from two distinct species with the production of viable offspring - is believed
to occur for as many as 25% of plants and 10% of animals. This project will
develop statistical methods that integrate both of these processes
simultaneously to reconstruct the history of evolutionary relationships among
organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of statistically-sound phylogenetic
models incorporating both processes will allow two fundamental biological issues
to be addressed: (1) estimation of the extent of historical hybridization
between pairs of species; and (2) inference of the true phylogenetic history
when gene-by-gene variation due to both processes is taken into account. The
result will be more accurate understanding of the evolutionary relationships
among present-day species. In addition, the investigator is involved in an NSF-
funded program in mathematical biology for undergraduates, and thus
undergraduate researchers will participate in some aspects of this research.