* 0842590
* Development of Photolabile Protecting Groups and Photochromic Systems Based on Intramolecular Excited State Proton Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Vladimir Popik, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2012
* USD 391,500.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Vladimir V. Popik of the
University of Georgia who proposes to develop a new family of photolabile
protecting groups (PPGs) based on photochemical elimination of substrates from
o-hydroxybenzyl alcohol derivatives. Preliminary results suggest that PPGs based
on this reaction, while generally applicable, are especially suitable for the
direct caging of alcohols. This new PPG platform will also be investigated for
the photolabile protection of glycols, carbohydrates, and carbonyl compounds.
PPGs developed in this project are expected to have long shelf-life and good
hydrolytic stability in the dark, as well as high quantum and chemical yield of
photo-deprotection. Substrate release from the newly-developed PPGs is expected
to be fast enough to allow for spatial- and time-resolved biochemical studies.
The mechanism and dynamics of the cleavage reaction will be studied in detail to
assist us in the design of novel PPGs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
the proposed research will contribute new caging tools to organic synthesis,
biochemistry, and medical technology. PPGs and photochromic systems developed in
this work might serve as a basis for the design of new drugs and drug delivery
systems that can be photoactivated, as well as open new approaches to
photolithography and information recording. This project will provide
undergraduate and graduate students with interdisciplinary training on the
interface of synthetic, physical organic chemistry, and photochemistry. Students
from underrepresented groups will be recruited to work on this project. A
photochemical laboratory will be established, which will provide the University
of Georgia and local scientists with apparatus and expertise to conduct
photochemical experiments. The interdisciplinary nature of the research is
expected to produce extensive collaboration with other research groups, both
locally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;