* 0842831
* RUI:   Mechanistic Studies of the Firefly Luciferase Catalyzed Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,11/30/2013
* Bruce Branchini, Connecticut College
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2013
* USD 582,899.00

The goal of this project is to increase the understanding of how living
organisms convert chemical energy into light. Bioluminescence, the emission of
light by living organisms, is a beautiful natural phenomenon that has enchanted
children, challenged those who have tried to understand it, and provided the
basis for an important research tool. Examples of bioluminescence can be found
throughout nature in bacteria, mushrooms, jellyfish, earthworms, clams, fish and
beetles. This project addresses the relationship between the structure of the
enzyme firefly luciferase and its detailed role in the catalysis of two
sequential reactions that ultimately lead to the production of yellow-green
light in the North American firefly, Photinus pyralis. New luciferases made by
recombinant DNA techniques will be evaluated by spectroscopic and kinetics
methods to examine the effects of mutations on each reaction. This approach may
also provide evidence of the role of essential conformational changes in the
luciferase structure. The results of this research will enhance the basic
understanding of firefly bioluminescence and the fundamental process by which
living organisms convert chemical energy into light. The project addresses the
need to produce novel luciferase proteins to improve current research
applications of bioluminescence and to advance the development of new ones.
Broader Impacts. This research will be carried out at a liberal arts college
with an established record of effective research training of undergraduate
students. Modern facilities and equipment provide an excellent environment for
students and faculty to engage in collaborative research. The principal
investigator has actively directed undergraduate research projects for 32 years.
Approximately 85 undergraduate students, the majority of whom are women and
minorities, have worked with him, and an estimated 70% of these participants
have entered graduate or professional school. The aim of this project is to
offer a meaningful research experience to a diverse group of students in a
multicultural environment. All student and professional participants in this
project will be involved in modern mainstream bioluminescence research and will
contribute positively to increasing the numbers of well-prepared graduates for
entry into graduate programs and professional scientific careers. Results of
this research may lead to improvements in the uses of firefly luciferase, for
example, in the detection of food contaminated with bacteria or as a reporter of
gene expression and regulation.