* 0842502
* SGER: New and Improved Methods for Collecting Ocean Particulates for the GEOTRACES Community
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Ken Buesseler, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2009
* USD 41,340.00

Quantifying particle distributions is essential to understanding the chemical,
biological and physical processes controlling dissolved distributions. Thus
sampling of oceanic particles is an important consideration for the GEOTRACES
program. A scientist from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution would use this
Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to build a new, large volume pumping
system capable of sampling &gt;1000L volumes through filters at all ocean
depths. The impetus for this trace metal clean pump rosette capable of deploying
up to eight McLane in-situ battery powered pumps at the same depth is the
acquisition of large quantities of marine particles with greater reproducibility
and within a shorter time frame relative to currently available systems. With
this SGER, the researcher also plans to evaluate which filters are best suited
for the analysis of the largest number of trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) and
assess the impact of loading/flow on particle collection. In addition, filters
would be subsampled using a newly designed trace metal clean cutting template
and the samples distributed to the national and international GEOTRACES
community for analyses of TEIs. Lastly, several casts would be carried out with
the new system to compare results obtained with this system with those collected
using the MULVFS pumping system.