* 0842424
* Building Partnerships and Pathways to Address Engineering Grand Challenges Workshop at University Texas El Paso in Fall 2009
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Soheil Nazarian, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 174,846.00

The College of Engineering at the University of Texas at El Paso proposes to
organize a workshop entitled ?Building Partnerships and Pathways to Address
Engineering Grand Challenges.? The workshop will focus on a select group of the
National Academy of Engineering ?Grand Challenges for Engineering.? The workshop
will provide a venue to highlight the research at minority serving institutions
(MSIs) and, in particular, at Hispanic Serving Institutions. The workshop will
also provide a forum to engage a diverse group of researchers (from different
disciplines, industry and higher education institutions) who can bring distinct
perspectives to the selected challenges. The workshop will offer a unique
opportunity to engage in discussions that could lead to innovative solutions to
challenges that face our society. In addition, researchers will share best
practices for successfully establishing research partnerships, and will identify
ways to overcome obstacles that could prevent the creation of research alliances
among universities, industry, and national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop objectives include: &lt;br/&gt;? To identify the
opportunities for synergetic research and strategic partnerships
among&lt;br/&gt;participating research extensive universities, MSIs and industry
to effectively address the&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Grand Challenges.&lt;br/&gt;?
To create partnerships among majority-minority universities and university-
industry to address&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Challenges.&lt;br/&gt;? To identify
the actions needed to create a culture of collaboration that facilitates the
formation of research partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;? To showcase capabilities of
faculty from MSIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will increase the
visibility of research teams from MSIs, in particular&lt;br/&gt;researchers who
are from underserved groups, to the research community in general. &lt;br/&gt;