* 0842182
* Plant Energy Metabolism and Carbon/Nitrogen Assimilation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Asaph Cousins, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2013
* USD 499,631.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." Solar energy harvested by plants provides the energy
required for the major metabolic pathways within plant tissue (e.g.
photosynthesis, photorespiration, respiration and nitrogen assimilation).
Despite the importance of these metabolic processes, there are large gaps of
understanding in how plant carbon and nitrogen assimilation interact with plant
energy metabolism. Low nitrogen availability is one of the major factors
limiting photosynthetic productivity and agricultural systems are currently
sustained only by enormous nitrogen based chemical inputs. The over-application
and ensuing runoff of these inputs leads to significant environmental
degradation, and the production of these nitrogen based fertilizers releases
vast amounts of greenhouse gases leading to further environmental change.
Therefore, understanding the mechanisms controlling carbon and nitrogen
assimilation and how changing climatic conditions will influence these processes
is essential for predicting the feedback effects of photosynthetic organisms on
climate change as well as future food and energy supplies. Reverse genetics,
leaf gas exchange, nutrient uptake/feeding experiments, and mass spectrometry
measurements will be used to understand how disruptions of key steps in leaf
metabolism influence the coordination of energy flow between these metabolic
processes. High school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students will
be taught integrative approaches to plant biology, broadening their training and
learning opportunities in scientific research. Additionally, new partnerships
between Washington State University (WSU) and local high schools will be formed,
providing young students with greater access to the scientific process early in
their educational training. The investigators aim to increase the participation
of underrepresented undergraduates and graduate students in the laboratory
through university programs promoting research opportunities for under-
represented minorities and women at WSU. Additionally, websites will be
developed to present the outcomes of this research to a broader audience.