* 0842258
* Collaborative Research (RUI):   Toward a stoichiometric theory of ant ecology--from colony performance to community composition
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Michael Kaspari, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2013
* USD 336,378.00

The chemical composition of living organisms reflects their evolution, their
traits, and the environment in which they exist. Differences in the availability
of certain resources, and in particular a scarcity of a chemical resource that
is critical for the expression of a particular trait, may restrict the abundance
of some species. The extent to which a specific set of traits, starvation
resistance, worker size, colony size, colony growth rate, and colony tempo, is
linked to chemical composition and nutrient availability will be tested in a
diverse community of litter ants in a lowland tropical rainforest of Panama.
Experimental manipulations of particular nutrients will be used to test whether
nutrient availability can shift the species composition of the ant community in
ways that are consistent with observed correlations between species traits and
chemical composition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in tropical
biodiversity science is an excellent entry point to evolutionary ecology for
students, and undergraduates will participate in all phases of the research. The
familiarity and experimental tractability of ants make them an ideal
instructional tool, and the multiple research foci of the project will provide
opportunities for students to acquire a diversity of skills. The field work, set
on Barro Colorado Island in Panama, will expose students to the dynamic research
culture of an international field station. Together, these experiences should
provide students with the skills, knowledge, and motivation to pursue a career
in science.