* 0842205
* Acquisition of a New TZM Experimental System, and Upgrade of the Hydrothermal Laboratory for the Study of High-Temperature Magmatic-Hydrothermal Systems at the Univ. of Maryland
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Philip Candela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2011
* USD 68,864.00

0842205&lt;br/&gt;Candela&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding of ~$69K to purchase components which will be used to upgrade and
modernize the UMd TZM vessel/furnace assemblies and high-temperature magmatic-
hydrothermal laboratory. For this request, the PIs intend to acquire components
to construct four rapid-quench TZM vessel/furnace assemblies with low and high
pressure gas lines and rapid cooling infrastructure, a Deltech furnace able to
control temperature and maintain oxygen and sulfur fugacity, components to
construct an automated temperature control system and data recorder system (for
the TZM vessels), and upgrade other experimental equipment. UMd will provide
approximately $30K in matching funds. The equipment acquisition, device
fabrication and laboratory upgrades will enhance research in high temperature
and pressure geology. Experimentation will include andesitic and dacitic melt-
volatile phase-sufide mineral/melt equilibria, synthesis experiments for glasses
and minerals at varying temperatures and pressures, and sulfide-silicate
equilibrium studies at Earth surface pressure and at fixed oxygen and sulfur
fugacities at temperatures up to 1700 °C. In addition studies will be undertaken
to better understand ore metal partitioning between crystalline and melt phases,
between melts and volatile phases, and between brines and vapors. Equilibria for
these components and processes will be established. The laboratory and equipment
upgrades will support a department with 25 full and part-time graduate students.
Undergraduates are required to write thesis dissertations. Students will be
incorporated throughout the research agenda and will co-author and present
results. The PIs along with their students have an annual ?Maryland Day? where
the public experiences their research work. The instrumentation will also be
incorporated into the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;