* 0842295
* Acquisition of a New Linux-Based Computer System for Geophysical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Viatcheslav Solomatov, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 74,881.00

0842295 Wiens

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This proposal seeks funding of ~$75K to purchase group
computing resources for geophysical research. Requested are two Dell workgroup
servers, three modern workstations, two fourteen Tb fast RAID disk arrays, and
associated accessories. These instruments will be part of a departmental effort
to standardize hardware and software on a common distributed system. Washington
University will provide a 100% cost match in the form of IT technician support.
The system will be put to use in studying the interior structure and dynamics of
terrestrial planets using modeling and seismological approaches. The PIs will
apply numerical modeling approaches to data collected from broadband
seismometers to elucidate the structure of island arcs and backarc spreading
centers. In so doing they intend to elucidate temperature anomalies, melt,
water, and mantle flow in subduction systems. Broadband seismic data will also
be processed to understand Antarctic mantle structure constraining post-glacial
rebound and ice mass loss estimates. "Hot lines" in the mantle will be assessed
by analyzing and relating seismic data to hotspots and small-scale convection
patterns. EarthScope USArray data will be used to better understand seismic
attenuation structure in the mantle. Additionally, deep earthquake mechanistics
will be investigated using precise relative location methods and other source
parameters. Different models for North American tectonic history will be
interrogated computationally. Core-diffracted waves will be analyzed to
understand the core-mantle boundary - thus elucidating the vertical structure of
the lowermost mantle and heat flux. The new computational resources will also
allow for refined numerical planetary resurfacing and geodynamical models. The
computer system(s) will support numerous researchers - the PIs, 4 research
scientists, and 8 graduate students. The system(s) will also support
undergraduate senior theses. The large storage space will be used to organize
IRIS/PASSCAL datasets for delivery to the DMC - thus providing open access to
data for the community.

***