* 0842782
* Collaborative Research: Global Measures of Tonal Alignment in a Level-based Theory of  Intonational Phonology
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 05/31/2011
* USD 32,771.00

Human languages use pitch to convey meaning in a bewildering variety of ways. In
all languages, pitch (as one aspect of speech prosody) can express attitude or
emotion. In some languages, like English, pitch patterns, usually called
intonation contours, also express distinctions such as that between a question
and a statement. In languages like Mandarin Chinese, on the other hand, pitch
patterns called tones go still further to signal differences between words that
are otherwise identical. Despite significant advances in recent decades, a
unified theoretical account of the linguistic phenomena called tone and
intonation remains elusive in crucial respects. In fact, there is still no
universal agreement even over how best to characterize the formal properties of
intonation contours in languages like English. What seems to be missing is a
common acoustic or articulatory vocabulary for the expression of the relevant
distinctions, a single measurable dimension within which contours can be
reliably distinguished regardless of the language under investigation. This
project develops a new mathematical approach, based on the notion of Tonal
Center of Gravity, to characterizing pitch distinctions in English. This
approach reconciles seemingly contradictory results from the experimental
literature on the perception of contrasting pitch contours. Our research will
concentrate on a small number of intonation contours from English, and will test
the applicability of our model in two kinds of experiments. The first involves
automatic classification of pitch contours recorded from native speakers in an
experimental setting. The second involves direct manipulation through speech
synthesis of a number of the physical characteristics of pitch contours that
might be involved in conveying speakers' intentions, to see which variables have
the greatest effect on listeners' judgments of utterance
meaning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project lays the groundwork for a unified
approach to the production and perception of tonal contrasts in human language,
one that expresses how systems differ, while capturing the deeper commonality
among languages at the same time. The results of this work will also have a
broader impact in the area of speech technology. For example, identifying the
perceptually relevant characteristics of distinct intonation patterns will allow
for greater realism in speech synthesis systems. In addition, being able to
distinguish automatically between similar but perceptually distinct contours
will allow automatic pronunciation training systems to give more helpful
feedback to second language learners. Finally, this new model will facilitate
automatic categorization of intonation contours for speech understanding
systems. Progress in this area will ultimately allow such systems to derive
meaning not just from the sequence of words in an utterance, but from the subtle
meaning differences conveyed by intonation as well.