* 0842800
* Collaborative Research:   The Evolution of Leaf Form in Viburnum (Adoxaceae)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Michael Donoghue, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2013
* USD 210,952.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." Terrestrial plants display remarkable variation in many
aspects of leaf form. Leaves serve as main sites for photosynthesis, and are
thus primary custodians of plant growth and ultimately, fitness. Previous work
suggests that there are optimal values for particular leaf traits in a given
environment that will maximize growth, and thus predicts that certain leaf forms
will evolve under certain conditions. However, evolutionary response to external
pressures such as climate may be constrained, because leaves are developmentally
and functionally integrated parts of the whole plant. In spite of the long-
standing interest in the role of leaves in plant ecological adaptation, few
studies have successfully documented consistent evolutionary shifts in leaf
traits in relation to environment. This collaborative project will develop the
plant lineage Viburnum (Adoxaceae), a widespread group of approximately 168
species of woody shrubs and trees, as a model system for investigations into the
ecology and evolution of leaf form. Viburnum is ideally suited for this problem
as it exhibits a remarkable diversity of leaf shapes and sizes, and much is
already known regarding evolutionary relationships within the group. The
interdisciplinary PI team will collect physiological data from two common
gardens, anatomical and environmental data from herbarium collections, and
molecular sequence data for phylogenetic analyses to produce a unique, whole-
lineage perspective on leaf evolution that is simultaneously detailed and broad.
They will directly test several hypotheses regarding stem and leaf co-evolution,
the decoupling of certain aspects of leaf water use from photosynthetic
capacity, and the evolution of particular leaf traits in response to
environmental conditions. One prediction is that considerable leaf shape
diversity has evolved within a relatively narrow climate space, suggesting that
other factors have historically been more important in shaping the evolutionary
trajectory of leaf structure and function. Results from this work may be
directly relevant to predicting plant response to rapid climate change. This
work will also result in the development of new online community-wide teaching
and research resources, such as a large leaf collection for anatomical study. In
conjunction with the Peabody Museum of Natural History and public school
teachers from the Providence, RI area, the PI's will also develop two 'leaf
diversity' education modules targeted for elementary and high school levels in
the New Haven and Providence school districts.