* 0842618
* The Climate Memory of Tropical Cyclones:  Dimensions, Magnitude, Mechanisms for Generation and Removal, and Implications
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Robert Hart, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 01/31/2013
* USD 418,524.00

This project will comprehensively define the climate footprint ("memory") of a
tropical cyclone (TC) in time and space, explaining many fascinating and
important aspects of the footprint. Specifically, the investigators will (i)
define the temporal and spatial extent of the structure of the TC footprint and
its variability, (ii) define the mechanisms for TC footprint generation and
removal and the variability of those mechanisms geographically and temporally,
(iii) quantify the role of TCs in climate through aggregate energy measures
implied by the aggregate footprint, and (iv) compare the TC aggregate energy
measures to other climate transport mechanisms, such as the mean meridional
circulation and baroclinic activity. The investigators will utilize the varying
reanalysis datasets and the new Climate Forecast System Reanalysis and
Reforecast (CFSRR) coupled reanalysis to quantify the uncertainty in the
footprint magnitude and the driving physical mechanisms, acknowledging the
inherent limitations of such datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
bridge a major gap that exists between our understanding of "weather" (in this
case TCs) and climate, when no such gap exists in nature. The assumption has
been historically that the large-scale impacts of TCs can be (at best) broadly
parameterized in Global Circulation Models (GCMs), and that the large scale
climate simulation will not suffer substantially. The research will in detail
qualify and quantify this impact and that assumption's validity. The aggregate
role of TCs in climate as a whole will be quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project include an improved understanding of the TC role
in climate. The ability to forecast floods, droughts, and El Nino-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) events is dependent upon the accurate simulation of the upper
ocean and atmospheric boundary conditions, and the atmospheric teleconnection
patterns that result. The project will shine a light on the overall potential
limits of climate predictability as induced by the TC footprint. It will train
graduate students and ensure wide dissemination of results and findings in
conferences, workshops, seminars, publications, and websites.