* 0842974
* Functional Studies of the CDK-module of the Human Mediator Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Joaquin Espinosa, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2013
* USD 453,957.00

Intellectual merit. A major challenge in modern biology is to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms employed by cells to regulate expression of thousands of
genes in a tissue-, signaling-, and development-specific manner. Proper
regulation of gene activity is a key element of every major biological process.
Specialized protein machineries can turn genes ON and OFF in a tightly regulated
manner. One such protein complex, known as Mediator, is recognized as a critical
regulator of gene activity from yeast to humans, yet little is known about its
mechanism of action. This research project investigates a four-protein sub-
complex of Mediator known as the CDK-module, which can function to either
activate or repress genes. The goal of this project is to elucidate the
molecular mechanism by which the CDK module activates genes including the
regulatory steps at which it acts, defining the requirement for different
domains of the catalytically active subunit, and delineating the roles of the
other subunits. Building on the identification of specific genes in mammalian
cells that are clearly regulated by the CDK-module, sophisticated biochemical
and molecular biology techniques will be employed to manipulate the activity of
this complex inside cells and thus obtain much needed mechanistic information.
This research project will greatly improve our understanding of Mediator in
particular and the evolution of gene expression control mechanisms in general.
Given the quasi-universal role of Mediator in the control of gene expression,
the discoveries arising from this project will have far reaching implications in
the fields of cell and molecular biology. Moreover, the innovative experimental
approaches not previously utilized to study Mediator in vertebrate cells will
almost certainly provide novel insights. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The
activities in this project will be carried out by a teaching-research team that
strongly promotes science education and diversity in science. Preliminary
results have been obtained by partnerships of undergraduate and graduate
students working in a laboratory with an overall 1:1 female to male ratio and
1/3 of the lab members representing ethnic minorities. This grant will fund one
such undergraduate-graduate student collaboration. Both the host institution and
the Principal Investigator actively participate in programs funded by NSF and
other agencies that aim to: a) increase the number of minority students earning
PhDs, b) provide hands-on research experience to undergrads, c) prepare
undergraduate students to pursue PhDs in the biosciences, and d) increase the
representation of women in leadership positions in science and engineering. The
success of these endeavors is demonstrated by the fact that every scientific
publication from this research group has one or more undergraduate authors, and
that several of the past undergraduate trainees are now enrolled in PhD
programs. The Principal Investigator, Dr. Espinosa, is an active member of the
local Hispanic community and a recognized science educator at CU-Boulder, where
he is the instructor of a ~150-student undergraduate course and co-instructor in
the graduate program of his home Department. He teaches topics related to his
research at both venues. This grant will help to cement a culture of integrated
research and education within this burgeoning group, as well as to promote
diversity at the host institution.