* 0842199
* LTREB:   Evolutionary Ecology of Seabird Reproductive Life Histories
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* David Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2015
* USD 460,400.00

This research continues a study of a long-lived seabird that lives in the
Galápagos Islands. After 24 years of marking members of the population,
individuals are available from all age classes to test hypotheses regarding the
causes and consequences of aging. Previous work has shown that the reproductive
success of members of the population declines after they reach middle age,
around 16 years old. Annual survival declines rapidly in elderly members over 20
years old. The new research will use several different methods to examine aging
processes in this long-lived animal; the approaches include a genomic survey of
individuals that die at young versus old ages, and pedigree analysis to estimate
the genetic effect on rate of aging.

Aging and senescent decline have received considerable attention in the
biomedical community, including laboratory research on short-lived models like
fruit flies, mice, and worms. Our study gives a rare opportunity to study aging
in a long-lived animal much like ourselves in terms of demography, in a
pristine, natural environment. These birds have mechanisms, like a robust immune
system, that delay senescent decline in performance. The research to be
conducted will attempt to reveal some of those mechanisms. Results will
contribute significantly to conservation of long-lived seabirds; the Ecuadorian
government relies on the PI to collect information necessary to influence policy
development for seabirds in Ecuador. Latin American and US students will be
trained as part of this research, providing both groups with a valuable
international experience.