* 0842534
* Development of DNA Catalysts for Synthetic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Scott Silverman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2013
* USD 455,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will initiate efforts to identify DNA catalysts (deoxyribozymes,
DNA enzymes) for catalysis of reactions of small-molecule substrates with
multiple turnovers. Nucleic acids are used as natural catalysts in the form of
ribozymes (RNA enzymes). DNA has practical advantages over RNA in terms of cost,
stability, and ease of synthesis. In this project, studies will be performed to
establish in vitro selection methodology to identify deoxyribozymes that operate
with multiple turnovers on small-molecule substrates. Deoxyribozymes will be
identified for catalysis of Diels-Alder reactions and other reactions of small-
molecule substrates, with particular emphasis on chemical selectivity.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Scott K. Silverman of the Department of Chemistry at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Professor Silverman's research
efforts focus on developing the catalytic abilities of DNA. This research will
expand our fundamental understanding of the catalytic properties of nucleic
acids. In addition, successful development of the methodology will have
practical impact on synthetic techniques by fostering new approaches to
selective chemical synthesis.