* 0842786
* Collabortive Research on Central Neuroplasticity of the Avian Vasotocinergic System During Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Marina Mikhailova, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2013
* USD 233,001.00

Robustness and plasticity are two fundamental properties of living organisms
required to sustain their ability to adapt to the changing environment. The
brain contains a complex neural network enabling individuals to make rapid as
well as sustained adjustments to their behavior and physiological functions to
cope with unexpected stresses such as overcrowding, temperature changes, and
food shortages. This neural network is a set of anatomical structures
interconnected by signaling molecules that is termed the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal (HPA) axis. This network regulates responses to stress and plays a
fundamental role in adaptation in all vertebrates. Within this network, the
neurohormone vasotocin has a wide range of physiological and behavioral effects
in all sub-mammalian vertebrate classes. The planned studies have three goals.
First, the collaborative team will determine how various cellular and molecular
components of the vasotocin system interact during stress. Second, they will
characterize the changes in these interactions when an acute stress exposure
instead becomes a chronic one. Third, the structural and molecular basis for
concerted effects of vasotocin and another neurohormone, corticotrophin-
releasing hormone, on an animal's adaptation to stress will be examined. The
proposed activity is a joint effort of two very different educational
institutions, a land grant university with a major agricultural focus and an
academic health sciences center, both located in Arkansas where fewer training
opportunities in neuroscience exist. The successful collaboration will
demonstrate to students, who will be trained and introduced to a number of up-
to-date techniques, the importance of networking between diverse academic
cultures to advance knowledge and build unique scientific careers.