* 0842112
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Opening Pandora's Box with a Biotic Key:  Can Cyanobacterial Blooms in Nutrient-Poor Lakes Accelerate Eutrophication?
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Holly Ewing, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2013
* USD 367,046.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater
ecosystems provide vital ecological services important to human well being such
as drinking water, food resources, and waste water treatment. These systems are
vulnerable to disruption of these services if human activities and their impacts
exceed the capacity of the system to absorb or buffer them. It has been long
known that excessive nutrient loads to freshwater systems can result in a
reduction in water quality and blooms in nuisance algae. What has not been
understood is the role of biological agents. Initial results indicate that they
can accelerate this shift from a nutrient poor lake to a eutrophic lake by
facilitating the release of accumulated nutrients from the sediments. This award
will explore the role that Gloeotrichia echinulata plays in accelerating
eutrophication. The research will explore how G. echinulata affects both
nitrogen and phosphorus availability as well as whole lake metabolism. Through
field observations, laboratory and field experiments, paleoecology, modeling and
comparative studies, the PIs will elucidate the role of Gloeotrichia blooms as a
driver of eutrophication. The research is timely and will have immediate
resource management application, given the recent expansion of G. echinulata
into lakes across the Northeast. The project identified a number of activities
(student training, lake management associations) which will lead to broadened
impacts of the research. The PIs are active participants in the international
lakes network, Global Lakes Ecological Network, thus ensuring the results will
be rapidly disseminated on a global scale.