* 0842338
* Collaborative Research:  Acquisition of GPS and seismic equipment for Phase 2 of a Plate Boundary Observatory, Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2012
* USD 65,913.00

This grant supports a collaborative effort between the University of Miami ?
RSMAS (PI: Tim Dixon), the University of California Santa Cruz (PI: Susan
Schwartz), UNAVCO and Costa Rican colleague Dr. Marino Protti at OVSICORI to
acquire and deploy GPS and seismic equipment on the Nicoya Peninsula, Costa
Rica. Observation from this network will directly feed into research efforts
supported by the Margins Program (OCE-0841091/Miami-RSMAS/Dixon and
OCE-0841091/UCSC/Schwartz). This grant will facilitate an augmentation and
upgrade to a current but smaller network of GPS and seismic instrumentation on
the Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica (funded through EAR- 0502221). The end result
will be extended and better constrained geophysical observations in time and
space beyond that now being acquired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This support will add
an additional seven GPS sites and upgrade five of the older existing thirteen
GPS sites to PBO standards as well as allow for the purchase and installation of
four Guralp CMG3 broadband seismic sensors and associated data loggers to
replace equipment in the current Nicoya seismic network that are currently on
loan. Data from the network will continue to flow to the UNAVCO and IRIS
publicly accessible data archives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing Nicoya
seismogeodetic network has recorded initial evidence of aseismic slip of the
downgoing slab and associated nonvolcanic tremor in May 2007. This expansion of
the Nicoya GPS and seismic network will better constrain the time varying strain
field and seismic activity. Similar albeit higher resolution space-time
observations of subduction zone dynamics within the Cascadia and SW Japan
subduction zones have radically changed and challenged our understanding of
plate tectonic processes at subduction zones with implications for better
understanding seismic hazards. This expansion of the Nicoya Plate Boundary
Observatory (PBO) will allow for study of a class of subduction zone with
different properties from those of the Cascadia and Japan trenches, perhaps most
importantly, temperature/age of the downgoing slab. The Nicoya Peninsula is
unique in that it is perched almost directly over the locked part of the plate
boundary. As a result, the proposed geophysical observatory will enable high
signal/noise (S/N) ratio observations of plate boundary processes. Questions to
be addressed by the data collected by these instruments include: 1) What is the
relationship between slow slip, nonvolcanic tremor, strain accumulation and
interplate earthquakes. 2) What is the role of temperature and fluids in tremor
and slip generation? 3) Is the occurrence of fast and slow slip tremor spatially
and/or temporally separated? The answers to these questions have important
implications for understanding the seismic process at subduction
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will include international
cooperation and technology transfer, graduate student training with state-of-
the-art seismic and geodetic instrumentation and techniques, and improved
understanding of earthquake hazards in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;