* 0842332
* Collaborative Research:   The role of isolation in species diversification; insights into dispersal and evolution of endemic Lotus from the California Channel Islands
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Kaius Helenurm, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2015
* USD 168,812.00

Understanding the mechanisms that lead to the origin of new species is a primary
goal of evolutionary biology. Although new species have traditionally been
viewed as originating in isolation from close relatives, recent data suggest
that unique evolutionary entities can diverge even with high levels of gene
flow. Although both genetic and ecological factors contribute to divergence of
new taxa, the balance and roles of connectivity and isolation in diverging
populations remain poorly understood. This project uses molecular genetic,
ecological, and morphological data to understand patterns of divergence
resulting from the balance between isolation and interbreeding in many
populations of two endemic Lotus species in the California Channel Islands.
These islands are close to each other and mainland California, but contain many
unique species not found on the mainland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
contributes to the documentation of biodiversity and understanding of the
underlying processes that generate new species. Such understanding is needed for
effective conservation and management of biological diversity and the ecosystem
services it supports. This study will clarify how natural processes influence
connectivity and divergence in ecological communities of islands, with
applications also to similar continental regions. The research also offers
interdisciplinary research training for many undergraduate and graduate students
and significant outreach to agencies and NGOs that are charged with conservation
and management of biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;