* 0842720
* Analysis of symbiotic mineral nutrient transport and mechanisms underlying regulation of the arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Maria Harrison, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2013
* USD 469,946.00

Over 80% of the vascular flowering plants are capable of forming mutualistic
symbioses with arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi. These associations develop in
the roots, where in exchange for carbon, the fungal symbionts transfer
phosphorus and nitrogen from the soil to the plant. In the symbiosis, the AM
fungi inhabit the root cortical cells where they form branched hyphae called
arbuscules. The arbuscules are responsible for nutrient delivery to the root
cells. Previous studies in Medicago truncatula indicated that a symbiosis-
specific phosphate transporter, MtPT4, is essential for symbiotic phosphate
transport. In this project the investigators will further analyze MtPT4 and in
addition, begin to characterize the roles of a second phosphate transporter,
MtPT8, and a novel ammonium transporter, MtAMT2. Single, double and triple
mutant plants lacking these transporters will be generated and they will be used
to determine the extent to which symbiotic phosphate and nitrogen transport
regulate the AM symbiosis. Experiments will address the underlying mechanisms
and signaling pathways involved. A second aspect of the project focuses on
protein targeting in the symbiosis. The MtPT4 protein is located exclusively on
a specialized membrane called the peri-arbuscular membrane, which surrounds the
arbuscule. Using immunological approaches, and live cell imaging of MtPT4 tagged
with fluorescent proteins, the investigators will analyze the mechanisms
underlying protein targeting to the peri-arbuscular membrane. The AM symbiosis
is formed by almost all vascular flowering plants but the proteins that mediate
symbiotic phosphate and ammonium transport, the mechanisms that regulate
maintenance of key symbiotic interfaces, and the signaling pathways that
integrate regulatory mechanisms with the mineral nutrient status of the plant,
are all largely unknown. The data generated in these experiments will advance
our understanding of these aspects of the symbiosis. The project includes
opportunities for undergraduate students to obtain experience with confocal
microscopy.