* 0842385
* Collaborative Research:   Feammox - A new pathway for nitrogen loss from terrestrial ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Whendee Silver, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 741,958.00

Nitrogen is a key nutrient to microbes, plants and animals, and considerable
research has been directed at understanding the controls on it's retention and
loss in terrestrial ecosystems. Despite this effort, much uncertainty remains,
especially with regard to gaseous nitrogen losses. This is particularly
troubling in the context of human modification of the nitrogen cycle, which is
dramatically increasing nitrogen pollution, runoff, and the emission of nitrous
oxide, a radiatively important greenhouse gas. This research will contribute to
our understanding of the terrestrial nitrogen cycle by quantifying the role of
"Feammox", a newly discovered pathway in the global nitrogen cycle. Feammox is
the anaerobic oxidation of ammonium coupled to ferric iron [Fe (III)] reduction.
It has the potential to produce inert dinitrogen gas as well as reactive
nitrite, which could subsequently be reduced to gaseous or organic nitrogen, or
ammonium under anaerobic conditions. Given the potential gaseous loss of
nitrogen from terrestrial environments, this pathway may play a significant role
in the global nitrogen cycle. The proposed research will place this newly
discovered nitrogen transformation pathway in the context of the larger nitrogen
cycle by (i) determining if Feammox is mediated by soil microbes, and if so
identify the responsible organisms, (ii) determining the relative importance of
iron- and nitrogen-containing compounds as controls on Feammox, and (iii)
quantifying the role of Feammox in total nitrogen gas emissions from soils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative research between a soil biogeochemistry
laboratory at the University of California at Berkeley and a microbial
biogeochemistry laboratory at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln will improve
the mechanistic understanding of terrestrial nitrogen cycling. Field work will
take place at the Luquillo Long Term Ecological Research site in Puerto Rico.
The research addresses a previously unquantified pathway in terrestrial
ecosystems that not only has implications for nutrient retention in soils, but
could also evolve nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas implicated in global change.
This project will support for an early career female scientist, two graduate
students, one undergraduate student, and one postdoctoral researcher. In concert
with sample collection in Puerto Rico workshops and training activities will be
held for Puerto Rican high school students. Science cafes in Puerto Rico and
California will provide an ecology and global change educational outreach
component to the public at large. &lt;br/&gt;