* 0842129
* III-SGER:    Spatio-Temporal-Thematic Queries of Semantic Web Data: a Study of Expressivity and Efficiency
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2011
* USD 152,000.00

Spatial and temporal data are critical components in many applications.
&lt;br/&gt;This is especially true in analytical applications ranging from
scientific &lt;br/&gt;discovery to national security and criminal investigation.
This exploratory &lt;br/&gt;research develops of new methods for modeling and
querying spatial, temporal &lt;br/&gt;and thematic (STT) data. The methods
differ significantly from traditional&lt;br/&gt;approaches for STT data
management; they follow a paradigm that goes beyond &lt;br/&gt;querying for
resources to querying about the relationships between resources.&lt;br/&gt;Three
STT data management advances this will lead to are: &lt;br/&gt;(1) new query
operators that exploit the graph-centric nature &lt;br/&gt;of Semantic Web data
models, (2) new indexing and query processing &lt;br/&gt;techniques for STT data
that are specialized for Semantic Web data models &lt;br/&gt;and (3) an
extension of the SPARQL RDF query language to support STT
queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second aspect of this project is to compare the
STT-RDF &lt;br/&gt;approach described above with an alternative approach based
on OWL-DL &lt;br/&gt;and qualitative spatial and temporal reasoning. This
exploratory &lt;br/&gt;study evaluates whether the STT-RDF analytics approach
provides a &lt;br/&gt;more efficient and expressive query language than the
&lt;br/&gt;OWL-DL approach with space-time ontology. Specifically,
&lt;br/&gt;(1) for the queries that can be encoded in both the formalisms,
&lt;br/&gt;is the former implementation more efficient? and (2) are there
&lt;br/&gt;queries that can be formulated in the STT-RDF analytics
formalism&lt;br/&gt;that cannot be expressed as OWL-DL queries?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout this project, special attention is given
to&lt;br/&gt;repeatability of experimental results. All code will be open
source, &lt;br/&gt;and all benchmarks, datasets and ontologies will be available
&lt;br/&gt;through the project web site at&lt;br/&gt;http://knoesis.wright.edu/r
esearch/semweb/projects/stt/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;