* 0842830
* RUI:   Analysis of the molecular, cellular and physiologic regulation of a proton mediated cell-cell signaling event in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Maureen Peters, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 01/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

Multicellular organisms must coordinate the activity of different cells,
tissues, and organs to function effectively and efficiently. Processes with
regular timing such as heartbeat, breathing, and digestion require signals to
pass between cells in a rapid manner. Understanding the nature of these signals
and how they are controlled will provide insight into the physiology of
multicellular organisms and may identify the causes of physiologic
dysfunction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent findings suggest an additional role for
protons in biological systems: protons can act as rapid transmitters, or
signals, between cells. This project focuses on identifying and characterizing
the molecular, cellular and physiologic mechanisms of a proton-mediated cell to
cell signal in the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans. The posterior body
contraction, which is the first contraction of the roundworm's periodic
digestive motor program, is controlled by a proton-mediated muscle contraction
signal. Recent studies suggest that a periodic calcium wave regulates this
proton signal. The investigator and undergraduate researchers will identify the
mechanism(s) regulating this new form of cell-cell communication by isolating
and characterizing posterior body contraction mutants. The investigator's
undergraduate research lab has determined that mutation of an evolutionarily
conserved sodium-proton exchanger regulatory protein, calcineurin B homologous
protein (chp), disrupts the posterior body contraction. In Aim 1, the effect of
chp mutation on intestinal pH and calcium physiology will be analyzed. In Aim 2,
the mechanism by which chp alters sodium-proton exchange activity will be
investigated by testing physical interactions, membrane localization and proton
exchange. In Aim 3, additional posterior body contraction mutants will be
identified using RNA interference and genetic screening. The project will
involve many undergraduates in hands-on, investigative research in teaching and
research laboratory settings, preparing them for future biology-related
professions, and will introduce new technologies to the local scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;