* 0842315
* Reconciling predictions of kinetic theory with observations of decomposition responses to temperature: Biochemical, biological, and edaphic constraints
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Eldor Paul, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 01/31/2012
* USD 692,525.00

Because the soil is such a large storehouse of carbon, the effects of
temperature on soil carbon dynamics have important implications for the global
carbon cycle and climate change. Soil organic matter is composed of a variety of
materials that differ in their decomposability. The extent to which
decomposition of these various components is influenced by temperature is a
critical factor that determines whether soils will act as a sink or source for
atmospheric CO2 under the climate of the future. This question is unaddressed in
leading climate-carbon models, masking a potentially large source of
uncertainty. This has substantial implications for changes in soil carbon
stocks. Using a combination of complementary laboratory, field, and cross-site
experiments integrated through model development, these researchers will examine
the responses of biochemical and biological processes to temperature, especially
constraints on enzyme production. They will also explicitly investigate the
effects of the soil's mineral matrix alone. The hypotheses and experimental
approach are directly aligned with the mechanisms by which soil organic matter
decomposition occurs: organic matter becomes available for decomposers
(desorption) and it is attacked by soil microorganisms (enzymatically). Thus,
this project will generate new knowledge that applies fundamental kinetic theory
to decomposition in real-world situations.

The broader impacts of this project include development of symposia at two
national global-change meetings. Undergraduate students will participate in the
Summer Ecology Research program, thus gaining valuable research experience. The
principal investigators will assist two graduate students in developing
scientific leadership skills, such that the graduate students will eventually
mentor undergraduates in their research.