* 0842327
* Collaborative research: Effects of herbivores and mycorrhizas on N-fixers across soil and climate gradients in the Serengeti
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Nancy Johnson, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 303,213.00

Shortages of plant-available forms of soil nitrogen and phosphorus frequently
limit plant production in natural and agricultural ecosystems. Microorganisms in
the soil can help relieve this limitation, as nitrogen-fixing bacteria convert
atmospheric nitrogen-gas into forms of nitrogen that plants can use, and
mycorrhizal fungi help plants acquire phosphorus. These microorganisms are
suspected to be important regulators of ecosystem productivity, but surprisingly
little is known about what controls their abundance and activities. Research in
the Serengeti grassland in East Africa provides an unprecedented opportunity to
learn how herbivorous animals, the plants they consume, and soil microorganisms
all interact together to generate a remarkably stable ecosystem. This research
will apply cutting-edge molecular methods in two new manipulative experiments
plus an ongoing long-term grazer exclosure experiment to assess how strongly
herbivores and mycorrhizal fungi stimulate or limit the abundance and N-fixing
activity of soil microbes, and whether these effects are mediated by rainfall
and soil minerals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human reliance on chemical fertilizers
could be reduced if nitrogen-fixing bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi could be more
effectively managed. This work will provide the scientific basis for developing
management strategies to maximize the benefits of these soil organisms for
sustainable production of food and fiber in semi-arid grasslands, savannas and
other tropical ecosystems. The results will also make it possible to estimate
more closely the contribution of natural nitrogen inputs, relative to elevated
human-induced nitrogen deposition across the globe. The research will build
scientific capacity in Tanzania.