* 0842839
* Influence of Cholesterol on Phase Behavior and Nonrandom Mixing of Membrane Components
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Gerald Feigenson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 937,104.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Cholesterol is the single most abundant lipid species in mammalian plasma
membranes. Nonetheless, the underlying nature of its interactions with
neighboring membrane molecules has remained obscure, as have its effects on
membrane biochemistry. Cholesterol is known to mix nonrandomly with other
membrane lipids, and yet in most cases a clear understanding is missing for the
lateral distribution of cholesterol, and the way cholesterol influences the
lateral distribution of other membrane components. This project has four main
conceptual elements: (i) 3-component bilayer lipid mixtures serve as models for
the outer and the inner leaflets of mammalian plasma membranes. These
3-component mixtures are sufficiently complex to model real biomembranes, yet
are chemically well-defined; (ii) Several independent, complementary methods are
used to thoroughly map and characterize the compositional phase behavior of
these model membranes; (iii) Some, perhaps all, of the most realistic model
membranes have compositional regions with phase separated "nanodomains". These
tiny domains, not the same as the clusters found in ordinary nonideal mixing,
must be characterized as to size, and their chemical properties correlated with
the well-studied macroscopic phases; (iv) Binding of membrane proteins
influences the size of nanodomains, and conversely the presence of these
nanodomains influences protein binding. Experimentally, this work involves large
data sets of fluorescence resonance energy transfer measurements to find the
lipid mixture phase boundaries and the partition behavior of fluorescent probes,
including membrane-bound peptides. Confocal fluorescence microscopy is used to
visualize and identify coexisting phases. X-ray diffraction experiments at the
Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source can detect nanodomains without the use of
fluorescent probes. A long-range objective of this project is to discover the
fundamental nature of the information that is contained in the structure of
lipid polar and hydrocarbon moieties, thereby serving the broader scientific
community. In this way, membrane lipids should become as well understood as are
nucleic acids and amino acids. Previous work shows that lipid structural
information, in part, is manifested in the phase behavior of lipid mixtures, and
this project is designed to elucidate this mixture behavior. This research also
will yield systematic information about properties of membrane probes that will
be of wide use to the community of cell biologists who use fluorescence
microscopy. As an integral feature of this project, in order to promote
scientific education and training, a group of undergraduate students will
receive lectures in lipid physical chemistry and fluorescence spectroscopy,
followed by systematic training in lipid analytical chemistry, lipid organic
synthesis, and spectroscopic and microscope techniques, which they will then use
in their assigned independent research.