* 0842235
* Causes and implications of dry season control of tropical wet forest tree growth at very high water levels: direct vs. indirect limitations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Elizabeth Losos, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 819,591.00

Recent research in Costa Rica has shown that the growth of tropical moist forest
trees is strongly related to the strength of the dry season across a range of
rainfall that by all standard measures would be considered more than sufficient
for growth. Understanding the basis for this finding is crucial because tropical
moist forests play important roles in the global carbon and water cycles and
therefore regional and global climate. Predicted future warming and drying of
tropical moist forests could have strong feedback effects on global climate.
However, recent satellite studies from the Amazon report that trees have their
greatest leaf cover during the dry season, suggesting that the dry season does
not affect production. These two findings suggest a serious gap in our
understanding of role of the dry season on tropical tree growth and carbon
sequestration. Dry-season controls on tree growth could result from both direct
water limitation or via other indirect mechanisms. Direct limitation via dry
soil and dry air seems unlikely given the high rainfall, soil moisture, and
humidity that occur during the dry season. Potential indirect mechanisms include
excessive leaf temperatures lowering photosynthesis, premature leaf loss in
response to dry air, low light-use efficiency and canopy photosynthesis during
periods of direct sun, and changes in allocation of resources to root biomass or
reproduction instead of aboveground growth. This project will test hypotheses of
direct water limitation and indirect mechanisms to determine the basis for the
dry season rainfall correlation with growth. The study will use both
observational and experimental approaches to test for direct water limitation,
combining measurement of whole forest photosynthesis and the form of energy
losses, leaf-and whole-tree water use, monthly tree growth and climate
measurements, and a dry-season water-addition experiment. Indirect limitations
will be evaluated by measurements of canopy leaf area, leaf temperature, and
measurements of root production and metabolism. Measurements of growth and
ecosystem carbon, water and energy balance will be used to evaluate the
importance of dry season growth reduction for regional climate.

This project will support outreach and education components in both South
Florida and Costa Rica. In South Florida a partnership has been developed with a
local private grade 1-8 school for environmental outreach activities. Project
personnel will continue to support the Fairchild Challenge school environmental
awareness program at Fairchild Tropical Botanical Garden in Miami. The project
will also support the environmental education programs of the Organization for
Tropical Studies at the La Selva Biological Station, the location of the study.
The project will support one postdoctoral fellow, several undergraduates, and
provide training for two Costa Rican technicians. Finally, understanding the
basis of the sensitivity of dry season limitation on aboveground biomass
production is critical to forecasting the responses of tropical wet forests to
future climate regimes.