* 0842652
* Markets Lab
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2009
* John Pyrovolakis, Kauffman Innovation Network
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 01/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

The objective of the Kaufman Innovation Network "Market's Lab" workshop is to
spur market driven innovation in the NSF's Small Business Innovation Research
and Small Business Technology Transfer ("SBIR/STTR") program in two industry
segments: financial services and healthcare services (insurance). The workshop
is to be held in Omaha, Nebraska; there is a significant business community
around financial services and health insurance which is motivated to spur
innovation in their industries. There are two key components of the workshop.
The first is having the larger corporations articulate three key "pain points",
for the purpose of providing visibility to NSF SBIR/STTR grantees about what
sorts of innovation they would be interested in. The second is introducing these
companies to NSF SBIR/STTR grantees with technologies that have the potential to
match up with pain points.

The broader impact of the proposed activity is to spur market driven innovation
within the NSF's SBIR/STTR program. The NSF SBIR/STTR program makes over
$100mm/yr in grants annually to small to mid-stage technology companies, with
the goal that these companies will eventually make a significant contribution to
the American economy. An impediment to some grantee's ability to make such a
contribution is a lack of visibility into what market there is for their
technology. The proposed workshop proposes to provide this sort of visibility by
having larger companies with a demand for innovation discuss what sorts of
technologies they are interested in. This improves the chances of "market-
driven" innovation occurring within the NSF SBIR/STTR program. Focusing the
workshop on a very particular industry - financial services and health insurance
- further improves these chances.