* 0842646
* Building a Technology Research Agenda:    An Early Career Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Michael Hannafin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2009
* USD 31,712.00

This is funding to support a research colloquium for early career researchers at
the annual AECT (Association for Educational Communication &amp; Technology)
conference to be held in Orlando, Florida in October 2008. The funding will
provide stipends for junior faculty and advanced graduate students to
participate in the research consortium. A goal of the Association for
Educational Communications and Technology (AECT) is to facilitate humane
learning through the systematic development, utilization, and management of
learning resources, which include media in educational settings. Yet, despite
research initiatives underway among its members, most are employed within
programs where external funding has not been a priority historically (e.g., in
Colleges of Education) and the prospects for advancing research collaborations
among most junior faculty and graduate students is inherently constrained. The
purpose of this colloquium is to provide a forum during which successful NSF-
funded scholars personally mentor junior scholars and graduate students in the
nuances of developing a systematic program of inquiry, successful grant
proposals, and disseminating research across a range of technology R&amp;D
problems and issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing young and creative
researchers to AECT 08 will help advance an important and socially valuable
research field. NSF funding will significantly impact the careers of the next
generation of researchers by enabling a number of them to take part in both the
conference as well as the research colloquium. The students and junior faculty
will have an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their
innovative work, and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the
research community. Participation will also help foster a sense of community
among these young researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development. The PI has indicated that she will act to assure
participation by members of traditionally under-represented institutions, and
will pay close attention to inclusion of minorities and women.