* 0842659
* SGER/Collaborative Research:  2008 Midwest Levee Failure Invesigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2010
* Norbert Maerz, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2010
* USD 42,969.00

This Small Grant for Experimental Research (SGER) award is an immediate field
reconnaissance and data collection effort to collect sensitive and time-
dependent perishable levee performance (failures and successes) data,
documenting the performance of the flood protection levees along the Mississippi
River between Davenport Iowa and St. Louis Missouri during the June and July
2008 storms. The objective of the study is to perform an integrated evaluation
of levee performance subject to "extreme" loading, such as extended duration
elevated river stages (inducing underseepage/internal erosion) and
overtopping/scour erosion.

Individual erosion characteristics for levee performance have been studied and
significantly advanced in the last ten years, but no integrated studies have
been performed that synthesize all the erosion characteristics in one model.
This study provides desperately needed comprehensive field data to validate
empirical formulas and numerical models that have been developed to analyze
erosion of levees. There are lessons of potentially vital importance to be
learned from the performance of the Midwest levee systems. The data collection
consists of detailed laser imaging surveys (Terrestrial LiDAR) of the breach and
erosion/scour features, characterization of the vegetative grass cover,
characterization of the levee soil materials (Unified Soil Classification
System, Atterberg Limits, density, grain-size distribution, and Erosion Function
Apparatus rating), documentation of river stage at the location of levee
failures from eyewitness accounts as well as river stage gaging stations, and
lessons from the engineers and personnel who observed the levee failures and
performed/oversaw repairs. Thus, this study provides comprehensive field data
for use in advancement of levee erosion-resistance design.

There are thousands of miles of earthen levees in the United States, many
without any engineering design or certification, that are supposed to provide
flood protection for residents living within the protected zone behind the
levees. Of the levees that were designed in accordance with accepted engineering
methods, very few of the levees have been designed to resist the most common
failure type, overtopping. Thus, the results of this field reconnaissance study
can be directly applied to the entire U.S. flood protection system to evaluate
the reliability of earthen levees as flood protection elements, as well as
recommendations for levee improvements to increase performance reliability.