* 0842525
* Translational Patterns During Spermiogenesis in Marsilea
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Stephen Wolniak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,043,363.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate the mechanisms that control cell fate
determination in the male gametophyte of the fern Marsilea vestita.
Specifically, studies will focus on the spatial and temporal regulation of
translation that underlies basal body formation and nuclear remodeling in the
spermatids. Spermatogenesis in this fern is a process that is activated by
placing dry spores into water and involves a series of nine rapid cell division
cycles in precise planes within the spore wall to produce 32 spermatids and 7
sterile cells. There is no movement of cells, so size and position within the
spore wall defines cell fate. Gametophyte development takes place in the absence
of new transcription; instead, the gametes are formed with proteins that were
already present in the spore, or translated from mRNAs that had been transcribed
and stored prior to spore desiccation. Within the spermatids, differentiation
involves the formation of basal bodies in the absence of preexisting centrioles
in a unique particle known as a blepharoplast. The spermatids then form an
elaborate signature microtubule cytoskeleton known as the multilayered structure
(MLS). The later phases of spermatid maturation involve nuclear remodeling, cell
reshaping, and finally ciliogenesis, to produce a multiciliated, spirally-shaped
motile gamete that looks nothing like the cell that gave rise to it. None of
these events occurs in the sterile cells, though all of the cells present within
the spore wall arose from the same progenitor. Thus, the male gametophyte of
Marsilea provides a unique opportunity to study multiple aspects of cellular
differentiation in populations of synchronously developing cells, where the
cells are permeable to the entry of macromolecules at the time the spores are
placed into water. The specific objectives of this project are to (1) determine
how the core components of the exon junction complex affect patterns of centrin
translation essential for the process of de novo basal body formation; (2)
characterize the RNA-binding proteins that regulate the abundance of alpha-
tubulin, which, together with centrin, affects basal body production and
formation of the MLS; and (3) determine how spermidine affects temporal and
spatial patterns of translation, thereby influencing cell fate specification
within the gametophyte.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research
training and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral
associates and visiting scholars. In addition, laboratory courses have been
developed that provide training in cell biology and microscopy for undergraduate
and graduate students and a website focused on an "Introduction to Mitosis" has
been developed and is accessible by the public at
http://www.life.umd.edu/CBMG/faculty/wolniak/wolniakmitosis.html.