* 0842351
* Upgrade of Research Equipment:  Refurbishing the Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer at the University of Colorado, Boulder
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* G. Lang Farmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2010
* USD 105,671.00

0842351&lt;br/&gt;Farmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding of ~$106K to refurbish a Finnigan-MAT 261 thermal ionization mass
spectrometer (TIMS). Primary amongst the needed upgrades is a modern computer
system along with interface cards and software to control the instrument. The
manufacturer in essence no longer supports this instrument so a third party
vendor?s products will be purchased. Also requested are two replacement filament
power supplies and ion source high voltage supply. Installation costs are also
requested. The TIMS facility sponsors in-department and outside users and
provides a level of training and sample processing assistance. The equipment
acquisition and installation will allow the PIs to keep a 21 year old TIMS in
service. The PIs have completed over 20,000 measurements - mostly Sr, Nd, Pb,
Rb, Sr, Pb, Sm and Nd concentrations/isotopes. The department (Geological
Sciences) and institute, the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental
Sciences (CIRES), support an Integrated Instrument Development Facility (IIDF)
consisting of electronics, machining and repair expertise. The PI has ample EAR
research funding and works on rhyolite genesis, epizonal granite formation,
siliciclastic sediment provenance, and paleohydrology. The advantages of the
upgrade include being able to collect data over longer periods of time, being
able to analyze data electronically, the ability to run the instrument in a more
automated fashion, the ability to network the data acquisition system so that
?hard? printouts and manual data entry can be avoided, and the cost savings in
not having to purchase paper, diskettes and other consumables. The instrument
and associated laboratory support students, CIRES, University of Colorado and
outside researchers. The PI has trained numerous graduate students, employed and
trained undergraduates, and developed collaborations at dozens of other
universities and federal agencies. The PI currently supports three PhD students
and has four other Geology graduate students working in the TIMS lab. Results
are regularly published.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***