* 0842446
* Improving Fluid Intelligence by Training Working Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* John Jonides, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 09/30/2014
* USD 312,317.00

Improving Fluid Intelligence by Training Working
Memory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: John
Jonides&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid intelligence
(an important component of what is usually termed "IQ") is the ability to reason
and to solve new problems independently of previously acquired knowledge, and so
it is considered one of the most important factors in learning. Moreover, fluid
intelligence is closely related to professional and educational success. There
is considerable agreement that fluid intelligence is highly heritable, but this
does not mean that it cannot be influenced by education and socialization.
Recently, the research group of Dr. John Jonides at the University of Michigan
published a widely acclaimed article in which they report evidence of transfer
from training on a demanding working memory task to measures of fluid
intelligence. Working memory is the system that is responsible for the short-
term storage of information to be used in the service of higher-level cognitive
processing. Individuals were trained on a working memory task that required
simultaneously holding in mind spatial and verbal information that constantly
had to be updated as the task continued. This working memory training effect is
a surprising finding both because previous efforts to train IQ have thus far not
been successful, and because it is all too rare to find transfer effects from
any training task to another task that differs from the trained task in content.
The transfer in question resulted even though the trained task was entirely
different from the intelligence test itself. Furthermore, the results indicated
that the amount of gain in IQ critically depended on the amount of training: the
more training, the more improvement in fluid intelligence. The present NSF-
funded project seeks to examine the brain basis of this training effect. It is
based on the rationale that successful transfer from working memory to measures
of intelligence must come about because there are brain mechanisms in common
between the two. The project involves testing participants' fluid intelligence,
training them for 5 weeks on a working memory task that has been shown to
influence fluid intelligence, and then testing their fluid intelligence after
training. Crucially, participants will be scanned using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) while they take intelligence tests, early and late in
training on working memory, and then again when they take intelligence tests
after training. The data should yield important insights about the brain regions
that underlie working memory and fluid intelligence and whether these regions
overlap between the two sets of tasks as expected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is significant in several ways. First, understanding the
relationship between working memory and fluid intelligence leads the way to
developing training schemes to improve fluid intelligence. There can be little
doubt that facilitating the intelligence of individuals can only yield benefits
for society in its productivity and its intellectual approach to society's
problems. Second, understanding the brain mechanisms that are shared in common
between working memory and intelligence permits prediction about what cognitive
skills will be lost after certain brain traumas and what remediations may be
effective. Third, undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers who are engaged in the project will learn the fundamentals of
scanning in the functional magnetic resonance imaging environment as well as
experimental skills, thereby strengthening their scientific training.