* 0842366
* Acquisition and Internalization of Copper by Methanotrophs
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Amy Rosenzweig, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 617,009.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methanobactin (Mb) is a small copper-
chelating molecule isolated from methanotrophic bacteria, organisms that utilize
methane as their sole carbon source. Methanobactin facilitates copper uptake and
may also function in regulation of methane monooxygenase (MMO) enzyme
expression, catalysis by the copper-containing, particulate MMO (pMMO), and
defense against copper toxicity and resultant oxidative stress. Although some
insight into Cu-Mb structure and function has been gained in the past few years,
major questions remain unanswered. First, Cu-Mb has only been characterized from
one organism. It is not known whether Mb molecules from different species have
similar structures. Cu-Mb from three types of methanotrophs will be isolated and
characterized by analytical, spectroscopic, and structural methods. These data
will provide insight into the structural diversity of Mb and into its role in
interspecies competition for metal ions. Second, it is clear that methanotrophs
secrete Mb into their growth medium when deprived of copper, but it is not known
how Cu-Mb is taken back into the cell. Direct uptake of Cu-Mb will be
established experimentally and a variety of biophysical, biochemical, and
genetic approaches will be utilized to identify proteins involved in Cu-Mb
uptake. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The growth of
methanotrophs, Mb isolation, and spectroscopic characterization have proven to
be excellent training projects. Several undergraduate students will work on
isolating Mb from different organisms. In addition to exposing undergraduates to
this highly collaborative, interdisciplinary research project, underrepresented
minority students will have the opportunity to participate as graduate students
at Northwestern and through the Chicago State University-NU Masters to the PhD
Bridge Program. An understanding of how methanotrophs acquire essential copper
ions for methane oxidation will impact greenhouse gas models for various
environments, particularly as pertains to acquisition of copper from mineral
sources. In addition, Mb is potentially applicable in the semiconductor industry
to remove copper from wastewater.