* 0842507
* RUI: Anatomical transformation in Mammalia: Developmental Controls of Vertebral Column Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Emily Buchholtz, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2012
* USD 199,981.00

Evolution requires both the generation of variation through the process of
development and the sorting of that variation by natural selection. The
principal investigator and her undergraduate students will use the methodologies
and insights of molecular biology, systematics (phylogeny construction),
comparative anatomy, and paleontology to address the ways that development has
shaped and constrained the morphological diversification of the mammalian
vertebral column over evolutionary time. Frequently observed categories of
column variation have recently been linked to developmental disruptions of the
processes of somite generation and axial pattern assignment. This linkage allows
the generation of a database that will enable the researchers to identify the
type, frequency, and phylogenetic location of critical developmental events in
mammalian column evolution. The key morphological innovations the investigators
will address are the differentiation of the column's component series, the
introduction of constraint in cervical (neck) morphology, and the dramatic
column transformations seen in three mammalian groups (sloths, manatees, whales)
with unusual lifestyles. This project's primary significance lies in its
contribution to our growing understanding of the role of development in
evolution. Its secondary impact lies in its integration of undergraduate
students into the process of formulating and investigating questions of animal
design during the scope of their summer research program, independent study, and
senior thesis research experiences.