* 0843726
* Mesoscopic Aggregation of Folded Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Peter Vekilov, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2014
* USD 447,563.00

To perform their function, proteins must operate in the crowded environment of a
living cell, thus requiring mechanisms that prevent protein aggregation. When
these mechanisms fail, pathological conditions, such as sickle cell anemia or
plaque formation, take place. In some cases, on the other hand, specific types
of aggregation are actually desirable; examples including storage of insulin in
the pancreas and protein in grains, in the form of crystals. Making protein
crystals remains the single most important tool for protein structure
determination, which is crucial for understanding protein function. It comes as
a surprise that for those protein aggregates to form, folded protein molecules
must first organize into long-lived clusters of a protein-rich liquid that are
about a micron in size: According to the existing paradigms of phase
equilibrium, such mesoscopic clusters should not exist, nor have they been seen
in other similar systems such as colloids. The project aims to elucidate the
molecular mechanism and the thermodynamic basis of how the puzzling mesoscopic
clusters form. To accomplish this goal, the project will combine the theoretical
and experimental efforts of the Lubchenko and Vekilov labs using four proteins
as model systems: lysozyme, hemoglobin, insulin, and lumazine synthase. The
roles of water structuring at the protein-solvent interface and the formation of
transient protein oligomers in the stabilization of the protein-rich phase will
be investigated by molecular modeling and tested by means of dynamic/static
light scattering and thermodynamic and rheological characterizations. The rich
kinetics of the formation/decay of clusters resulting from the interplay between
protein transport and oligomer formation will be worked out by solving non-
linear kinetic schemes coupled with diffusion/advection and tested against
measured life-times and sizes of the clusters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
solution of the important problem of mesoscopic aggregates in concentrated
protein solutions lies at the interface of biology, physics, chemistry, and
materials science. In addition, this research will be a close collaboration
between a theoretical and experimental group from departments of chemistry and
chemical engineering. These factors will combine to create a unique
multidisciplinary research environment for participating students and research
infrastructure. Considering the ethnic diversity at the University of Houston
and in the greater Houston area, the research will enhance the educational
opportunities in several underrepresented groups and promote their participation
in advanced research. Existing collaborations with local writers and radio
personalities will be utilized to publicize the societal benefits of the
research. In addition to the fundamental and clinical significance of the
research, its benefits include new potential routs for manufacturing novel
materials and improving the nutritional value of crops. This project is jointly
supported by Molecular Biophysics in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Physics
Division.