* 0843901
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Kiowa Switch-Reference and the Nature of Topichood
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Seth Cable, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2011
* USD 10,620.00

The grammatical notion of 'topic' in language is intuitively clear: A topic is
what a sentence is about. However, this notion and its role in the grammar has
proven difficult to formalize. No theory of the meaning or structure of topics
has complete empirical coverage, because they assume some unified notion of
topichood, and they tend to focus on a handful of European languages. This
research drops that assumption and explores the grammar of Kiowa, a Native
American language spoken in Oklahoma. In doing so, it will build towards a more
nuanced theory of topichood. Working under Dr. Seth Cable, Andrew McKenzie will
examine referential strategies in the Kiowa language. Kiowa employs sentence
markers that track certain arguments across sentences--- a phenomenon called
'switch-reference'. The hypothesis of this dissertation is that these arguments
are one kind of topic. As such, they are arguments of the sentence, rather than
of the verb in the sentence. Also, their semantic and syntactic properties
systematically differ from those of other types of topics. The results of this
research should lead either towards a typology of topic phenomena in Kiowa and
other languages, or to the abandonment of any theoretical notion of `topic'.
With support from the NSF, Mr. McKenzie will make three trips to Oklahoma to
test this hypothesis by conducting fieldwork with native speakers of Kiowa. He
will collect data by eliciting utterances and grammaticality judgments. Speakers
may also recite passages and conduct conversations, in order to provide more
naturalistic data. In addition, speakers will be asked to listen to or read
passages in Kiowa and discuss the use of language therein.

This research will advance our understanding of topic phenomena and clarify the
role topics play in the structure and meaning of sentences. In addition, this
research will help promote the survival and maintenance of the Kiowa language.
Kiowa, like the vast majority of Native American languages, is gravely
endangered. Fortunately, it is being taught in several places. However, a
complete language curriculum is hampered by the lack of a full understanding of
the aspects of Kiowa grammar concerning topichood. This research will fill this
gap in our knowledge, and help students of Kiowa learn fluent conversation
techniques. It will also serve as an example of investigation into the meaning
and structure of topics in understudied languages, and provide substantial sets
of data that may prove valuable to students of Kiowa and to linguists.