* 0843730
* Regulatory and Signaling Mechanisms of Crassulacean Acid Metabolism:   A Photosynthetic Adaptation to Environmental Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Karen Schlauch, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2013
* USD 988,389.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM), a photosynthetic
pathway found in approximately 7% of all vascular plant species that improves
water use efficiency up to 10-fold relative to C3 species, provides an exquisite
example of circadian and environmentally regulated photosynthetic adaptation.
CAM plants display distinctive circadian clock outputs and inverse stomatal
rhythms, which are not found in C3 or C4 plants. The long-term goals of the
proposed research are to identify the regulatory and signaling pathways
essential for the circadian control of CAM and inverse stomatal behavior,
respectively. The common or crystalline ice plant will be used as a model to
determine the environmentally induced, circadian controlled changes in mRNA and
protein abundance, and reversible protein phosphorylation events during the
transition from C3 photosynthesis to CAM by conducting mRNA expression
profiling. Metabolite changes will also be monitored to determine if they
participate in possible feedback control circuits of upstream circadian clock
gene expression outputs. Key regulatory and signaling factors that function in
the CAM circadian clock will also be analyzed. Increased understanding of the
molecular mechanisms responsible for controlling the expression and regulation
of CAM will provide new knowledge about the molecular basis of this important
water-saving photosynthetic adaptation that will provide novel strategies for
improving crop productivity in the context of global climate change. This
project will provide unique 'hands-on' training opportunities in plant research
for undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students. Undergraduate students
will be selected from established outreach programs at the University of Nevada
(UNR) that target students from disadvantaged backgrounds to participate in
developing a "Plants Have Rhythm" educational display and K-12 teaching module
to inform and excite high school, college students, and the general public about
CAM and the existence of circadian rhythms in plants and their adaptive
significance.