* 0843608
* Selective Reactivity of H2S with GlnE7 and HisE7 in Hemoglobins:   Implications for Organisms
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Juan Lopez-Garriga, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2014
* USD 698,843.00

Organisms that live in sulfide-rich environments harbor symbiotic
chemoautotrophic bacteria that, in the presence of oxygen, oxidize sulfide and
fix carbon dioxide. The biological molecule responsible for delivering hydrogen
sulfide (H2S) and oxygen to these bacteria is the heme protein hemoglobin (Hb).
Hb protects these organisms from H2S toxicity and helps maintain their symbiotic
relationship with the endosymbiont species. Hemoglobins from these invertebrate
organisms show variability in the distal chemical structure and stereochemistry.
While cytoplasmic hemoglobins bind and transport their respective ligands via
the heme active site, extracellular hemoglobins deliver H2S and O2
simultaneously, delivering H2S using sulfhydryl or organometallic Zn clusters
outside the heme chromophore. It is hypothesized that a single amino acid
(glutamine or histidine at position E7) is responsible for the difference in H2S
toxicity and heme reactivity. The results of this project would provide a deeper
understanding of the unique routes for hydrogen sulfide transport and the
decreased hydrogen sulfide toxicity in particular organisms.

BROADER IMPACTS This interdisciplinary research project will be used as teaching
tool to mentor graduate and undergraduate students, as well as to increase their
knowledge and communication skills through scientific presentations to pre-
college students and teachers via visits to local schools.