* 0843392
* Testing models of selection with data on behavioral isolation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Paul Hohenlohe, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Evolutionary biologists have developed a number of mathematical models to
understand the process of selection on traits that arises from partner
preferences. However, tests that can be used to discriminate among these models
are lacking, in part because some aspects of the models are difficult to measure
directly. This project will develop a novel technique for testing models of
selection that result from partner preferences by comparing the predictions of
alternative models with data on behavioral (or reproductive) isolation between
related species. The technique will extend the power of existing data by
applying the statistical approach of maximum likelihood and by using knowledge
about the evolutionary relationships among the species. The investigators will
test alternative models with available data sets for three divergent groups
(salamanders, fishes, and flies). However, the analytical framework developed
will be applicable to any set of data on behavioral isolation and for a wide
range of alternative models. The investigators will make software to conduct the
analysis available online, extend an existing website to illustrate alternative
models and conduct a workshop on the methods at a scientific meeting. These
components of the project will both provide a better understanding of selection
models among empirical researchers and allow them to test alternative models on
data from their own organisms of interest.