* 0843969
* Morphological Decomposition in Derived Word Recognition:  Single Trial Correlational MEG Studies of Morphology Down to the Roots
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alec Marantz, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 612,903.00

This project will investigate the comprehension of morphologically complex
words, words like "knowable" that can be broken down into pieces. Linguists and
psycholinguists disagree on whether all words that consist of a possibly
independent stem ("know" is a verb by itself) and an identifiable suffix
("-able" generally creates adjectives from verbs) are analyzed as complex by
speakers and whether all or any such words are recognized via decomposition into
their parts. The issue is particularly controversial for words like "tolerable"
apparently built from roots that do not appear on their own ("toler-" is also
seen in "tolerate" but not elsewhere). This project uses magnetoencephalographic
(MEG) brain monitoring methods to test a theory about the interaction of
linguistic representations and neural computations. The theory demands that
every decomposition motivated by linguistic theory is a necessary computational
step in recognizing a word and that each computation maps to neural activity of
a set of brain regions at particular time latencies during word recognition. For
this project, subjects will read or listen to individual words and non-words,
judging their word status, while the electrical activity in their brains is
monitored with MEG. A novel analysis technique will be developed that correlates
the brain responses of each subject for each word with continuous stimulus
variables such as word frequency, suffix frequency, and the probability of
having a particular suffix following a particular stem. Given sufficient numbers
of subjects and stimuli, this technique can provide meaningful data about
individual words and individual subjects. For example, is a word like
"vulnerable", whose root "vulner-" does not appear elsewhere in English,
recognized in the same way as "knowable" or "tolerable"?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project should elucidate the connections among
linguistic theory, psycholinguistic models, and brain activity while testing
hypotheses about the comprehension of morphologically complex words. Since for
the theories of morphology being tested, the structure of words involves the
same computations and representations as the structure of sentences, support for
full decomposition to the root for words like "knowable" and "tolerable" will
have implications for language processing at all levels of linguistic analysis.
The single trial MEG analysis techniques developed by the project should aid
greatly in the diagnosis of language-impaired populations and in the evaluation
of remediation. Exploiting the results and techniques of this project, future
research can ask, for example, how the brain responses of an individual dyslexic
or autistic subject differ from the norm along various dimensions, and if any of
these responses approach group norms after intervention. Progress in
understanding and treating these deficits should come from an understanding of
how neural systems perform linguistic computations and store and manipulate
linguistic representations.