* 0843551
* Calmodulin Mediated Disorder-to-order Transitions: Calcineurin as a Model System
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* H. Spielmann, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2014
* USD 661,001.00

In recent years many intrinsically disordered proteins have been identified in
numerous biologically important systems. An intrinsically disordered protein is
one that is entirely or partially unstructured. It is not clear is why protein
disorder is so common. A number of hypotheses have been advanced. The hypothesis
being tested in this project is that disorder-to-order transitions can be used
to regulate protein function. Calmodulin is a very abundant, highly conserved
calcium-binding protein known to regulate the functions of numerous essential
other proteins. It was recently proposed that many of the calmodulin binding
sites within target proteins are located in intrinsically disordered regions and
that some of these undergo disorder-to-order transitions upon calmodulin
binding. Calcineurin is an essential, highly-conserved serine/threonine
phosphatase that is activated when bound by calmodulin. Upon binding of
calmodulin to the regulatory domain of calcineurin, a conformational change is
induced that results in activation of the enzyme. Experimental data suggests the
regulatory domain of calcineurin is disordered in the inactive enzyme, and that
it undergoes a disorder-to-order transition upon calmodulin binding. The goal of
this research is to characterize the physical nature of this disorder-to-order
transition. Calcineurin is being employed as a model system in studies of
calmodulin-mediated disorder-to-order transitions that regulate biological
activity. This goal will be achieved through two aims: i) determination of the
ability of the regulatory domain to undergo a calmodulin mediated disorder-to-
order transition as an isolated domain, and ii) determination of the role full
length calcineurin plays in this transition. A variety of biophysical techniques
will be employed, including circular dichroism, fluorescence, NMR, and
analytical ultracentrifugation. The data obtained will enable construction of a
model for the calcineurin regulatory domain disorder-to-order transition, which
in turn will be used as the basis for future studies of other calmodulin
mediated transitions involved in protein regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central question in the field of intrinsically disordered proteins is why is
disorder so common? This project will make a significant contribution towards
answering part of that question through the testing of the hypothesis that
calmodulin mediated disorder-to-order transitions can regulate protein function.
The PI plans to have both a postdoctoral scholar and several undergraduate
students work on aspects of this project. Where possible, these will include
representatives from underrepresented groups. The postdoctoral scholar will
receive advanced training in protein chemistry, molecular biology, spectroscopy
and NMR spectrometry. The undergraduate students will receive basic laboratory
training, training in protein chemistry, molecular biology, spectroscopy,
scientific ethics, and in the analysis and presentation of data. All trainees
will participate in the dissemination of knowledge generated. The PI will
incorporate knowledge generated in this project into graduate-level courses on
structural biology and proteins. In addition, data will be published in peer-
reviewed journals, and presented at scientific meetings and research
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;