* 0843651
* Distributed Learning and Collaboration:  Pedagogical Middleware and Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Margret Hjalmarson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 41,890.00

This is funding to support a research conference to develop guidelines for 21st
Century pedagogical middleware: an integrated set of conceptual, methodological,
and technological tools for teaching complex innovative and creative thinking in
a digital world. The focus area of interest will be to model the sustainabilty
of urban areas, particularly in very large or megacities. The conference will be
held in Arizona so that researchers can parter with NSF's Long Term Ecologial
Research Network (LTER) at Arizona State. Select expert researchers will
participate, drawing from the following interdisciplinary fields: (a) theories
of learning, (b) technology, (c) virtual learning organizations, (d) research
methodology, and (e) measurement. For each theme, a lead discussant will prepare
working documents prior to the meeting, lead discussions during the meeting, and
prepare the appropriate section of the resulting white paper.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this initiative is important because it is
address the problem of how to best guide research and development of
technologically complex learning communities and organizations. This colloquium
is innovative in its goal to link theories of how people think creatively in
cross-functional teams to inform the design of collaborative technologies.
Further, by considering assessment throughout the process, the resulting
integrative framework (whitepaper) will be well-grounded and useful to a wide
interdisciplinary audience.