* 0843244
* Arabidopsis 2010:   Regulatory mechanisms of energy signaling in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Jen Sheen, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 04/30/2014
* USD 685,124.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Jen Sheen&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0843244&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Arabidopsis 2010: Regulatory Mechanisms of Energy Signaling in
Plants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthetic plants are the principal solar energy
converter sustaining life on Earth. Despite its fundamental importance, little
is known about how plants sense and adapt to darkness in the daily light-dark
cycle or to unpredictable environmental stresses that compromise photosynthesis
and respiration and deplete energy supplies. Recent studies have discovered that
the evolutionarily conserved Arabidopsis protein kinases, KIN10 and KIN11,
control convergent reprogramming of transcription in response to seemingly
unrelated darkness, sugar and stress conditions. The project aims to build a new
conceptual framework of energy signaling in plants by uncovering the diverse
physiological and developmental functions, signaling links, and regulatory
mechanisms of the conserved energy sensors. Inducible mutant transgenic lines
will be use to gain new insight into the roles of energy signaling in plant
response and adaptation to diverse environmental challenges, and in plant growth
and development. Integrative cellular, biochemical, genetic and genomic
approaches will be applied to enhance our understanding of the regulatory
mechanisms of energy signaling from the control of sensor activity, stability,
localization, partner interactions to its downstream transcription factors and
primary target genes. This project represents a new line of research that
integrates diverse plant responses and regulation into convergent energy
signaling vital to plant growth and survival. The studies on the regulatory
mechanisms of energy signaling are urgently important in light of the rising
global needs in the development of renewable biofuels. The basic research will
enable targeted genetic modification of carbon allocation, growth and
development, architecture, and stress and pathogen resistance, all major
determinants of crop yield and renewable energy production. The project will
provide unique training opportunities for students and postdocs in
multidisciplinary and integrative research, and promote woman and minority
scientists as future research leaders. The Principal Investigator of the project
offers educational and outreach programs serving the plant community and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description of the network of
genes selected&lt;br/&gt;KIN10 At3g01090, KIN11 At3g29160, KINB1 At5g21170,
KINB2 At4g16360, KINB3 At2g28060, KINBG At1g09020, KING
At3g48530&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;URL of the Arabidopsis 2010 project&lt
;br/&gt;http://genetics.mgh.harvard.edu/sheenweb/main_page.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;