* 0843777
* CAREER:    Microbial Storage Products and Density:    Overlooked Fundamentals and Promising Opportunities in Biological Solids Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2012
* Andrew Schuler, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 08/31/2012
* USD 234,971.00

0348594&lt;br/&gt;Schuler&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive five-year plan is proposed
for an innovative research project and a complementary educational program. The
research is motivated by the large benefits in increased environmental and human
health protection and cost savings, which may result from improvements to solids
settling processes in biological wastewater treatment systems, and the
observation that a fundamental yet potentially critical factor (density)
affecting settling has been scarcely studied. Efficient biosolids settling is
vital the provision of a clarified effluent and a concentrated solids stream for
system recycling and wasting. The gravitational force that drives all settling
processes is a function of buoyant density (the difference between liquid and
solid densities). It is hypothesized that although biomass buoyant density can
vary substantially, and that new, effective strategies can be developed to
improve solids separation based on density optimization. This is based on
observations that (1) high-density microbial storage product (MSP)
concentrations vary in treatment systems, (2) MSP accumulation affects bacterial
density, and (3) previous reports indicate systems selecting for MSP-
accumulating organisms improve settling independently of filament control.
Furthermore, MSPs, density, and settling were correlated as expected in
preliminary experiments. Factors such as floc size and filament content clearly
affect settling rates, and the current hypothesis suggests that biomass density
may be an additional, fundamental, and previously neglected factor that should
be considered in the analysis and control of biomass settling. A governing
objective of this proposal is to produce and validate a model linking process
parameters, density, and settling. This will require determination of the
relationships between operational parameters and MSP accumulation (and other
factors affecting density), between these factors and density, and between
density and settleability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
work include increased protection of environmental and human health and costs
saving through increased process performance; development of a better
understanding MSPs, which are ubiquitous in natural and engineered systems but
not always well-understood; improved understanding of biological phosphorus
removal processes and aerobic MSP accumulation; increased representation of
underrepresented groups in the sciences; improved high school curricula; and
development of advanced laboratory and modeling skills in undergraduate and
graduate students.