* 0843366
* Collaborative Research:  Fungal Life History Strategies and Evolution: Insights from Isotopic Measurements and Phylogenetic Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Erik Hobbie, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 09/30/2011
* USD 155,999.00

Fungi play important ecological roles and affect society through their
activities as decayers, mutualists, and pathogens of plants and animals. Their
enzymes are critical to biofuel production. Despite their importance, there is
little known about how many fungi obtain food. Mycorrhizal fungi obtain sugars
from plants in exchange for helping their host plants take up nutrients, and
saprotrophic fungi obtain their energy and nutrients from decomposition of dead
organic matter. Whether fungi switch between nutritional strategies is a key
question in the evolutionary ecology of fungi. Recently, measuring carbon-12,
carbon-13, and carbon-14 isotopes has been shown to reliably assess nutritional
strategy, and therefore provides new opportunities to examine the evolution of
nutritional strategies in fungi. This study will use archived fungi from
Australia, Asia, and the US to conduct a broad survey of fungal nutritional
strategies. A site-specific study at the Harvard Forest research site in
Massachusetts will also be used to examine whether fungi can switch nutritional
strategies. These studies will greatly expand knowledge on the links among
fungal function, phylogeny, and ecology. The broader scientific impacts of the
proposed research will result from integrating functional (isotopic) methods and
genetic methods in a novel collaboration that should stimulate interest within
the larger community of evolutionary biologists, ecologists, and mycologists.
These methods could be readily expanded to Europe and Africa to include the
global distribution of mushroom-producing fungi. This project will also
incorporate current scientific research into specific educational activities
designed to inspire future scientists including high school (fungal forays),
college (Clark University's ACE Summer Institute, Research Experience for
Undergraduates at Harvard Forest, the UNH Undergraduate Research Conference),
and graduate students.