* 0843141
* Structure/Dynamics/Function Correlations in the Cystoviral Polymerase Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Ranajeet Ghose, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2015
* USD 991,984.00

Many viruses contain RNA genomes and utilize a multi-protein polymerase complex
(PX) for RNA replication and transcription, processes that are central to viral
infectivity, survival and propagation. In bacteriophages of the family
cystoviridae (cystoviruses) that contain a double stranded RNA (dsRNA) genome,
the PX is a four-protein complex that includes an RNA-directed RNA polymerase
(P2) that replicates and transcribes viral RNA (vRNA) in concert with proteins
P1, P4 and P7. A complete understanding of the functional interactions of the PX
proteins in spatial and temporal terms at atomic or near-atomic resolution is
important not only in the context of cystoviruses in particular but for dsRNA
viruses in general. The present project will focus on elucidating
structure/function/dynamics correlations involving two of these PX proteins, the
polymerase P2 that forms the central machinery of the PX, performing the
transcription and replication functions, and the essential protein P7 that
regulates genome packaging and helps in maintaining transcriptional
fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City College of New York (CCNY), a primarily
minority serving institution, has registered a significant drop in the number of
African-American students enrolling in undergraduate degree programs over the
last decade. The level of enrollment of Hispanic students has also not kept up
with a corresponding population increase in the five boroughs of New York City
over the same period. The PI intends to raise the level of enrollment, retention
and graduation of these minority populations in the science disciplines at CCNY
using a three-tier approach: (1) Enrollment: specifically targeting high-schools
specializing in the sciences in upper Manhattan and the Bronx with predominantly
minority students, through teacher training and by research mentoring of a small
number of promising students in the PI's laboratory; (2) Retention: active
mentoring of pre-science majors through the City College Academy for
Professional Preparation (CCAPP); and (3) Undergraduate research: involving
undergraduate students in specific parts of the research project, providing them
an experience rather unique in the City University of New York system of
incorporating two cutting edge biophysical techniques NMR and X-Ray
crystallography in a complementary fashion to elucidate the structural and
dynamic determinants of biomolecular function.