* 0843814
* Sulfur isotope study of sulfide oxidation products:  Great Marsh of Delaware and Green Lake NY
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* James Farquhar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2011
* USD 75,000.00

Research Goals: Research will focus on describing the expression of sulfur
isotope effects of sulfide oxidation products (polysulfides, polythionates,
thiosulfate, sulfite, and sulfate) in two aqueous system case studies where
sulfide oxidation occurs. We will collect samples from the Delaware Great Marsh
during March, June, and August of 2009 and from Green Lake (a meromictic lake)
during summer 2009. The aim of the study will be the isolation and isotopic
characterization of the products of sulfide oxidation. The research will involve
the adaptation of techniques for collection of these compounds so that
measurements of the four sulfur isotopes can be made and with the purpose of
characterizing and exploring the connections between the isotopic composition of
the intermediates, pH, and biological activity. The overarching goal of this
research effort is to develop a protocol based on four sulfur isotopes to place
quantitative constraints on biological and abiotic pathways for sulfide
oxidation in natural aquatic systems and in sediments. The work is rooted in the
underlying premise that small isotope effects between products and reactants as
well as between the variety of oxidation products will be expressed in different
ways depending on the speciation of sulfur and the reaction pathways. This
research is part of a larger effort underway by our group and others and extends
our recent laboratory culture work with sulfate reducers, sulfur intermediate
compound disproportionators, and biological sulfide
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed Activity: The
results of this research will be prepared for publication in peer-reviewed
journals. We anticipate that the outcomes of this research will carry
implications for other studies of cycling of sulfur in geochemical systems and
provide a context that can be used to inform our understanding of the
significance of isotopic effects associated with sulfide oxidation in the sulfur
cycle (present and past). The proposed activity will include involvement of
undergraduates and will be incorporated into the broader activities of the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;