* 0843606
* Transcription-Associated Mutagenesis in Bacillus Subtilis Cells in Conditions of Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Ronald Yasbin, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2013
* USD 410,650.00

Cells undergo mutagenic events under non-dividing conditions, thereby adding
growth-independent processes to evolution. This prediction is highly debated
because of the implication that the organism directs the accumulation of
beneficial mutations. One way beneficial mutants may accumulate in a stochastic
manner is by transcription-associated mutagenesis. In this project, the
investigators seek to test the hypothesis that transcription de-repression and
formation of transcription-induced DNA secondary structures contribute to the
generation of adaptive mutations. Aim 1 of the project is to establish whether a
decrease in the level of transcription correlates with a reduction in mutation
frequency in a gene under selection. The experimental system is a leucine
auxotrophic Bacillus subtilis strain that expresses a leuC427 mutant allele.
This mutant gene is governed by an effector (S-adenosyl-methionine,
SAM)-responsive riboswitch control mechanism such that increasing levels of SAM
lead to incrementally greater repression of the leuC417 gene. The expectation is
that a decrease in transcription will proportionally lower mutant accumulation
and escape from leucine starvation. Aim 2 seeks to confirm the related
hypothesis that transcription-induced secondary DNA stem-loop structures are
particularly prone to mutagenesis, thereby enhancing the mutant accumulation
under selection. To test this hypothesis, the investigators will create
inducible thiF and argF alleles that differ only in the potential to form stable
stem-loop structures to measure their relative accumulation of mutants under
inducing and non-inducing conditions. The expectation is that the number of Thi+
and Arg+ revertants decreases significantly in the strains carrying the alleles
with destabilized stem-loop structures (low mutability) compared to those with
stable secondary structures (high mutability). Together, these specific aims
will provide potential novel insights into the molecular mechanism of stress-
induced adaptive mutagenesis, and consequently provide a better understanding of
the molecular processes that have been at the core of
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This work will promote
and educate the public in the process of evolution. In addition,this study will
advance and provide opportunities in science for students in a state that
historically has been under-funded for science initiatives and education. The
sponsoring state has a growing population of minorities. These objectives will
be accomplished by implementing lecture programs offered to local high schools.
This effort will be implemented and coordinated with the local high school
district. Lastly, this research program will also provide much needed science
hands-on experience to college students.