* 0843334
* Indivdual reproductive decisions:  Behavioral mechanisms and adaptive significance
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Emily DuVal, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2013
* USD 320,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the processes that
produce and maintain genetic variation is a critical goal of modern biology. Of
the many behavioral processes that may influence genetic variation, few are as
directly influential as reproductive decisions. Choice of a reproductive partner
determines which genetic information is transmitted across generations and
affects offspring health and reproductive success. Only recently has it been
appreciated that individual females may vary considerably in their reproductive
decisions and that this variability can be critical in maintaining population
genetic variation and diverse male courtship behaviors. This study investigates
female reproductive decisions in a lekking passerine bird, the lance-tailed
manakin (Chiroxiphia lanceolata). In lek systems, females actively assess and
choose from among displaying males, but receive nothing but genes from their
chosen partner (there is no paternal care, and males do not control access to
food or nesting resources). Genetic paternity analyses have revealed that female
lance-tailed manakins frequently change their choice of partners in different
breeding seasons, even when previously-favored partners are still available and
reproduce successfully with other females. Females assess the same males, but
make different reproductive decisions. This project combines field observations
of behavior, automated radio-tracking of females, and genetic analyses of
paternity and variation to (1) characterize the behavioral mechanisms that
generate variation in partner preferences; (2) identify female characteristics
associated with this variation (e.g. age, condition, and reproductive
experience); and (3) test hypotheses about the benefits of variable reproductive
decisions to individual females. This work will provide much-needed empirical
evidence to test the idea that variable female reproductive choices influence
the process of sexual selection in wild populations. Furthermore, the project
will provide training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students,
results useful in university-level teaching, and educational benefits through
outreach presentations to the general public in the US and Panama.