* 0843173
* Nitric oxide as cell-intrinsic messenger of neuronal function
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Vincent Rehder, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 04/30/2015
* USD 716,110.00

The long-term goal of this project is to identify the role of the gaseous
neuronal messenger molecule Nitric oxide (NO) in the development of the nervous
system. NO is known to be involved in a large number of physiological events and
in most of these cases, NO is released by one cell or tissue and then acts on
another cell or tissue. The possibility that NO might also have physiological
effects in the cell in which it is produced, however, has attracted very little
attention so far. Novel preliminary evidence shows that NO can have important
physiological roles within cells that produce it, such as regulating a variety
of ion channels and determining the speed with which nerve cells grow. During
neuronal development, the motile tips of advancing neuronal structures, called
growth cones, guide extending nerve processes (such as axons and dendrites) to
their appropriate targets by a process termed pathfinding. Expression of the
Nitric Oxide Synthase (NOS) gene, which is responsible for the enzymatic
production of NO, has been linked to the process of synapse formation and
neuronal plasticity, making the neuronal growth cone a prime location for NO to
act and effect pathfinding and synaptogenesis. Techniques used in this study
include electrophysiology, molecular biology, cell culture and advanced imaging
applications. The research proposed will provide the groundwork to refine our
thinking about NO signaling in the brain and will serve as the basis to develop
novel approaches to investigate brain development and repair. The proposed work
combines research and educational components. It contains projects particularly
suited for undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.
Several successful programs at Georgia State University serve as pipelines to
enhance the representation of underrepresented ethnic minorities in research
laboratories and in the scientific community as a whole.