* 0843385
* SGER: A Lightweight Drive-Through Management Service for Internet-enabled Ad-Hoc Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Niki Pissinou, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,001.00

As the Internet evolves into a global communication infrastructure, it is
becoming complex and ubiquitous. It is bringing together heterogeneous
collections of hosts and network devices such as wireless mesh networks. A
consequence of this ever-increasing scale, complexity and agility is that
problems of managing this infrastructure keep getting worse. Research
concentrating on streamlining fundamental issues has shown that absence of a
single end-to-end lightweight hybrid network management solution with the
necessary levels of context awareness and adaptability, while much desirable,
has not yet been realized. Consequently, the community is still detained from
fully gaining from many of the emerging applications of the cyber-
infrastructure.

This research involves an exploratory investigation towards a ?drive through?
network management platform for ?on-the-fly? Internet-enabled mobile networks.
Objectives include new conceptual approaches that couple application, and
middleware designs with design of network management services; novel theoretical
models that tap into in-network management characteristics of pervasive
computing so that missing or conflicting information gathered from multiple
participating nodes can be tolerated; augmentation of security management
algorithms with trustworthiness functionalities; theoretical schemes that
examine epistemic uncertainty by fusing imprecision, uncertainty and event
synchronization with belief theory; and extensions to archetype platforms for
supporting autonomic network management and configuration. The intellectual
merit of the research lies in presenting a first step towards synthesis of
integrated network management theoretical and design solutions that support
traditional network management protocols and functionalities in addition to the
dynamic aspects of infrastructures-less networks. Although some risk exists,
focused research can overcome the current barriers. The broader impact of the
research is that this work will pave the way to transformative next generation
network management paradigms and tools.