* 0843855
* Using Social Networking to Advance Psychological Research and Teaching
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Scott Plous, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 700,000.00

This project is designed to enhance the Social Psychology Network (SPN), an
active website that offers searchable databases, a directory of social
psychologists and other professionals, web-based data collection, online forums,
and extensive teaching resources. The proposed activities will incorporate Web
2.0 technologies to enhance its social networking capabilities. A strong case
can easily be made for the importance of SPN. For example, within a 24-hour
period, the SPN pages are viewed more than 70,000 times by individuals in over
100 countries, and the SPN databases are searched more than 1200 times. Indeed,
the PI's efforts with SPN were recognized with the Society for Personality and
Social Psychology's distinguished service award. As such, the current SPN site
greatly enhances the infrastructure of not only social psychology but of many
social and behavioral sciences as well. The project will use Web 2.0
technologies to transform the Social Psychology Network into a fully featured
social networking service designed specifically for researchers, educators, and
students interested in social psychology. Specifically, the project will involve
eight components: (1) adding options that allow users to customize SPN's layout
as they wish; (2) developing SPN's eInterview.org partner site so that
researchers can use it to collect interview data via the Internet; (3) changing
SPN Profiles to a tabbed format that permits users to post multimedia content,
upload files to store or share, and add new categories of content; (4) giving
profile holders the option to link their profiles to "colleagues" and establish
user-defined groups based on common research interests, career level, geographic
location, or other attributes; (5) making it possible for site visitors to
"subscribe" to SPN Profiles or request alerts that notify them when content of
interest is posted in the Network; (6) setting up a community blog to hold
discipline-wide discussions about questions of general importance to the field;
(7) establishing a Collaboration Forum to help bring potential research
collaborators together; and (8) developing an Application Program Interface that
allows other programmers to create software applications for use in the Network.
To complete the proposed work, SPN will hire an Associate Director with
expertise in social networking, and it will appoint an Advisory Board to ensure
that SPN meets the needs of the field and stays connected to other professional
organizations. In this way, the project will not only fulfill NSF's intellectual
merit criteria by advancing the field, but it will have broader impacts by
enhancing the infrastructure for social science research and education.