* 0843307
* Development and Evolution of an Adaptive Phenotype in the Mechanosensory Lateral Line System
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Jacqueline Webb, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 389,189.00

The mechanosensory lateral line system is a structurally diverse sensory system
present in all fishes that is responsible for detection of water flow
(hydrodynamic) stimuli and is of critical importance in a variety of behavioral
contexts. It is composed of sensory organs located on the skin and in bony
lateral line canals that are contained in a subset of bones in the skull. One of
the four types of canals, widened canals, are quite sensitive to hydrodynamic
stimuli and is considered to be an adaptation for the non-visual detection of
prey, which is of great ecological importance for fishes. Two genera of Lake
Malawi (Africa) cichlid fishes (Aulonocara [widened canals], and Tramitichromis
[narrow canals]), will be used for a study that uses comparative anatomical,
developmental and behavioral approaches to address fundamental issues in fish
sensory biology. First, the convergent evolution of widened canals will be
assessed among cichlids and among fishes more generally to more precisely define
common features of its anatomy. Second, the pattern and timing of development of
widened and narrow canals and the sensory organs contained within them will be
analyzed quantitatively to determine the developmental basis for evolutionary
change in the lateral line canal system. Finally, the role of widened canals in
the detection of sand-dwelling prey will be analyzed using a behavioral assay
and video analysis. This work will have important implications for our
understanding of the evolution of feeding habits of cichlids in the African Rift
Lakes, and of marine and freshwater fishes that feed on benthic prey, especially
those in disturbed habitats in which non-visual predators may have an ecological
advantage. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will integrate research and education by involving
undergraduates and graduate students in all aspects of this project.
Collaborations with colleagues (re: genetics, biomechanical modeling, microCT
imaging, design of stimulus delivery apparatus), will enhance the
interdisciplinary nature of the PI's research program and provide new training
opportunities for students. This funding will enhance research infrastructure in
Rhode Island, an EPSCoR state with a research focus in marine life sciences.