* 0843207
* Immune Responses in Amphibians against a Skin Fungus Linked to Global Amphibian Declines
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 06/30/2012
* USD 526,339.00

Louise A. Rollins-Smith Proposal # IOS- 0843207 Immune Responses in Amphibians
against a Skin Fungus Linked to Global Amphibian Declines

ABSTRACT

Amphibians (frogs, toads, and salamanders) are an essential part of many aquatic
and terrestrial ecosystems. They consume algae and plants as tadpoles, consume
many insects as adults, and become food for other animals such as birds and
mammals. Currently, amphibians are declining around the world due to a new skin
fungus. This project will investigate the immune responses of amphibians against
this skin fungus using state-of-the art molecular and cellular assays. Whether
amphibians can develop antibody responses or other immune cell-mediated
responses will be determined. The project will evaluate immune responses in
species that have high and low resistance to the fungus. Efforts will be made to
develop an immunization protocol (vaccination strategy) to protect endangered
amphibians in captivity. It is expected that amphibians can be induced to
develop an immune response that may protect them from natural infection in the
wild. This may allow for the reintroduction of endangered species that are
currently held in captivity in zoos and aquariums. The project will provide
training for students at the undergraduate and graduate school levels. It has
the potential to expand our understanding of amphibian immunity in general. The
overall project will enhance ongoing partnerships with an international group of
scientists addressing the problem of global amphibian declines and support
amphibian conservation efforts.

