* 0843355
* Controlling cardiogenesis via the Notch signaling pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Kelly McLaughlin, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2015
* USD 583,488.00

The creation of a functional heart requires the coordinated action of genes that
direct cells to assemble into a complex, three-dimensional organ having a
characteristic size, shape, and physiological properties. Although it is widely
accepted that the heart is one of the first organs to form, the early events
during cardiac development when the heart field is initially created remain
unclear and are thus the focus of recent research. Where do the cells that will
ultimately create a beating heart come from? How does a cell know it should
become a cardiac cell? What are the biological consequences of creating a heart
field that is either too large or too small? Because the initial steps necessary
to create a functional heart are poorly understood, these questions await a
detailed understanding at the molecular, genetic, and biochemical levels.
Therefore, interdisciplinary approaches will be used to gain a detailed
understanding of the cellular signals that control the development of the
embryonic heart. This project is designed to elucidate the role of Notch
signaling during the early stages of heart development: the specification and
prepatterning of the cardiac mesoderm. A direct benefit of this work will be the
characterization of novel molecular mechanisms needed to create the embryonic
heart. Understanding how identified molecules direct the creation of heart
tissue allows us to gain important insights into designing therapeutics that can
be used to treat various cardiac defects, thereby allowing people with cardiac
abnormalities to live fuller lives. Moreover, the impact of this work extends to
the study of other systems because techniques developed in the course of this
research facilitate the manipulation of gene activity during specific stages of
organ formation. These novel embryological techniques and approaches will be
taught directly to members of the lab, and will be published and presented at
scientific meetings to help disseminate valuable ideas to the scientific
community that can form the basis of future work. In addition, results obtained
from this research will not only be important for researchers, but as part of
out-reach programs to introduce students and K-12 science educators to the
methodologies and practices used to conduct novel research projects. By
integrating research and education, advances in science can be taken to new
levels as future generations of researchers are brought one step closer to
becoming independent investigators.