* 0843880
* CAREER:  A Computational Investigation into Biological Motion Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Hongjing Lu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 07/31/2014
* USD 556,647.00

CAREER: A Computational Investigation into Biological Motion
Perception&lt;br/&gt;Hongjing Lu, Principal
Investigator&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In everyday activities ranging from running in a
proper trajectory to avoid hitting other pedestrians, recognizing a friend based
upon his walking style from a far distance, to practicing boxing with a partner
in the gym, action perception plays a critical role in interpreting the
intentions of other people and interacting with the world. Despite the
importance of action perception, there are major gaps in our understanding of
three basic computational issues: (1) how efficiently human observers can
process visual information to make action identifications in different contexts;
(2) how humans learn and represent action categories, such as walking, boxing,
and dancing; and (3) how humans acquire the ability to understand social
interactions by bridging perception and reasoning. With the support of an NSF
CAREER award, Dr. Hongjing Lu will integrate computer modeling approaches with
behavioral experiments to answer the above three questions. This research will
develop greater understanding of how visual information is used to achieve
apparently effortless recognition of human actions at different processing
levels. The work will significantly extend conventional computational approaches
in order to render them applicable to the study of visual processes more complex
than those to which they have previously been applied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the computational basis of action perception
is essential to achieving a scientific account of our ability to understand the
external world and to conduct social interactions. Furthermore, understanding
how the human visual system perceives actions will guide development of
artificial vision systems to recognize and interpret complex biological
movements. This research will improve a range of applications, including action
visualization (e.g., deciding what visual information is important or could be
ignored in 3D animation), security surveillance systems (e.g., detection and
recognition of suspicious actions in airports or train stations), robotics
(e.g., the ability of machines to interact effectively with people), blind
assistance system and driver assistance systems (e.g., blind spot detection
systems for drivers when backing the car). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition,
the integration of research and education activities in the project will provide
students with training opportunities in interdisciplinary research, encompassing
psychology, statistics, computer science and mathematics. A new Ph.D. Major in
Computational Cognition will be established in the Psychology Department at
UCLA. Mathematical training will be promoted at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels in Psychology; at the same time, training in experimental
research will be introduced to students with mathematical and computer science
backgrounds.