* 0843996
* Unraveling structural conundrum of organic nitrogen in soil and sediment organic matter using advanced solid-state NMR: insights into formation mechanisms of stabilized nitrogen
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Jingdong Mao, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2011
* USD 80,000.00

Intellectual Merit. The nitrogen (N) cycle is a biogeochemical cycle involving
the transformation of nitrogen and nitrogen-containing compounds in nature.
Nitrogen is essential for many biological processes and is crucial for any life
on earth. For example, nitrogen is one of the building blocks of proteins, amino
acids, and is a key component of the bases that make up the genetic code of all
life, such as DNA and RNA. Therefore, N cycle is one of the most important
topics in biogeochemistry and understanding the N cycle can help control both
the nature?s N balance. Most of N in soils or sediments is organic. While
routine 15N cross polarization/magic angle spinning technique has been
extensively applied to the investigations of organic N in soil/sediment organic
matter (SOM), the inherent drawbacks of this technique have so far provided
limited insight into the structures of organic N. The objectives of the project
are: a) to develop an improved advanced solid-state protocol for investigating
organic N forms in SOM, b) to investigate the distributions of different organic
N forms and in particular the presence and abundance of heterocyclic N in SOM,
and possibly c) to investigate the mechanisms underlying the formation of
biologically refractory N using the new and advanced solid-state NMR techniques.
We will primarily focus on, but not are limited to, two samples, an IHSS Pony
Lake (Antarctica) Reference and a gilsonite, both of which contain relatively
high N.&lt;br/&gt;The work on the new and improved advanced solid-state NMR
techniques will include improvement of routine 15N cross polarization/magic
angle spinning (CP/MAS) by using appropriate model compounds to maximize cross
polarization; development of some 15N spectral-editing techniques to select
specific functional groups and analysis of covalently-bound N using saturation-
pulse induced dipolar exchange with recoupling. The relative proportions of
different forms of organic N will be examined using these improved NMR
techniques. The presence and abundance of heterocyclic N, which could be
underestimated by routine 15N CP/MAS, will also be investigated using these
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;The project promises significant advances in
understanding the nature of organic N in SOM. It will reveal more accurate
information on the relative proportions of different forms of organic N. The new
or improved NMR techniques for characterizing organic N in SOM will provide us
with a critical tool for research on organic N in SOM, laying the foundations
for a significantly improved understanding of nitrogen
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will train a graduate
student in applying, improving and developing advanced solid-state NMR
techniques for biogeochemistry. It will also influence the content of planned
public outreach and educational outreach at the college and graduate levels by
the PI. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will train a graduate student
in applying, improving and developing advanced solid-state NMR techniques for
biogeochemistry. It will also influence the content of planned public outreach
and educational outreach at the college and graduate levels by the PI.