* 0843439
* Structural and Dynamic Characterization of 2/2 Hemoglobins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Juliette Lecomte, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 994,632.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Hemoglobin is best known as the oxygen transporter responsible for the red color
of blood. The hemoglobin superfamily of proteins, however, has members in all
three domains of life, including bacteria. Little is known about bacterial
hemoglobins, and it is expected that many participate in processes other than
reversible oxygen binding. The project will explore the physico-chemical
properties of bacterial hemoglobins belonging to the recently discovered 2/2 or
"truncated" hemoglobin lineage of the superfamily. Of particular importance to
the reactivity of heme proteins are the interactions involving the cofactor and
the molecular motions that allow small ligands such as oxygen to reach the
central iron. The goal of the research is therefore to establish robust
relationships linking structure, dynamics, and reactivity. To this end, a
combination of molecular biology approaches and spectroscopic methods (optical
and nuclear magnetic resonance, NMR) will be applied to a set of proteins
representative of two phylogenetically distinct groups of truncated hemoglobins
(Group I and Group III) and two different classes within Group I. (1) In the
first specific aim, the dynamic properties of the hemoglobins from the
cyanobacteria Synechococcus and Synechocystis (Group I class 1) will be studied.
The focus will be on the determinants of their distinctive bis-histidine heme
coordination and heme post-translational modification. (2) The second aim bears
on the structural characterization of a Nostoc punctiforme hemoglobin (Group I
class 2) and the consequences of its highly hydrophobic heme binding site. (3)
In the third aim, the heme environment in the hemoglobin from Helicobacter
hepaticus (Group III) will be described and related to its unique ligand binding
properties. (4) Finally, novel NMR methods will be devised to probe the
intricate details of key hydrogen-bond networks in the heme pocket of each
protein. The four specific aims will help place these intriguing proteins in the
context of the hemoglobin superfamily, facilitate the interpretation of their
amino acid sequences, and provide insight into novel aspects of heme chemistry
and oxygen utilization.

Broader Impacts The hemoglobin superfamily is an ideal subject with which to
illustrate fundamental concepts in the fields of biochemistry (metabolism,
regulation), chemistry (equilibria, kinetics and reactivity), biology
(evolution), and physics (spectroscopy). The project offers excellent
opportunities for the training of graduate and undergraduate students in these
disciplines and for inclusion of research results in lectures and laboratories.
A new biophysics course covering quantum chemistry and spectroscopy will be
developed that will use hemoglobins as recurring model systems. The research
results will also be at the basis of workshops designed to improve the
communication skills of graduate students. The series will emphasize addressing
both specialized and broader audiences, thereby facilitating future outreach
activities of the students participating in the workshops. Results will be
disseminated through publication, participation in conferences, posting on web
sites, and deposition of structural data in public databases.