* 0843627
* Molecular Structure and Biomechanics of Plant Cuticular Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2014
* Ruth Stark, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,023,033.00

The cuticle of higher plants serves as a versatile regulator of the flow of
water and chemicals from the outside environment and a robust defense against
bacterial and fungal attack. Waxes are deposited on a cutin polyester whereas
suberin and poly(phenolics) are found in secondary growth tissues or formed as a
stress response. Fruit cuticles are smart surfaces - capable of spatially
selective self cleaning and regulation of their superlative mechanical
performance during ripening. To establish the molecular and mesoscopic
architectures underlying the protective functions of these remarkable
biomaterials without destroying their unique properties, solid-state nuclear
magnetic resonance, biomechanical analysis, and atomic force microscopy of the
intact biopolymers will be coordinated to examine covalent structure and
dynamics, stress-strain profiles, viscoelasticity, and surface topology. Three
tomato fruit cuticle systems will be used to test hypotheses involving the
influence of cutin molecular structure and its organization with waxes and cell
walls on the mechanical integrity of fruit cuticles: a commercial cultivar from
which epicuticular waxes have been removed to model environmental stress and two
types of genetically characterized cuticle-deficient fruit mutants. The
thematically related goals of this project include optimization of methods for
structural and functional characterization of intact fruit cuticles, testing of
mechanistic models for maintenance of fruit cuticle integrity under wax abrasion
stress, evaluation of how cutin/wax ratios, amounts, and branched structures
preclude formation of a homogeneous barrier in cuticle deficient mutant fruits,
and testing of proposed architectural causes and consequences of microfissuring
in precocious dehydration mutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multiscale approach to
fruit cuticle integrity has broad potential for intellectual synergy among plant
molecular biologists and geneticists, physical chemists, and bioengineers. The
results of this research will guide the design strategies to enhance the
hardiness and yield of agriculturally important food crops. Findings on the
mechanical performance of these remarkable natural plant interfaces should also
inspire the biomimetic design of self-cleaning paints and fiber-reinforced
waterproofing. New NMR methodology developed for this research will be
disseminated through an NSF-sponsored Research Coordination Network. Finally,
the educational impact of this project will include interdisciplinary training
in the biophysics of macromolecular assemblies, conducted on a campus that
enrolls more than 60% Hispanic and Black students and at a university that
awards almost 10% of U.S. African-American Ph.D.'s in Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering. The project will form the basis for two new outreach initiatives
based at CCNY and targeting nearby Upper Manhattan and Bronx high schools with
substantial minority populations: (1) a semester-long lab-based Plant
Biopolymers course designed for 20-student classes in CUNY's College Now
partnership with the NYC Department of Education; and (2) a 40-student Gateway
Lab research training workshop coordinated with CCNY's Pathways Bioinformatics
and Biomolecular Center.