* 0843269
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Supercell/Tornado Genesis, Structure and Evolution Using Observations and Numerical Models
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Matthew Gilmore, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 09/30/2013
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to improve
understanding of severe convective storms using numerical models with particular
attention to genesis, structure and evolution of supercells and tornadoes in
increasingly realistic environmental conditions. Research questions include:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Why some supercell-spawned tornadoes are particularly
long-lived? &lt;br/&gt;2) How environmental conditions influence tornado
genesis, intensity, and longevity? &lt;br/&gt;3) How capping inversions and
microphysical makeup influence cold pool strength and the development of low-
level rotation in supercell storms?&lt;br/&gt;4) How storm interaction and
mergers impact tornado genesis?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations, numerical
modeling and data analysis will be used to address the research questions. The
methodological approaches build on the Principal Investigators' (PIs) past work
including the successful simulation of an intense and long-lived supercell-
spawned tornado, simulations of supercell storm environment at 1 km resolution,
assimilation of polarimetric radar observations, and coarse-resolution
simulations of storm interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations will be
used to guide parameter studies and for data assimilation while modeling will
provide consistent and high resolution space and time data sets for analysis and
the means to explore controlled parameter spaces. The modeling studies build on
advances in model physics, model parallelization/nesting, new methods for
initiating sustained storms in the presence of capping inversions, and ensemble
Kalman filter based data assimilation methods. The research will take advantage
of the availability of computing systems approaching the petascale as well as
future systems such as Blue Waters to be deployed at the University of Illinois
in 2011 which will be capable of sustaining petaflop performance for weather and
storm simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposal: The work
is aimed at increasing the understanding of supercell/tornado genesis, and
structure and evolution. Numerical simulation provides a unique approach for
testing hypotheses as well as providing complete data sets for analysis and
visualization. It also provides a means to simulate multiple scales, namely the
supercell and any tornadoes embedded within it. Of particular interest is
determining what environmental conditions and what balance of forces are
required for simulations of quasi-steady and long-lived supercell-spawned
tornadoes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will potentially
improve public warnings. In particular, the PIs will contribute to understanding
why some supercell storms produce tornadoes while others do not. Given the
upgrade of the WSR-88D radar network that is currently underway, research on the
assimilation of polarimetric radar data will provide new insight as to how to
best use this data in storm forecasting. Research findings will be communicated
via conference presentations, peer-reviewed journal articles and instructional
modules for wider use by meteorological education, research and operational
communities. The results will be used in classes at the University of Illinois
and University of North Dakota. In addition, the researchers will be working
with National Center for Supercomputer Applications on a storm exhibit at the
Chicago Museum of Science and Industry. The latter will include interactive
tools for exploring simulation data as well as visualizations from
supercell/tornado simulations. Three graduate students will be supported and
cross institution collaboration will be fostered by the work between two
academic institutions.