* 0843938
* Motor Intention
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Hernando Ombao, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2013
* USD 501,491.00

Healthy humans effortlessly and accurately perform a wide range of voluntary
movements and actions. Considerable work has revealed many brain sites involved
in performing voluntary actions, including areas in the frontal and parietal
cortices. By contrast, substantially less is known about brain areas which are
involved in the intention to move and when and how these intention-related brain
sites mediate movement planning. The current project will use neuroimaging to
identify regions in the human cerebral cortex that contribute to planning and
preparing voluntary movements. They will also use and novel mathematical methods
and analysis tools to describe when each brain region becomes involved in the
action planning and the interactions among brain regions. The project outcome
will yield a spatial and temporal map of brain activity related to action
intention.

Broader impacts of this project include development of analysis tools that can
to assess patterns of brain activity related to basic human functions of
sensation, perception, thought and action. The methods may also be useful to any
system that has sets of time-varying signals, particularly brain-computer
interfaces. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students, some
of whom participate in K though 12 outreach programs; thus, the research
activities will become disseminated to the local public community.

