* 0843537
* Mechanistic Studies of Tryptophan Oxidizing Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Aimin Liu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 577,180.00

Heme iron active sites are present in a wide variety of proteins and enzymes.
The different biological functions they perform include oxygen binding, storage,
transfer, and activation for hydroxylation, peroxidation, and desaturation. This
project examines the molecular biochemistry exhibited by two structurally
diverse heme-containing enzymes that oxidize either free tryptophan or protein-
bound tryptophan residues. Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) inserts two oxygen
atoms into free tryptophan in a four electron oxidizing process by a b-type heme
cofactor. This enzyme represents a potentially new hemoprotein dioxygenase
superfamily whose oxygenase activity remains poorly understood. MauG is a novel
enzyme that utilizes two c-type hemes to catalyze a posttranslational
modification of a 119 KDa protein. Such a modification endows endogenous
tryptophan residues with a new catalytic activity. The MauG-catalyzed reaction
is a six-electron oxidation process and the utilization of two c-type hemes to
perform a hydroxylation reaction and the subsequent oxidation reactions are
unprecedented. Novel high valent iron intermediates have been trapped from these
tryptophan oxidizing enzymes. This research will establish a better definition
of the requirements needed to attain the unusual Fe(IV) intermediates as well as
elucidate their relation to oxidizing the free or protein-bound tryptophan
substrates. A biochemical and spectroscopic approach employing site-directed
mutagenesis, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, Mössbauer
spectroscopy, mass spectrometric analysis, and structural determination as well
as quantum mechanics computational methods will be utilized to study the
electronic structure of the intermediates in these enzymes. These studies are
directed toward obtaining detailed insight into electronic and geometric
structural contributions to the formation and stabilization of high valent iron
intermediates, the electronic structure of reactive oxygen intermediates, and
the heme-dependent tryptophan oxidizing mechanisms contrasts to non-heme
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will provide the
opportunity for motivated students, including underrepresented populations, to
participate in the frontier of molecular biochemistry research. Students
exposure to an array of biochemical and biophysical techniques will be
integrated with hands-on training. A video tutorial of electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy will be developed during the experimental process
to provide a thorough demonstration of EPR-centered techniques in studying the
chemical properties of important biomolecular systems.