* 0843831
* Collaborative Research: Floral and Faunal Community Responses to Late-Quaternary Climate Change
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Eric Grimm, Illinois State Museum Society
* Continuing Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 02/28/2014
* USD 103,384.00

Floral and Faunal Community Responses to Late-Quaternary Climate Change
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John Williams, Stephen Jackson, Eric Grimm and Russell
Graham &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a study of the responses
of species and communities to &lt;br/&gt;late- Quaternary environmental
variations and, in particular, the environmental drivers of species turnover,
community assembly and disassembly, and the formation of no-analog communities.
Their research will demonstrate the power of NEOTOMA, a new community
paleoecological database that reduces informatics costs and removes barriers to
interdisciplinary collaboration by storing in a single database most of the
major late-Neogene paleoecological databases. The proposed research will be the
first-ever synoptic analyses of late-Quaternary community dynamics in North
America that directly integrate fossil pollen, plant-macrofossil, and faunal
records. The PIs propose improving the resolution of the NEOTOMA database by
obtaining 100 new AMS radiocarbon dates for key vertebrate fossil localities,
adding recent high-quality records to NEOTOMA, revising existing chronologies in
NEOTOMA in light of this new data, and mapping all data for 15 time-windows
covering the last 21,000 years. These time windows are more finely subdivided
than the original FAUNMAP synthesis, and will permit study of species responses
to the rapid climate changes of the last deglaciation. The PIs will test such
hypotheses by comparing the distributions of the floral and faunal no-analog
communities to each other and to the distributions of no-analog climates. They
will create plant based and animal based biome maps to see whether such maps are
complementary or in contradiction. The PIs will further conduct generalized
dissimilarity modeling to reveal patterns of species turnover, along
environmental gradients, in both space and time. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;