* 0843295
* Molecular studies of dissimilatory selenium reduction by subsurface microorganisms
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Max Haggblom, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,544.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ability of
anaerobic prokaryotes to perform dissimilatory selenium reduction is a
remarkable biological adaptation that allows selenium respiring microorganisms
to populate ecological niches in Earth?s subsurface. In laboratory experiments,
a diverse range of anaerobes have been shown to grow using selenate as a
terminal electron acceptor. However, field-based evidence for subsurface
microorganisms that are supported by selenium oxyanion reduction remains
elusive. In this study, it is proposed to elucidate the genetic determinants
involved in anaerobic selenium respiration, and use these molecular proxies to
quantify the in situ activity of Se-reducing bacteria in sedimentary
environments. The objectives of this research are: 1) to identify the functional
selenate reductase genes in diverse strains of Se-reducing bacteria; 2) to
demonstrate that the expression of the selenate reductase gene is a reliable
marker for Se-reducing activity; and 3) to quantify in situ transcript levels of
the selenate reductase genes in anoxic sediments where selenium oxyanion
reduction is actively occurring. Using investigators? collection of novel
selenium respiring isolates, they will employ directing cloning techniques and
genome-context analysis to identify the genes that confer selenate reductase
activity. With this genetic information, degenerate PCR primers will be
developed to amplify the regions of the selenate reductase that are genetically
conserved regions among phylogenetically diverse species of Se-reducing
bacteria. Utilizing these PCR primers, quantitative real-time reverse
transcription (QRT) PCR experiments will be conducted to determine the
transcriptional response of the selenate reductase gene during growth on
selenate as the sole terminal electron acceptor. After these PCR primers have
been tested on pure culture isolates, QRT-PCR will be performed on natural
sediments to measure mRNA levels of selenate reductase genes in sediment cores
where vertical geochemical profiles show the occurrence of selenium oxyanion
reduction. By establishing a link between the genetics and geochemistry of
selenium reduction, investigators aim to lend new insight into the existence of
this unique mode of life in nature, and illuminate the microbial processes that
govern the cycling of selenium in sedimentary environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Undergraduate research opportunities in
Geomicrobiology will be initiated through collaboration with the Rutgers Honors
Program. Four-year undergraduate research experiences will be established to
promote discovery-based learning at the interface of geological and biological
sciences. Undergraduate students majoring in geology and environmental
geosciences will learn how to design PCR primers and carry out PCR reactions to
amplify selenate reductase genes. The results of undergraduate student research
projects will be disseminated via on- and off-campus conferences, electronic
journals for undergraduate research, and peer-review scientific journals. This
project will also train two graduate students in the field molecular
geomicrobiology. Graduate students from the Geological Sciences graduate program
will learn to clone, sequence, and mutate selenate reductase genes. Sequence
data obtained from the experiments will be integrated into homework assignments
for the new Geomicrobiology course at Rutgers University. Students taking this
course will learn to use web-based search tools to analyze and interpret
nucleotide sequence data. To integrate research activities into the teaching of
K-12 science, investigators propose to employ the Rutgers Science Explorer?a
state-of-the-art mobile laboratory ? to advance geoscience education in high-
minority urban school districts. A 90 minute module on biogeochemistry will be
developed to teach middle school students the basic concepts of how matter moves
between the geosphere and hydrosphere.&lt;br/&gt;