* 0843946
* Understanding Multi-Modal Discourse: Cognitive Resources and Speech-Gesture Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Seana Coulson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anyone who has had a phone conversation
about how to how to change the oil in a car or how to make lasagna knows the
importance of explanatory gestures for communication. Multimodal discourse
involves the use of both visual (gestures) and auditory (speech) information
during communication. Scientists still have much to learn about how people
combine information in gestures with information in speech and whether people
vary in their ability to use gestural information. This project evaluates the
importance of working memory for combining linguistic information in speech with
gestural information. Participant's brain activity will be recorded as they
watch videotapes of a person talking about concrete topics such as the shape of
objects, their relative sizes, and other spatial information that is difficult
to convey through speech alone. The impact of gestural information will be
measured by comparing brain activity recorded when the same person watches
videos in which the speaker does gesture with those in which he does not. The
importance of the different working memory systems will be assessed by seeing
how language comprehension suffers when participants are asked to remember
irrelevant words (verbal working memory), dot patterns (visuospatial working
memory), and pictures of meaningless body positions (sensorimotor working
memory). The impact of differences in learning style and cognitive abilities on
gesture comprehension will also be examined &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By discovering
the relative importance of verbal, visuospatial, and sensorimotor working memory
for understanding face-to-face communication, this research will aid the design
of more effective teaching and training methods. The project may guide the
development of teaching methods that are specially adapted for people with
different learning styles and could help children and adults with communicative
deficits by maximizing the effects of gestural information. The project supports
an early career scientist and provides summer jobs for college students,
including those from minorities under-represented in science.