* 0843692
* Gene Networks and Chromatin Regulation of Phaseolin Transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Timothy Hall, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Susannah Gal
* 12/31/2013
* USD 589,582.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Seed storage proteins are vital sources of food for
mankind and livestock. Phaseolin is the most abundant protein stored in the
seeds of the French bean, Phaseolus vulgaris. Genetically, it is encoded by a
small family of similar but not identical genes, one of which (phas) has been
studied in great detail. This NSF-funded research has the long-term goal of
gaining an understanding of how specific genes are activated at certain times in
defined tissues, and has led to major advances in plant molecular biology. These
include the isolation and in vitro translation of plant mRNA, the first
demonstration of introns in a plant gene, and the first functional transfer of a
developmentally regulated gene (phas) from one species to another (bean to
tobacco). Transcriptional regulation of phas is constrained both spatially and
temporally. It was found that the establishment of a repressive chromatin
structure and a rotationally positioned nucleosome over three phased TATA boxes
of the phas promoter is responsible for the lack of phas expression in
vegetative tissue. However, using an estradiol-inducible system for PvALF
production and externally supplied abscisic acid (ABA), it was possible to
induce activation of phas promoter-driven GUS reporter expression in leaves of
Arabidopsis plantlets homozygous for two transgenes (pER8/XVEHA.PvALF). These
experiments revealed that the activation of phas is a two-step process that
involves nucleosome remodeling initiated by the seed-specific B3 domain
transcriptional activator, PvALF, followed by abscisic acid (ABA)-driven
activation of robust GUS transcription from the phas promoter that is easily
identified by blue-colored leaves upon histochemical staining. Specific
objective 1 of this project is to identify proteins that interact with the PvALF
effector to achieve chromatin remodeling. In addition to yeast two-hybrid
screening and immunoprecipitation with antibody against HA-tag, a novel approach
will be to extract RNA from Arabidopsis leaves at specific time points during
the potentiation and activation steps. High throughput sequencing of cDNA
reverse-transcribed from the RNA samples will allow identification of the genes
that are turned on in these steps, and the order in which they appear. In
objective 2, further dissection of the various events governing the potentiation
and activation of the phas promoter will be undertaken. Specifically, it will be
determined if histone H3 depletion or substitution is intrinsic to effector-
mediated activation of phas expression. The key role of PvALF and related
effectors in initiating transcription from seed-specific promoters makes it
imperative to search for the critical event that induces transcription from
PvALF and its relatives (objective 3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;In addition to gaining new information on molecular processes
of gene expression, this project has relevance to understanding how the
production of the seed protein of an important food crop is regulated. This
project will provide training for a postdoctoral research associate, a graduate
student and will give undergraduate students opportunities for laboratory
experience. Several aspects of the proposed studies (e.g. cDNA cloning, yeast
one/ two hybrid screening and T-DNA mutagenesis experiments) are expected to
provide exciting opportunities for undergraduate participation. Arabidopsis
transgenic lines or mutants created from the proposed studies (e.g. transgenic
line expressing Myc-tagged histone H3 or H3.3) will also be made available for
researchers in the plant community. Students of different heritage and gender
will be encouraged to participate.