* 0843419
* RUI:  Evolution of clitellate cocoons: regulation, secretion and ultrastructure
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Daniel Shain, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 291,694.00

Clitellate annelids (e.g., earthworms, leeches) contain specialized segments
comprising the clitellum, whose primary function is to secrete a cocoon.
Clitellate cocoons display remarkable physical properties, including resilience
to temperature extremes, proteases and organic chemicals. The primary goals of
this project are to characterize cocoon secretion at molecular and cellular
levels, and to determine ultrastructural features that distinguish different
cocoon types. The central hypothesis is that cocoon-secreting cells are derived
from a single precursor cell type that differentiates into two lineages; one
secretes protein granules that generate the cocoon membrane, while the other
secretes a glycosylated form of the same protein that forms opercula (glue-like
plugs that seal the cocoon ends). Employing available DNA and antibodies, an
understanding of the evolution and secretion dynamics of the cocoon will be
gained that will facilitate their potential applications as biomaterials (e.g.,
thin, flexible, transparent membranes; underwater adhesives; biopolymers).
Student participants will be actively engaged in this research, present results
at local, state and national symposia, and gain exposure to this work through
its integration into existing 'Computers in Biology' and 'Electron Microscopy'
courses at Rutgers-Camden.