* 0843185
* Developmental Trajectories of Children's Sleep and Adjustment
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Joseph Buckhalt, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 03/31/2011
* USD 349,790.00

Approximately 40% of U.S. children live in families characterized by high levels
of parental conflict, and the negative psychological and behavioral outcomes
associated with exposure to parental marital conflict are well-documented. The
current project will extend an ongoing, longitudinal project that has been
examining interrelations among parental conflict, sleep, and child adjustment.
Previous waves of data collection in this project demonstrated that disruptions
in an important facet of children's biological regulation, namely sleep, can
have deleterious effects on typically developing children, and highlighted the
importance of simultaneously examining family and sleep functioning in the
prediction of child outcomes. The opportunity to follow the same families during
a time when children are entering puberty is vital to determine the role of
marital conflict in child development. Children and their families will be asked
to participate in a third wave of data collection in which marital functioning
and associated processes (e.g., emotional insecurity) are examined, children's
sleep quality and quantity are assessed, and multiple domains of children's
adjustment (socio-emotional, cognitive, academic) are investigated. This wave of
data collection will allow the investigators to (1) analyze the mediating
(intervening) role of sleep in the link between marital conflict and child
development over time; (2) determine whether relations among marital conflict,
children's sleep, and daytime functioning persist, weaken, or become stronger as
children enter puberty, and ascertain if these associations differ based on
child sex, ethnicity or socio-economic status; and (3) clarify processes that
can influence child adaptation in the context of marital conflict and sleep
disruptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of contextual factors (e.g., high
marital conflict) and psychobiological processes (e.g., sleep) associated with
normative familial risk in children are critical for education and prevention
efforts, multidisciplinary intervention, and institutional structures and
policies relating to children and families. Understanding the role of sleep will
inform interventions that promote resiliency, coping, and competence in many
areas of functioning. By integrating theories and methods from different
disciplines, the study will facilitate collaborations among the medical and
social sciences in the ultimate service of public policy and practice. Further,
Alabama's high rate of poverty, as well as large minority (African-American)
population, makes the setting advantageous for studying the impact of multiple
factors on the well-being of a diverse population of children. There are also a
number of educational benefits of this study. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in interdisciplinary methods and working with a diverse
population. Parents, school administrators, teachers, clinicians, and county
agents will have the opportunity to participate in training workshops and
seminars that are based on study findings. Finally, results will be presented
via professional meetings, multidisciplinary journals, and a user-friendly
website.