* 0843504
* Evolution of compensatory changes in nematode gene regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ilya Ruvinsky, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2014
* USD 796,054.00

The proposed work asks, "Why do some traits persist apparently unchanged for
long periods of evolutionary time?" One possibility is that this is due to
exquisite conservation of individual genetic programs that direct development.
However, evidence indicates that in many cases individual developmental
regulators have functionally diverged even between fairly closely related
species. An alternative explanation is that changes may accumulate without
causing morphological differences if they compensate or "buffer" each other.
This proposal will dissect specific molecular mechanisms responsible for the
evolution of compensatory changes in the case of a single gene between two model
worms, C. elegans and C. briggsae, and test the generality of the findings using
a number of co-expressed genes in a variety of related nematodes. Since
regulatory evolution is thought to be an important driving force of
morphological evolution, this work will be of interest to a broad community of
Evo-Devo researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Ruvinsky incorporates findings of this work into his teaching of undergraduate
and graduate students at the University of Chicago as well as to science
teachers of Chicago Public Schools. Research in Dr. Ruvinsky's laboratory will
involve undergraduate and graduate students who will be trained in experimental
and computational approaches central to this proposal. The PI and other members
of the laboratory will present their findings at a variety of scientific
meetings.