* 0843065
* Engineering the Proteins in the Carboxysome Shell
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Todd Yeates, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2013
* USD 554,000.00

Scientific Merit: This project will have long-range impact on scientific
understanding of a system of potential global importance. Many bacterial cells
contain poorly understood interior structures called "microcompartments", which
are composed of several thousand protein subunits, with a polyhedral outer shell
reminiscent of viral capsids. The interior of these microcompartments is filled
with enzymes carrying out sequential metabolic reactions important for life of
the cell. They function as simple organelles in bacteria, which lack the well-
studied membrane-bound organelles (e.g. mitochondria and chloroplasts)
characteristic of cells from eukaryotes (e.g. animals and plants). The
microcompartment under study in this project is the carboxysome. The function of
the carboxysome is to enhance carbon sequestration and CO2 fixation. Microbes
with carboxysomes make a major contribution to global CO2 fixation. An atomic
level understanding of the carboxysome could be helpful in modifying a system
that plays a major role in the global carbon cycle. Furthermore, related
microcompartments in other bacteria are involved in producing various small
organic molecules, some of which are relevant in biofuel applications. Initial
structural studies on the protein shell of the carboxysome have led to
hypotheses about how the protein shell might control the flow of metabolic
intermediates into and out of the microcompartment. Research in the current
project will engineer the carboxysome shell in order to advance understanding of
these important and unique structures. The shell proteins will be engineered to
modify the pores that are hypothesized to serve as gates for molecular transport
into and out of the carboxysome. The modifications will test current hypotheses
about molecular transport, which should lead to the ability to create
microcompartments that can transport novel metabolites. In addition, the
modifications will make it possible to isolate and study carboxysomes from model
organisms amenable to genetic manipulation. Structural studies of large protein
complexes like the carboxysome are at the leading edge of our abilities to
investigate the molecular architecture of proteins.

Broader impacts: In addition to providing fundamental insight into large protein
structures and mechanisms of production of reduced carbon in the biosphere, this
project also involves a significant training component at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels. The project will be executed by two graduate students with
the assistance of a group of undergraduates drawn from programs geared to
include underrepresented groups. This important training component of the
project will have a substantial effect on education and scientific workforce
development.