* 0843621
* Integrating Decision Elements for Behavioral Switching
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Rhanor Gillette, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 04/30/2013
* USD 420,000.00

Successful animals tend to make efficient decisions in their daily activities in
terms of effort spent, risk taken and benefit gained. How they do this at the
level of the dynamical neuronal circuit has broad implications for the
understanding of both normal and abnormal animal and human behavior. This
project outlines a plan to describe how the nervous system integrates sensation,
internal state and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In preliminary work on a
simple animal model system, a simple and robust neural network model has been
derived for cost-benefit decision-making. Now, investigations are aimed at
explaining the neural bases for switching between orienting and avoidance motor
acts, how this switch is determined by sensation, appetite and learning, and how
avoidance decision may suppress feeding behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies
are to be carried out with conventional electrophysiological recording methods.
This project contributes to laboratory training of undergraduate and graduate
students, and through its content to field classroom education in neuroethology.
In these venues an effective synthetic approach, linked by content to problems
in animal decision, to neuronal systems and behavior in field and lecture is
important in training the next generation of systems and computational
neurobiologists. The expected results will elucidate the interactions of goal-
directed neuronal network circuitries to show how animals can make successful
behavioral decisions that balance perception of available resources and risk
against their own needs. They will provide a simple model for approaching the
neural circuitry for similar value-based decision-making in more complex
animals. The further potential impact of the work is to enable improved
ecological and economic modeling using biologically based decision making
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;