* 0843798
* SGER: Evaluation of the Rating Curve Hysteresis Due to Unsteady Channel Flows Using Non-Intrusive Measurements Acquired During the Iowa 2008 Flood
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Marian Muste, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2010
* USD 56,869.00

0843798&lt;br/&gt;Muste&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to
better understand and refine river discharge estimates using improved measures
of rating curves. Traditional river discharge estimates are conducted at times
when flow is relatively normal and steady, allowing safe and convenient
measurement. These measurements serve as the basis for calculating rating
curves. The curves, in turn, are used to estimate flow and discharge during
flood events ? possibly leading to significant uncertainty due to hysteresis.
Understanding the discharge-flow hysteresis relationship requires measurements
during high flow events. The 2008 Midwestern flood offers a unique opportunity
to couple flow and discharge measurements in order to better understand and
model rating curve hysteresis during extreme events. With the goal of coupling
river stage and discharge, measurements will be made in a non-contact manner
developed at IIHR-Hydroscience &amp; Engineering which uses Large-Scale Particle
Image Velocimetry (LSPIV). This technique was initiated on June 10, 2008. Funds
are requested to 1) finalize the on-going measurements; 2) perform topographic
and bathymetric surveys; 3) evaluate deployed instruments by conducting baseline
flow measurements; 4) analyze data and report findings; and 5) produce
conceptual process models and define future research needs. The unique aspect of
the proposed research is the use of non-intrusive measurement techniques in a
natural extreme event provided by the 2008 Midwestern flood. The series of
measurements will allow the PI to assess the technique and its ability to
provide improved rating curve estimates under rare unsteady flow situations in
natural channels. The expectation is that LSPIV will provide a simple, compact,
cost- and effort-effective package for providing these critical measurements.
Unsteady flows will be investigated in detail and conceptual frameworks will be
developed in order to determine what ancillary data are needed to answer
discharge hypotheses. The transformative, exploratory nature of this project
will provide field testing for technical aspects of the LSPIV technique to
include specular reflection for free-surface tracing, optimal velocity
distribution laws in the water column testing as a function of stream
characteristics, flood wave raising and falling data capture, and uncertainty
analysis. Rating curves are the basis of stream stage measurements, yet their
uncertainty during high-flow events obviates the ability to fully understand
unsteady fluvial processes. River processes hypotheses regarding extreme and
unusual flow regimes can be tested and the results of this study will enable
river stage and discharge estimation in regions without gauging stations.
Integrated hydrologic-geomorphic-biological studies will be possible through a
better understanding of key temporal and spatial processes in flood propagation.
Uncertainty in rating curves calculated during stable river flow regimes will
hinder flood stage forecasting whereas this project will provide data useable by
national mission agencies for more accurate flood estimates. With billions of
dollars lost each year, more accurate flood data are timely and of broad
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;