* 0843426
* CCF-TFNSG: Uniting the Discrete Methods, Optimization and the CISE Community with Community Studying Matrix Operations, Tensors,Verifiable Computational Experiments and Scalability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Lenore Cowen, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lenore M. Mullin
* 09/30/2009
* USD 44,100.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCF-TFNSG: Uniting Discrete Methods, Optimization and the
CISE Community with the Community studying Matrix Operations, Tensors,
Verifiable Computational Experiments and Scalability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2009 SIAM Annual meeting is taking place in Denver, Colorado. There is typically
a great deal of representation of the SIAM Computer Science and Engineering
group at the Annual meeting that studies matrix operations, tensors, verifiable
computing and scalability, but little or no representation of the CISE
Community, the Discrete Methods or the Optimization Communities. As a pilot
effort to study the feasibility of promoting such interaction, Lenore Cowen from
the SIAM Discrete Math activity group, and Tamara Kolda from the CS and E SIAM
activity group, chaired the 2008 SIAM Annual Meeting. On the CS and E side, both
a full CS and E track was organized, and also a meeting theme of Numerical
Linear Algebra and Tensor methods. On the Discrete and CISE side, a special
theme of Networks: Biological, Social and Internet was organized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2009, Lenore Cowen has agreed to organize a track at
the SIAM Annual meeting through the Discrete Math activity group. The Discrete
Math activity group runs its own biannual conference, plus it and ACM SIGACT co-
run SODA (The Discrete Algorithms conference) every year. The goal of this
proposal is to get participant communities that normally attend the SIAM
Discrete Math and the ACM-SIAM SODA conferences to come attend the annual
meeting in minisymposium sessions design to promote interaction in topics in
mutual interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our plan for this is threefold: 1) To
have Bruce Hendrickson on the CS and E side run a minisymposium on Combinatorial
Scientific Computing, and also to have someone on the CS and E side run a
minisymposium on tensors and data mining (possibly Tammy Kolda). &lt;br/&gt;2)
To have a repeat of the Networks: Biological, Social and Internet theme for
several minisymposia to bring in the CISE people and &lt;br/&gt;3) To bring in
some of the core Discrete Math and Optimization people by co-locating a banquet,
separate from the SIAM annual meeting, in honor of Danny Kleitman?s 75th
birthday. &lt;br/&gt;The result will hopefully be a truly interdisciplinary
meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We ask for $20,000 to help support registration,
travel and housing fees for minisymposium speakers; this will be spread among
28-32 minisymposium speakers, with preference for funds going to those coming
from further away and/or who do not have other sources of grant money for
travel. We ask for an additional $15,000 for travel grants for graduate student
attendance, and every effort will be made to reach out and broaden participation
to a diverse group of graduate students. No money is requested for the non-SIAM
activities at the meeting, i.e. the banquet in honor of Danny Kleitman?s
birthday. Participants will cover the cost of the banquet on their own.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;