* 0843096
* Geodetic Expressions of Plate Boundary Zone Dynamics from EarthScope Facilities
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Richard Bennett, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 203,082.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are using new continuous GPS and
seismic data products from EarthScope facilities to investigate possible dynamic
links between vertical crustal motions and lithospheric structure. We are
combining PBO and PBO NUCLEUS data with GPS data from a large network of
globally distributed stations and analyzing the combined data set using the
latest geodetic models, including IGS absolute phase centers. Our goal is to
create high-precision regional-scale images of the vertical velocity field
throughout the EarthScope focus area. In order to characterize and improve the
precision of the GPS vertical rate estimates, we are developing new time series
analysis methods. To interpret the vertical velocity field, we are developing
new inverse analysis methods based on the flexure of elastic plates. The model
parameters that we are investigating include vertical loads and load rates and
(possibly time dependent) strength of the continental lithosphere. EarthScope
seismic deployments are providing images of the structure of the continental
lithosphere composing the deformed plate boundary zone, adding constraints on
seismic velocity, density, attenuation, and anisotropy structure. The
combination of geodetic and seismologic data sets should have implications for
models of instantaneous mantle flow, ongoing postseismic stress relaxation, and
other processes. Pilot study regions include southern California and central
Utah, and similar areas where data sets are currently the strongest. Ultimately
we anticipate applying the technique across the entire western conterminous US
region. The associations between vertical motions, lithosphere structure, and
dynamics that we are establishing constitute only one of many important avenues
of scientific investigation that require precise constraints on vertical crustal
motions. We anticipate that the vertical motion data products and analysis tools
that we generate will have wide application concurrent with and beyond our two-
year project. Our research team includes an early career female research
scientist and a female PhD student. &lt;br/&gt;