* 0843505
* Taxonomy, Phylogenetics, Behavior And Proteomics Of The Social Wasp Superorganisms (Hymenoptera: Vespidae; Vespinae).
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2014
* James Carpenter, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 09/30/2014
* USD 385,432.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kurt M. Pickett of the University of Vermont's
Department of Biology for the study of the sophisticated social structures found
in yellowjacket and hornet colonies. Pickett, with collaborators Dr. Bryan
Ballif (also of UVM) and Dr. James M. Carpenter (AMNH, New York), will
investigate the evolutionary history of all yellowjackets and hornets worldwide.
This phylogenetic investigation will rely on morphological, genetic and
proteomic data. The team will investigate various aspects of the wasps'
sophisticated sociality. Among these includes the amazing "superorganismic"
interdependence of the members of the colonies, in which members function
intimately, as a single unit. Just like cells in the human body, the castes of
wasps have distinct physiological roles. In particular, it seems that only
larvae colonies can digest food, effectively forming the stomach of the higher-
level individual, the colony itself. This investigation will shed new
evolutionary light on the origins of complex cooperation and division of
labor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will train undergraduate and
graduate students and will create new content related to the research for the
AMNH's award-winning OLogy, a free, science-rich website designed for learners
aged 7 and up and their educators. In addition to producing manuscripts related
to the wasps' behavior, the investigators will revise taxonomy and produce
identification keys to all species. No adequate keys exist, and so the fully
illustrated keys will greatly facilitate the education of undergraduates and
other students beginning their studies in any aspect of yellowjacket and hornet
biology, as well as function as a practical tool for applied workers.