* 0843872
* The Cost of Covering: Psychological &amp; Physiological Implications of Managing a Stigmatized Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Jennifer Richeson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 06/30/2011
* USD 274,325.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of intergroup contact often
focus on how members of visibly stigmatized groups, such as racial minorities,
maintain high levels of self-esteem after they have experienced poor treatment
or have otherwise been reminded of their group's devalued status. Less
attention, however, has been devoted to how members of socially-devalued groups
attempt to manage these interactions and the costs these efforts may entail. The
present work examines one strategy that members of racial minorities may adopt
in interracial interactions in anticipation of negative treatment by others,
with the objective of preempting it. Known as "covering," this self-presentation
strategy is one where individuals shift, suppress, or otherwise avoid discussing
topics that are closely associated with their group membership during
interracial interactions and is designed to reduce any negative reactions that
their interaction partners may have to their group membership. This project will
examine covering behavior on the part of racial minority (Black and Latino)
students of an elite, predominantly White, private university, a context in
which these individuals are both numerically underrepresented and culturally
devalued. In a series of laboratory studies, this research will examine (1) the
extent to which racial minority individuals engage in covering during
interactions with and/or communications directed toward racial majority group
members, and (2) the potential costs of covering, including feelings of shame,
increased loneliness, physiological stress reactions, and impaired cognitive
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the widespread benefits of
increased diversity in educational and employment domains, it is important to
understand the experiences of racial minority individuals who attempt to persist
and succeed in the face of severe numerical under-representation and prevalent
negative group stereotypes. This research, therefore, has the potential to
directly benefit institutions of higher education, by informing academic leaders
as they seek to increase racial diversity, design environments that facilitate
positive interracial contact experiences for all students, and create programs
that contribute to minority students' academic success. Insight into these
issues will undoubtedly aid in the development of interventions to improve the
quality of life of members of racial minority groups who manage to persist in
the face of negative group expectations, as well as increase the number of
individuals who are able to do so.