* 0843175
* Neuroendocrine modulation of LTP durability
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Paul Gold, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 568,471.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Hormonal responses to an experience can gate how well and for how long the
experience is remembered. Epinephrine (adrenaline) is one such hormonal
regulator of memory strength and durability. Recent findings by the PI, using an
electrophysiological model of memory called long-term potentiation (LTP),
demonstrate that epinephrine also modulates the strength and durability of
connections between neurons known as synapses in brain areas involved in memory
in rats. Specifically, an injection of epinephrine extends LTP durability from
minutes, seen without epinephrine, to days. This proposal examines the neural
sites and molecular mechanisms important to this conversion of short- to long-
lasting LTP by epinephrine. Aim 1 will test actions at two brain regions, the
hippocampus and amygdala, important in memory formation. Epinephrine likely
modulates LTP strength and durability indirectly via specific receptors in the
amygdala and directly influences LTP strength through receptors in the
hippocampus, the site of change in synaptic strength. Aim 2 will examine
molecular events involved in the conversion to long lasting synaptic strength,
focusing on the activation of one protein, CREB, that regulates the expression
of many genes. Predictions are that increases in CREB activity will correspond
to increased durability of synaptic strength. Results from these studies will
lend insight into how stress hormones, a component of strong emotions, lead to
strong memories. The scientific impact of these experiments is potentially broad
with findings that will advance knowledge in fields of mechanisms of memory,
neuroendocrinology, and neurophysiology, extending basic findings to fields of
learning, reproduction, and animal behavior. This project will provide
extensive, unique research experiences for undergraduate and high-school
students, with progress assessed by PIs and students using portfolios of
written, technical, and subjective reports. Together with the varied outreach
programs the PIs conduct, these opportunities will impact a wide and diverse
group of prospective scientists.