* 0843459
* Structure-function relationships in metalloenzymes with multiple redox-active centers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Marius Schmidt, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2011
* USD 410,478.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Pacheco-Schmidt research groups
are studying three proteins that allow certain bacteria to interconvert ammonia
and nitrite. Without these proteins, such an interconversion would be too slow
for bacterial survival. The primary aim of the project is to determine how the
three proteins, which have broadly similar architectures, are tailored to
shepherd the ammonia-nitrite interconversion preferentially in one direction or
the other. Indirectly, the research will also supply a deeper understanding of
nanoscale electronic device design, since the proteins are essentially
conducting devices 5-10 nanometers wide. The proteins will be investigated using
a variety of techniques, most notably time resolved X-ray crystallography
(TRXRC), a relatively new method that allows one to make movies of molecules
undergoing chemical reactions. The technique has enormous untapped potential,
some of which will be uncovered during the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Broader impacts. This project provides research opportunities to high school
students and teachers, in addition to undergraduate and graduate students. It
will also provide insight into a growing environmental problem: nitrogen cycle
imbalance. Ammonia (a major component of fertilizer) and nitrite are two
examples of reactive nitrogen; that is, nitrogen usable by many living
organisms, as opposed to elemental nitrogen which makes up 89% of the air we
breathe, but is directly usable by only a few bacteria. Together, elemental
nitrogen and reactive nitrogen constitute the nitrogen cycle. Over the last 50
years the balance between the components of the nitrogen cycle has shifted
significantly towards reactive nitrogen species, as more fertilizer was
generated to produce food, and more recently biofuels. This shift is having many
unintended negative consequences, which will have to be mitigated in the coming
years. A better understanding of the processes by which ammonia and nitrite are
interconverted may lead to the more efficient use of ammonia fertilizer, and
thus help redress the nitrogen cycle imbalance. This award is co-funded by the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division and the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division.