* 0843930
* The Response of the Marine Osmium Isotope Record to Impact Events
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Gregory Ravizza, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2013
* USD 199,978.00

The Response of the Marine Osmium Isotope Record to Impact
Events&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gregory Ravizza, EAR-0843930&lt;br/&gt;University of
Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;An extensive, but incompletely
preserved, record of impact craters on the Earth demonstrates that large
projectiles from space have repeatedly hit Earth?s surface. Although the
Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinction some 66 million years ago coincides
precisely with the largest known impact event of the last 500 million years, the
environmental consequences of numerous other large impact events remain poorly
understood and documented. In order to study the response of the Earth system to
these large, abrupt perturbations, it is essential to be able to reliably
recognize an impact horizon globally throughout the sediment record. Currently
elevated iridium (Ir) concentrations are most commonly used to try to recognize
impact horizons far removed from the site of impact, but the results are often
ambiguous. The research supported by this award will test the usefulness of
combining measurements of Osmium (Os) isotope ratios (187Os/188Os) with Os and
Ir concentrations to reliably identify impact horizons, and also to estimate
projectile size. This will be accomplished by performing these analyses in well
studied marine sediment sequences that are known to have accumulated during the
time that large impact craters formed. Some of the sites to be studied are
relatively close to the impact site while others are located thousands of
kilometers away. PI's previous work using Os isotopes to recognize impact events
in deep sea sediments composed mainly of calcium carbonate microfossils have
yielded promising results. In this new study he will investigate if
compositionally different types of marine sediments can also reliably record the
chemical signatures of large impact events. Completion of these research
objectives will show if the marine Os isotope record represents a new and
unparalleled record of impact events through Earth history, or simply a modest
augmentation of the often ambiguous record of impacts obtainable through the
study of Ir concentration data alone. If the former is true this work will make
lasting contributions to event stratigraphy and global correlations of the
sediment record, as well as to understanding abrupt perturbations of Earth's
climate system by large impact events.