* 0843473
* Identifying mechanisms of symbiosis:  Establishment and comparative physiology of siboglinid tubeworm/ bacterial interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Fielman, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2013
* USD 655,500.00

Intellectual Merit: Annelid tubeworms belonging to the group Siboglinidae are
one of the most successful and diverse animal lineages with obligate symbioses.
As adults, these worms lack a functional gut, mouth and anus, and derive energy
from bacteria housed within a unique storage organ. Some species within this
worm group are well studied due to their dominance at hydrothermal vents and
hydrocarbon seeps, whereas other species are poorly known despite a broad
distribution in the deep sea. To understand establishment, maintenance, and
diversification of these bacterial symbiotic relationships, the investigators
will explore the diversity of symbioses within tubeworms and examine molecular
processes and mechanisms in host tissue and bacteria in contrasting metabolic
pathways that use hydrogen sulfide or methane as a primary energy source. Using
candidate species and a range of life-history stages, expressed genes of hosts
and symbionts will be surveyed using next-generation pyrosequencing and
microarray-based technologies. A goal of the project is to identify important,
broad-scale molecular processes directly associated with these symbioses. A
bioinformatic, systems-level approach will enable analysis, comparison, and
generalization to other terrestrial and aquatic symbiotic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: All organisms, including humans, are associated with
microbial flora. This work will be integral to elucidating how microbial
associations have shaped animal biology and evolution. It will also interest
those studying invertebrate evolution and diversity, microbial processes and
annelids, as well as the symbiosis scientific community. A web-based portal,
accessible to K-12 students and researchers, will be developed. This project
includes three beginning investigators, a graduate student and a technician. All
investigators actively teach and mentor students, seek out personnel from
underrepresented groups, and engage in formal outreach efforts. Results obtained
from this project will be presented at international meetings and published in
peer-reviewed journals. Molecular and computational resources for the study of
symbioses will be made publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;