* 0843253
* Choroid plexus control of cerebrospinal fluid inorganic phosphate
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* J. Larry Renfro, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 01/31/2015
* USD 443,783.00

The choroid plexus is a tissue located in spaces (ventricles) in the brain and
forms about 70% of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The CSF both mechanically
cushions and, in large part, determines the stability of the chemical
environment of the neurons. The CSF is similar to plasma but has very little
protein, higher chloride, and substantially less inorganic phosphate. The
mechanisms responsible for maintaining the CSF phosphate concentration at a
lower level is unknown, but it is hypothesized that control of CSF phosphate is
due, in part, to active removal of phosphate by the choroid plexus. The overall
objective of this project is to determine the mechanism and control of active
phosphate transport by the choroid plexus. Two model systems for these studies
are the sheet-like choroid plexus of a shark and a mammalian immortalized
choroid plexus cell line that can be maintained in a functional state outside
the body. Unlike mammalian choroid plexus in its natural state inside the brain,
which is highly enfolded, frond-like and deep within brain tissue, the choroid
plexus of the shark normally forms a large slightly enfolded sheet on the
surface of the brain. The latter allows the use of special chambers for the
determination of the mechanisms of transfer of phosphate out of the CSF back
into the blood. The molecular mechanisms responsible for the phosphate transfer
process will be identified by knocking down the expression of specific transport
proteins and monitoring the effect on phosphate transport. Once identified in
the shark, similar transport systems will be sought in the mammalian system
reorganized in culture into a sheet-like tissue. Another objective of the
project is to determine how this phosphate transfer system is controlled by
focusing on parathyroid hormone-related peptides. These peptides are involved in
regulating calcium and phosphate metabolism and it is hypothesized that they
regulate CSF phosphate concentration through actions on the choroid plexus
phosphate transport processes. Because small changes in CSF can have very large
effects on brain function as well as alter other processes such as breathing
rate, factors which modulate its composition will have important effects on
normal body functions. This project will involve the training of undergraduate
and graduate students and participation in NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduate programs at the University of Connecticut and Mount Desert Island
Biological Laboratory.