* 0843346
* The Human Stress Response: Interaction of Life Stress History and Genetic Variation on Behavior, Brain Function, and the (Epi-)Genome
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Turhan Canli, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2013
* USD 882,152.00

Stress is a widespread societal problem that can have dramatic health costs for
some vulnerable individuals, which may include damage to the brain and numerous
physical and mental health problems. Yet, individual differences make it
difficult to predict who is vulnerable to the adverse effects of stress. These
individual differences must be generated by brain circuits involved in stress-
related behaviors and responses, which can be affected by common variations
within genes, individuals' life experiences, and the interaction between gene
and environment. How these interactions take place in the human brain is
currently unknown. Thus, the field is in critical need of an integrated approach
to the study of gene x environment interactions on human behavior, its mediating
brain circuits, and its underlying molecular-genetic mechanisms. With support
from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Turhan Canli and colleagues at Stony
Brook University will examine the interaction between genes, life stress, and
stress reactivity. The project involves molecular genotyping of subjects, with
focus on three genes thought to be important for neurotransmitter and hormonal
cascades involved in stress reactivity. Genetic information will be correlated
with behavioral response on a well-characterized social stress task. The genetic
information will also be correlated with brain imaging, which will allow the
researchers to see how individual differences in the response of specific brain
regions are influenced by genetic variation. Because gene x environment
interactions are expected, life history will also be a part of the analysis.
Lastly, because leading theories of the effects of stress on the brain predict
damage in particular brain regions, the research will also involve an analysis
of postmortem human brains, from individuals with known life histories and
genetic profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's significance is that it
will reveal much about the genetic and environmental factors that affect
vulnerability and resilience in healthy, normal individuals. Furthermore, the
anticipated findings from this research will have important implications for
mood disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder or depression. This
project meets the educational mandate of NSF in several ways: The research
broadens participation by underrepresented groups by including students who are
female and/or minorities. Moreover, the project presents a unique opportunity
for cross-training in genetics and neuroscience.