* 0843564
* RUI:   Constitutive and Regulated Trafficking of the Cystine/Glutamate Exchanger, System xc-
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Leah Chase, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2013
* USD 466,724.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. System xc- is a
cell transport system that allows for the exchange of cystine, an amino acid, on
the outside of the cell for glutamate, an amino acid and neurotransmitter, on
the inside in of the cell in a variety of cell types. The transporter is found
in the brain, retina, kidney and small intestine. System xc- has been shown to
play an important role in regulating the production of the antioxidant,
glutathione, and thus protecting cells from damage as a result of oxidative
stress. The principal investigator (PI) and her students have recently shown
that oxidants such as hydrogen peroxide appear to acutely (within minutes)
regulate System xc- by redistributing the transporter from the inside of the
cell to the cell membrane where it is active. These exciting findings suggest a
novel form of regulation of System xc- that may serve as an important component
of the cellular defense system in protecting cells from oxidative damage and may
serve as a model for the regulation of other transport systems. To confirm and
extend these findings, this project will use biochemical and cell biological
techniques to elucidate the mechanism by which System xc- activity is regulated
by insertion and removal from the membrane (membrane trafficking). Specifically,
the experiments outlined in this project will allow for the identification of
the membrane trafficking pathways of the protein components of System xc- under
basal conditions in cultured human cells. The research will also investigate the
mechanism by which hydrogen peroxide acutely regulates the cell membrane
expression and activity of System xc-. Finally, this project will examine the
basal and regulated trafficking of System xc- in distinctly different cell types
in order to determine if the acute regulation of System xc- by oxidants is
common to a variety of cells. Thus, when completed, this project will lead to
significant advancements in our fundamental understanding of the basal and
regulated trafficking of System xc-. Since previous studies of this transporter
have focused only on the production of the transporter, which is under genetic
control, this study will provide insight into a novel form of regulation of
System xc- which allows for acute modulation of transporter activity. The fact
that oxidants appear to acutely regulate this cystine/glutamate exchanger is
intriguing since the transporter provides cells with the cystine required to
synthesize the antioxidant glutathione. Therefore, these studies may reveal an
important early defense mechanism utilized by cells immediately after exposure
to an oxidative agent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. In addition to
improving our understanding of the regulation of System xc-, this project
provides research training for nine undergraduate students and six high school
students, most of whom will be from groups underrepresented in science. The
majority of the research proposed in this project will be completed by these
students as a part of their comprehensive education in the sciences. Students
will work collaboratively in teams on the proposed project side-by-side with the
PI, learning to develop hypotheses, to design and conduct experiments, to
analyze data, and to report their findings. In the PI's experience (41 students
mentored in 8 years), engagement in original research projects leads to
significant gains in students' understanding of the scientific process, ability
to think critically about difficult and complex problems, and ability to
communicate about science. Thus, this project will train students who will be
better prepared for future careers in science. Additionally, this research
experience could inspire the PI's students to pursue scientific careers, and
thus, to contribute to increasing the diversity of individuals in science. The
impact of this project will be extended by publishing the scientific findings in
journals such as the Journal of Biological Chemistry and by presentations made
at national scientific meetings such as Experimental Biology or the Annual
Society for Neuroscience Meeting.