* 0843130
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:Assessing Carbonized Archaeological Cooking Residues:Evaluation of Maize Phytolith Taphonomy &amp; Density through Experimental Residue Anal
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* William Lovis, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 13,212.00

Under the direction of Dr. Lovis, Ms Maria Raviele will examine the process by
which early maize (corn) agriculture was adopted in the eastern United States. A
study area within eastern North America, the Saginaw River valley of Michigan,
will be used to specifically address the problem of early use of maize (prior to
AD 1000) and how this cultigen was incorporated into an already existing hunter-
gatherer subsistence system. It is known from visible archaeological remains,
such as cobs, that maize was grown after AD 1000. However, evidence suggests
that maize and other cultivated plants were increasingly used by hunter-
gatherers before this time in what is called a mobile low-level food production
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A relatively new methodological technique,
phytolith analysis, is adopted to examine evidence for plant use. Phytoliths are
microscopic deposits of silica which occur with varying frequency in every plant
part. Phytoliths can be diagnostic of particular plants and are used to identify
species from archaeological contexts where larger, visible plant remains are not
preserved. This study extracts phytoliths from charred food remains adhering to
ceramic sherd interiors. This will allow for the direct identification of plant
foods being cooked in a pot. It is expected that one of the plants identified
will be maize. The charred food remains to be examined are taken from ceramic
sherds, dating both before and after AD 1000. This time span covers the Middle
Woodland (200 BC-AD 500) and Late Woodland (AD 600-AD 1400)
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to examining archaeological charred
food remains, systematic experimental food residues, specifically using maize,
were created to determine if quantifying phytoliths found in a residue is
possible. This is important because current analysis simply records
presence/absence. If quantification is possible, this would allow researchers to
address issues such as how much of a plant was used, how the plant was processed
prior to cooking and how important this plant food was in a prehistoric
diet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project demonstrates the importance of
interdisciplinary and experimental work within archaeology since it draws on
disciplines in the life and environmental sciences. Human responses to the
introduction and adoption of a new food source are also addressed and are
pertinent to parallel issues of contemporary subsistence change. The
experimental method applied here has the potential to be applied to other
economically based plant utilization studies and thus has a geographical range
extending beyond eastern North America. The use of museum collections also
raises several methodological issues in regards to long-term curation and
processing of residues. These are pertinent to other researchers as well as
institutional administrators in their decisions about how to care for these
finite resources. Finally, this project provides comprehensive experience in
phytolith analysis for a graduate student researcher who can then train future
students in this method.