* 0843619
* The Biochemistry of 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Graham Moran, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2013
* USD 532,012.00

The overarching goal of this research is to understand the biochemistry of
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate (HPP). HPP is a remarkably versatile secondary
metabolite that has both conserved and unique roles in each Kingdom of life. In
this project the chemistries of two fascinatingly similar alpha-keto acid
dependent enzymes of common ancestry are compared. These enzymes have ostensibly
the same overall structure and both use HPP and oxygen as reactants but manage
to form entirely different products. These enzymes are 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate
dioxygenase (HPPD) and hydroxymandelate synthase (HMS). The alpha-keto acid
dependent enzymes are the largest and most diverse set of oxygenase enzymes
known. Enzymes in this family catalyze an array of complex reactions that are
relevant to many diverse biochemical processes, from permitting access to DNA in
higher organisms to the synthesis of plant toxins or the formation of collagen.
Widespread speculation as to the steps that occur during catalysis by these
enzymes persists in the literature but is largely unsupported by evidence. This
comprehensive approach employs spectroscopy, crystallography, and mutagenesis to
allow for a detailed picture of structure-function relationships to emerge. The
laboratory of the principal investigator has shown that at least four unique
chemical species occur during reactions of HPPD and HMS. Clearly, evidence for
the identity of these intermediates would be a highly significant observation.
In addition, the structure of both the reactant and product complexes is one of
the key observations yet to be made for either enzyme and will provide a
structural context for each reaction. As such, the broad objectives of this
research are to trap and characterize highly reactive intermediates in order to
understand the basis for these two reaction paths, obtain additional structures
of both enzymes bound to reactants and products and to investigate specifically
mutated enzymes to probe for the primary determinants of these two chemistries.
The successful completion of this research will have significant impact on the
understanding of oxygen utilization and will also provide insight into how
highly reactive species are directed by oxygenase enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The HPPD and HMS projects have proven to be
particularly useful platforms for the integration of teaching and research. The
richness and broad relevance of the chemistry of these enzymes has meant that
students who undertake this research gain exposure to a wide array of
methodologies and scientific conjecture that drives their work from a sense of
both curiosity and purpose. The principal investigator uses the data from this
research program to continue to improve an undergraduate laboratory course based
entirely on the biochemistry of HPPD. Moreover, The University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee has a mission to educate underrepresented students from surrounding
urban communities. As such the principal investigator is well placed to receive
students from diverse backgrounds and heritage as evidenced by recent doctoral
and bachelors graduates. Moreover, the principal investigator is involved in the
promotion of science locally by offering his expertise each year to judge high
school science fairs that continue to yield national science fair competitors.