* 0843026
* High Resolution Structural and Functional Mapping on Mediator of Transcriptional Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Yuichiro Takagi, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2012
* USD 510,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;Genetic information is read by
RNA polymerase II (pol II) through the synthesis of messenger RNA from DNA in
the process termed transcription. A prerequisite for transcription is binding of
transcription factor(s) to specific regulatory sequences on DNA, ultimately
resulting in recruitment of pol II to a specific gene to initiate transcription.
Since coordinate transcription by pol II defines networks of genes that function
in the same biological process, elucidation of transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms is essential to understanding biology. Mediator is an essential
component that ensures correct temporal and spatial patterns of transcription by
transducing the regulatory information through DNA-bound transcription
activators to pol II. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mediator is a large
protein complex composed of 21 subunits with a total mass over 1 megaDalton.
Despite its fundamental importance, the precise mechanism through which Mediator
functions remains enigmatic. The current low-resolution picture has illuminated
its modular organization into three distinct sub-complexes, termed Head, Middle
and Tail respectively, but reveals no mechanistic insight. This project
addresses a basic question, namely how this large multi-protein complex brings
about proper transcription regulation. The working hypothesis to be tested is
that the Mediator subunits provide key interacting domains for transcription
factors and pol II, and that these specific interactions are essential for
Mediator's function. The strategy will involve elucidation of the detailed
structural features of Mediator combined with phenotypic and biochemical
characterization of critical domains. Over the years, the size and complexity of
Mediator has significantly hampered structural and functional studies of this
kind. To overcome this problem, this project takes advantage of previous success
in reconstituting one essential Mediator module, termed the Head (7 subunits
with molecular mass of 223 kDa), in recombinant form. The Head module is
essential for Mediator's function since it is required for promoter interaction
in vivo and disabling it results in cession of mRNA synthesis. The goals of the
project are (i) to solve the structure of the head module to an atomic
resolution by X-ray crystallography, as well as (ii) to delineate the domain
structure of the Head module subunits. Integration of the structural and
functional insights will transform the current low-resolution information into a
high-resolution structural and functional map of the Head module of Mediator.
The map will illuminate how key regulatory domains are distributed within the
complex, leading to delineation of distinct functional domains embedded within
the structure of Mediator. Such structural and functional insight will transform
the way Mediator is studied in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an interdisciplinary research
education that examines a basic mechanism of eukaryotic gene regulation by
structural and functional studies of a multi-protein complex. The project will
provide research training opportunities for Indiana University (IU) graduate
students, as well as for undergraduate students from Indiana University Purdue
University at Indianapolis (IUPUI) through the Life-Health Science Internship
(LHSI) program. Students will gain experience with cutting-edge technologies
including the latest molecular cloning and protein complex engineering
technologies, X-ray crystallography, biochemical assays, and yeast genetics.