* 0843364
* RUI:   Fine scale phylogenetic relationships in Lycieae (Solanaceae):   A multilocus approach for understanding biogeography, polyploidy, and reproductive evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,05/31/2018
* Jill Miller, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The tomato family (Solanaceae) includes many wild species that are excellent
models for understanding how plants reproduce, whether they hybridize, and how
their genomes evolve. This project will develop new genetic markers and use them
to study evolutionary relationships among species and populations in the tomato
relative Lycium. Lycium is distributed throughout the world and has evolved many
complex ways of breeding. This project combines studies in the field and in the
lab to discover the history of species distributions worldwide and the evolution
of sexual strategies in flowering plants. This work thus uses genomic resources
developed for the economically important tomato family applies those to an
evolutionary study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will also contribute
significantly to undergraduate education and training by involving diverse
students at various stages of their careers in all aspects of the project,
including travels to collect plant materials and attendance to professional
meetings to present their research. Students will be trained in molecular
methods and sequence analysis, population genetics, and phylogenetic systematics
and reproductive evolution. Contributions will be made to summer programs that
provide training in molecular biology, systematics and genomics for high school
science teachers, as well as to curricular development at Amherst
College.&lt;br/&gt;