* 0843092
* Sequencing and Analysis of Centrosomal RNAs
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Joshua Hamilton, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2010
* USD 119,988.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centrosome in animal cells is
composed of a pair of centrioles surrounded by a relatively ill-defined
pericentriolar matrix. Centrosomes serve as the major microtubule organizing
center in animal cells, carry the mother centriole which is the basal body
progenitor, and organize the assembly of the mitotic spindle during cell
division. Centrosomes duplicate only once per cell cyle to ensure development of
a normal bipolar spindle. The initial event in centrosome duplication is
centriole replication, which is generative, semiconservative, and independent of
the nucleus. These and other observations have led investigators to propose that
centrosomes may contain their own complement of nucleic acids, possibly
representative of an organellar genome as has been described for mitochondria
and chloroplasts. Until recently, the only consensus developed during the past
50 years is that centrosomes do not contain DNA. The existence of centrosomal
RNA (cnRNA) remained an open possibility. Research in this investigator's
laboratory and others has now resolved this decades-old question in the
affirmative, although the source and function of cnRNAs remain unknown and
controversial. In this project, high throughput sequencing technology and
informatics will be used to characterize cnRNAs from the surf clam, Spisula
solidissima, and identify related molecules in other species. This will open the
way for future phylogenetic and functional analyses to help determine the
evolutionary origin and physiological roles of cnRNAs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help
provide training for one postdoctoral scientist and one graduate student at the
Marine Biological Laboratory. Opportunities for undergraduate training are also
available in the PI's laboratory. In addition to submitting raw sequence data to
NCBI, a database for centrosomal RNAs will be made available to other
investigators via web server. The database will be hosted on high performance
servers at the MBL that are already in use for other, similar projects. Finally,
should the results of this study uphold hypotheses for an exogenous origin for
the centriole-centrosome system, it will represent a significant contribution to
our understanding of the role played by symbiogenesis in the origin and
evolution of the eukaryotes.