* 0843915
* CAREER: Geometric Techniques for Algorithm Design
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Jonathan Kelner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 12/31/2013
* USD 450,081.00

This project focuses on the application of geometric and analytic techniques
from pure mathematics to the study of fundamental questions in the theory of
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator aims to develop two
sets of mathematical tools and their applications to algorithm design: integral
geometry and spectral/differential graph theory. In the former, he aims to study
the use of geometric concepts such as lengths and volumes in configuration
spaces to understand the complexity of combinatorial algorithms and the
diameters of polytope graphs. In the latter, he proposes to work on
understanding the right way to employ structures on graphs analogous to those of
continuous differential geometry and harmonic analysis, such Laplacians, Green's
functions, Hodge structures, and connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator intends to apply these techniques to a variety of algorithmic
pursuits, including:&lt;br/&gt;* the search for a strongly polynomial time
algorithm for linear programming;&lt;br/&gt;* new algorithms for nonconvex
optimization;&lt;br/&gt;* a faster algorithm for finding (1+epsilon)-approximate
maximum flows in undirected graphs;&lt;br/&gt;* the development of a general set
of tools for designing nearly linear time graph algorithms; and&lt;br/&gt;*
distributed routing protocols and other decentralized and local graph
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to advancing the theoretical study
of several central questions in the theory of algorithms, this research holds
the potential for broad practical impact. In recent years, it has increasingly
become the case that much of the world can be effectively modeled by very large
graphs, whether they be interconnected computers, social networks, or
collections of roads. These graphs are often so large that even a quadratic
algorithm would be impractically slow. For this reason, effective tools for
designing algorithms that run in nearly linear time are becoming more and more
important. In addition, there is an increasing focus now on having collections
of loosely coordinated computers work together to solve large algorithmic tasks.
In both cases, the development of spectral/differential graph theory holds great
promise. Differential geometry and the analogous discrete theory that the
principal investigator intends to develop aim to synthesize pieces of local
information to deduce global properties. As such, spectral and differential
graph theory provide a general approach to developing both nearly-linear time
algorithms and distributed ones. Furthermore, linear programming is applied to
solve a vast array of practical problems in a wide variety of fields, inclding
economics, operations research, combinatorial optimization, and logistics. Any
algorithmic improvement for it would broaden the set of such problems that can
be practically solved.&lt;br/&gt;