* 0843215
* SGER:  Deception as a Resource in Design to Support Interpersonal Awareness
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jeffrey Hancock, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2010
* USD 90,714.00

Ubiquitous information and communication technologies (ICT) are having
transformative effects on the ways in which people socialize and collaborate. In
particular, "virtual organizations" - aggregations of individuals, facilities
and resources that span geographic and institutional boundaries - are an
increasingly common work structure in a range of settings. One of the most
important problems faced by those working in virtual organizations, however, is
that unscheduled informal interaction with colleagues can be difficult to
support. When compared with face-to-face collaborations, this means
unanticipated problems can take longer to solve, uncertainties and
misunderstandings can persist longer, and relationships may take longer to
develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supporting informal interactions requires improved
interpersonal awareness, that is, the ability to quickly and naturally see what
colleagues are doing and whether or not they are available to talk. To date,
design and research efforts have generally failed to produce novel and widely
adopted technologies that overcome the problems associated with sub-optimal
interpersonal awareness in virtual organizations. One problem limiting progress
in the area is the implicit assumption in many awareness and interruption
minimization technologies to reduce ambiguity and provide accurate information
about others. There is increasing evidence, however, to suggest that such
assumptions may not be valid. In communication, people frequently draw on the
ambiguous properties of certain media to maintain plausible deniability about
message receipt, avoid confrontation, as well as to encourage or discourage
rapid response to a query. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to awareness
technologies, such practices can sometimes be considered deceptive in that false
information about one's availability may be deliberately provided to colleagues.
This leads to the following research questions: When and how do people use
deception to manage interpersonal awareness with current ICTs? What is the
impact of these deceptions on their self-concept and their ability to work with
colleagues?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing work in this area aims to either
characterize people's use of deception, or eliminate deception by providing more
accurate information. The long-term goal of this project, on the other hand, is
to identify deception and to exploit it as a resource in designing and
implementing improved awareness technologies. This SGER enables preliminary work
on novel ideas about the identification and usage of deception hotspots in
interpersonal awareness is the first exploratory step of a research program that
could significantly impact how interpersonal awareness technologies are
considered and designed, as well as our understanding of the role of deception
in interpersonal awareness. Its primary contributions are: 1) a systematic
examination of the conditions under which deception is used as a resource with
existing awareness technologies, and 2) a conceptualization of deceptions as an
indicator of a "trouble spot" in how a technology is supporting interpersonal
awareness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The results of this project
will be critical to providing the necessary social capacities in our national
cyberinfrastructure that will enable effective and transformative work in
various forms of geographically distributed virtual organizations.