* 0843896
* Testing the Universal Grammar Hypothesis
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Lisa Pearl, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2013
* USD 176,713.00

One of the most controversial claims in linguistic theory is the existence of an
induction problem for language learning: the data that children are exposed to
in learning language is inadequate to yield the knowledge of language children
eventually attain. One solution to this problem is that children are born with
some knowledge specifically about language, known as Universal Grammar (UG),
that allows them to hypothesize the correct linguistic knowledge from the
available data. Recent debates in the language learning literature have
questioned both the existence of induction problems and the possibility of ever
disproving the existence of UG. This project specifies a concrete methodology
for doing both of these, by drawing from recent advances in experimental and
computational technologies, and incorporating aspects of theoretical syntax,
psycholinguistic experimentation, and Bayesian modeling. The first stage of the
project quantifies the input available to children for various linguistic
phenomena, using transcripts of child-directed speech to assess exactly how
often children encounter certain constructions. The second stage quantifies the
knowledge of language children attain, using experimental syntax techniques to
gauge adult linguistic knowledge. The mark of a potential induction problem is
when a construction that appears relatively infrequently in child-directed
speech is found to be relatively acceptable for adults, since this means
children must decide that construction is part of their language without
encountering it very often (or sometimes, at all). The third stage of the
project uses psychologically-motivated Bayesian models of language learning to
evaluate what is required to solve these potential induction problems, and
importantly whether language-specific knowledge is necessary to do so. The
project begins the search for induction problems with a set of phenomena that UG
advocates unequivocally agree must be part of UG: constraints on long distance
dependencies, also known as island constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides a methodology for addressing one of the central debates in
language and learning and demonstrates how to apply this methodology to complex
phenomena central to linguistic theory, such as island constraints. By
connecting theoretical and experimental work in linguistics with computational
modeling, this project will yield results not achievable from each of these sub-
fields individually and impact the methodological norms in both theoretical
syntax and computational models of language acquisition. As this research
refines understanding of language learning and necessarily innate knowledge,
this project will hopefully inspire productive collaboration across the
traditional divides of theory, experimentation, and computation, both within UCI
and across the field as a whole. This, in turn, will help us understand how
children overcome the difficulties inherent in language learning. An additional
feature of the project is the creation of a database of conversational speech
that has structures of theoretical interest explicitly marked, which will
undoubtedly be a valuable research tool for both theoretical linguists and
computational modelers for years to come. The availability of this tool will
stimulate fruitful scientific research on phenomena central to linguistic theory
that has been difficult or impossible to do previously, due to lack of available
data. Moreover, this project integrates research and education by providing
hands-on research experience in linguistics to undergraduate students each year,
thereby fueling the recruitment of future linguists from the economically and
ethnically diverse population of students at a large public university.