* 0843940
* The Geometry of Spatial Knowledge for Navigation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* William Warren, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 06/30/2013
* USD 700,736.00

The Geometry of Spatial Knowledge for Navigation&lt;br/&gt;Investigator: William
H. Warren&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imagine arriving in a new city. As you leave the
train station and walk around the downtown area, you seem to build up knowledge
of the spatial layout that enables you to get back to the train station
(homing), find your way to restaurants and museums, and even take new shortcuts
or detours. It is commonly believed that this spatial knowledge takes the form
of a "cognitive map," something like a street map in your head. But what have
you really learned about the layout of the city? What sort of spatial knowledge
can you build up by walking around (by path integration)? How does it depend on
the layout of the environment, on distinctive landmarks like statues and
skyscrapers, and the manner in which you explore the city? What kinds of
navigation aids might help you learn the layout and keep you from getting lost
(signs, maps, GPS)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to answer such
questions by taking advantage of state-of-the-art virtual reality techniques.
Investigators study active navigation by distorting a 40 x 50 ft virtual
environment during ongoing walking, and recording the participant's natural
behavior. For instance, as a participant learns or navigates in the environment,
the virtual world may be stretched, changing distance relationships; the
locations of paths and landmarks may be shifted; or "wormholes" may be inserted
to teleport the participant from one place to another, creating "rips" and
"folds" in virtual space. These manipulations allow the investigators to probe
the geometric structure of spatial knowledge and how it is
acquired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous research, the investigators have
found that multiple forms of spatial knowledge, with different geometric
properties, are acquired when learning a new environment. But the results
suggest that such knowledge may not be integrated into a consistent, unitary
cognitive map. In particular, participants seem to acquire some local metric
information about distances and directions, but fail to integrate it into a
consistent global map. They learn topological structure such as the paths that
connect places (a graph), relations among neighborhoods, and ordinal sequences
of landmarks, but tolerate large discrepancies between them. The present
research investigates the accuracy of the metric "map" that can be built up
through path integration, how the various types of geometric knowledge are
related, and how their acquisition depends on the structure and stability of the
environment during learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For example, in one study the
investigators will create a non-Euclidean virtual world called the "Escher
Museum," consisting of six rooms with distinctive paintings and sculptures that
do not fit into a plane, but overlap in space, something like a flat spiral
staircase. Thus, by walking around a loop the participant will circle back to
previous physical locations that are occupied by new Museum rooms. This allows
the investigators to dissociate the neighborhood structure (rooms) from the
ordinal structure of landmarks (sculptures) and metric distances and directions
between them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of spatial knowledge
and human navigation has broad applications to the design and presentation of
spatial information (signage, maps, directions, web-based mapping applications),
visual and verbal interfaces for GPS-based navigation aids (autos, cell phones),
and biologically-inspired robot navigation systems, as well as to architectural
design and city planning.