* 0843959
* The Effects of Acoustic-Category Definition on the Learning of Phonological Classes:  Corporal Analyses,  Behavioral Studies and Modeling Experiments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Kristine Onishi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 02/28/2014
* USD 342,348.00

Adults treat linguistically relevant and not relevant contrasts between speech
sounds differently. For example, in English, the contrast between the vowel
sounds of "pit" and "peat" is relevant (phonemic), since "pit" and "peat" differ
in meaning. Variation in the vowels of "can't" and "cat" is not relevant
(allophonic): exchanging the "a" sounds does not affect meaning, and speakers
produce one or the other depending on the sound context (e.g., the "a" in
"can't" before "n"; and the "a" from "cat" before "t"). Whether a contrast is
allophonic must be learned since they vary across languages. For example, in
French the reverse is true: the contrast between the "a" sounds signals
differences in meaning (as in "bas" [low] and "banc" [bench]), whereas the
contrast between "pit-peat" does not and depends on the vowel context. Infants
hear both types of contrasts; yet, by the end of their first year, they have
learned to ignore allophonic contrasts. How do they learn to attend to phonemic
and ignore allophonic contrasts? Computational models learn to differentiate
phonemic from allophonic contrasts only when explicitly given measures of sound
similarity. Therefore, the hypothesis driving the current research is that
contrasts produced phonemically (e.g., "a"s by French speakers) and
allophonically (e.g., "a"s by English speakers) differ in their similarity, such
that allophonic sounds in a contrast are more similar to each other, and that
young infants are sensitive to these differences. This hypothesis is tested
using two approaches. First, a corpus of speech sounds will be created by
recording adult speakers of English and French producing two contrasts (similar
to "pit-peat" and "can't-cat" differences) when speaking to both infants and
adults. Acoustic measurements will determine which differences, if any, indicate
whether sounds are from phonemic or allophonic categories for the speaker.
Second, behavioral experiments will test whether infants and adults use these
available acoustic differences and distributions when learning sound patterns.
Participants will be exposed to novel speech sound patterns then tested on
additional items that either follow or violate the earlier patterns. Learning of
the novel patterns will be inferred from the differentiation of test items that
follow and violate the patterns (indicated by listening time differences in
infants and rating differences in adults). If larger differences in acoustics
and/or distribution of speech sounds induce participants to treat the sounds as
part of a phonemic contrast while smaller differences induce them to treat the
sounds as allophonic variants, the hypothesis will be supported.

The research will provide insight into the available information and fundamental
mechanisms used to learn a language's sound system (phonology); extend knowledge
about how infants learn categories; and increase our understanding of the role
of infant-directed speech in language acquisition. Discovering that infants
differ in their ability to learn categories from infant- and adult-directed
speech may influence both parenting techniques and early intervention
strategies. The project contributes to the growing body of work clarifying
relationships between early speech perception and later language acquisition,
which may eventually enable us to use perception tasks in infancy for diagnosis
and early intervention (e.g., sensitivity to native-language contrasts predicts
later word comprehension, word production, and reading skill). Finally, the
award not only enables research on phonological acquisition, but, as students
play a key role in all phases of the project, also educates and motivates
students and future researchers in linguistic, behavioral, and experimental
approaches to the understanding of language development.