* 0843265
* Measurement of the Deuterium Kinetic Isotope Effect on Hydroxyl Radical Cleavage of RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Thomas Tullius, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 649,456.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent completion of the sequences
of the human genome, and many others, has provided the raw data on which to
build a deep understanding of how living organisms work. But more than just the
sequence of DNA nucleotides in the genome is needed to understand how genetic
information is retrieved and expressed. A key player in the transmission of
genetic information is ribonucleic acid, RNA. The shape of an RNA molecule is
critical to its function in the life of the cell, yet few methods are capable of
mapping the structure of RNA. This project will develop a new experimental
method for determining RNA structure that makes use of the hydroxyl radical, a
high-resolution chemical probe of the structure of nucleic acid molecules. The
new method is designed to provide atom-specific information on the structural
features of RNA. The result will be a chemical probe of RNA structure of
unprecedented resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Since RNA
molecules are ubiquitous in all living organisms, the new structural method that
will result from this research will find wide application in laboratories around
the world that seek to understand the role of RNA in biology. The graduate
students who will work on this project will be trained to take a highly
quantitative approach to experiments that normally are interpreted
qualitatively. They will learn to combine synthetic and physical chemistry with
structural and molecular biology. This research project was originally developed
by two Postdoctoral Faculty Fellows (PFFs), each of whom has since been
appointed as Assistant Professor of Chemistry at an undergraduate institution.
The PFF program is an innovative program in the Chemistry Department at Boston
University that is focused on preparing recent Ph.D.s to teach chemistry and to
mentor research at undergraduate colleges. Half the time of a PFF is spent on
research and half on teaching. New PFFs will be sought to join this project. The
Tullius laboratory has focused in recent years on outreach to high school
students and undergraduates to provide them with research experience in an
active university laboratory. In summer 2009, four high school students and an
undergraduate will do research in the Tullius lab alongside postdoctoral fellows
and graduate students.