* 0843625
* Molecular and structural biology of phycocyanobilin:ferredoxin oxidoreductases
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2013
* J. Clark Lagarias, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2013
* USD 668,000.00

Intellectual merit: Phytobilins are pigments that perform significant light
harvesting roles in oxygenic photosynthetic organisms from unicellular algae to
green plants. When attached to proteins (biliproteins), phytobilins harvest
light energy to drive photosynthesis in blue-green, red and brown algae, and
trigger adaptive signaling pathways vital to survival in a constantly
fluctuating light environment. This project focuses on ferredoxin-dependent
bilin reductases (FDBRs), a family of metal-free radical enzymes that are
responsible for the synthesis of phytobilin pigment precursors of both classes
of light sensor proteins. Using a variety of biochemical and biophysical
techniques, this research seeks to elucidate FDBR function at the molecular
level via a combination of x-ray crystallography, molecular biology and
biochemical analysis. Such knowledge is needed for development of
activators/inhibitors of FDBRs that can be used to enhance light perception,
growth and development of oxygen-evolving photosynthetic organisms upon which
all life on earth depends. These studies also seek to understand the biological
role of a unique FDBR gene in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, an
oxygenic photosynthetic organism that lacks all known light sensing
biliproteins. Using genetic, genomic and phenotypic analyses of this organism,
several hypotheses for the function of this gene will be assessed. It is
anticipated that such studies will lead to insight into new functions of bilin
metabolism hitherto unrecognized. Since Chlamydomonas retains features common to
plants and animals, this research is expected not only to yield new avenues to
improve crop productivity, but could reveal novel bilin-dependent regulatory
pathways of relevance to human/animal physiology and disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research project will integrate
research and education by training scientists at all levels (postdocs, graduate,
undergraduate and high school students) in the methods of molecular biology,
enzymology, protein chemistry, structural biology, computational biology and
reverse genetics. Undergraduates (including an underrepresented minority
student) will conduct a number of aspects of this research. Additionally, to
broaden participation of underrepresented groups and pto romote teaching, the
labs participate in a number of development and minority-training programs,
including: MURPPS (Minority Undergraduate Research Participation in the Physical
Sciences), SURPRISE (Summer Undergraduate Research Program In Science and
Engineering), BUSP (Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program), and in high school
programs including Young Scholar Program, SEED (Success in Engineering through
Excellence and Diversity Program), and Davis high school advanced biotechnology
class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being supported by the Biomolecular
Systems cluster in MCB and the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry program in CHE.