* 0843617
* Collaborative Research:  Investigations of the plant and bacterial family of LOV-domain flavoproteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Winslow Briggs, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2015
* USD 469,884.00

Intellectual Merit: Plant photoreceptors recognize light signals that detect
light direction, light intensity, light color, and light duration. They use
these signals to regulate almost every phase of plant development from seed
germination through flowering, fruit development, and senescence. There are four
known groups of plant photoreceptors: the phytochromes that can sense red and
near-infrared light, and the cryptochromes, phototropins, and a family of three
photoreceptor relatives of the phototropins, all of which can sense both blue
and near-ultraviolet light. The phototropins are the photoreceptors that direct
plant growth toward a light source (phototropism); adjust the leaf angle to
maximize light capture for photosynthesis; adjust the positions of the small
organelles that carry out photosynthesis (chloroplasts) to spread them out and
minimize self-shading in order to maximize light capture in dim light (or to
move into positions maximizing self-shading to avoid damage caused by too much
light); and to induce the opening of small pores in the leaf surface (called
stomata) to facilitate the uptake of carbon dioxide needed for photosynthesis.
The phototropins contain two sequential segments of amino acids that form a
pocket surrounding a molecule of a riboflavin derivative, a yellow pigment that
is responsible for absorbing blue light. The segments are designated LOV domains
for their similarity to domains that sense light, oxygen, or voltage. On
absorption of blue light, the light-activated pigment alters the shape of the
protein to initiate the steps leading to the eventual biological response - be
it phototropism, leaf positioning, chloroplast movement, or stomatal opening.
This light-absorbing protein pocket (the LOV domain) is also found in important
proteins in lower plants, many different kinds of fungi, and a large number of
bacteria. In the bacterium Brucella, a virulent animal pathogen, light
absorption has been shown to induce a ten-fold increase in bacterial virulence.
This response is mediated by a LOV-domain-containing protein. The present
project has two foci: First, to continue to investigate how the change in shape
of the LOV domain is transmitted into a signal that induces one of the several
biological responses, using biochemical techniques to identify other proteins
which interact with the LOV-domain-containing proteins on light excitation. The
objective is to determine the complete chain of events from light absorption to
response. Second, it will investigate, using biophysical and biochemical
methods, the light responses of the bacterium Rhizobium, essential together with
legumes for nitrogen fixation. Like the brucellosis pathogen, Rhizobium has a
LOV-domain-containing signaling protein that affects its behavior on exposure to
light. The research will investigate the previously un-described role of light
in this agriculturally important bacterium using biophysical and biochemical
methods to trace the steps from light absorption to alteration in the bacterial
behavior. The project aims to elucidate the common mechanism by which a single
small pigment-containing protein pocket can elevate pathogenesis in a bacterium
on the one hand, and the opening of stomatal pores on a leaf on the other when
activated by blue light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Integration of
research and education in the training of post-doctoral fellows and graduate
students and mentoring of undergraduate students (a research thesis is required
at UCSC) and summer interns, both undergraduate and high school is an essential
component of this project. Many of the students are sponsored by minority
programs - MARC (Minority Access to Research Careers), MBRS (NIH Minority
Biomedical Research Support), Summer Community College Students working under
the ACCESS program (ACCESS: Baccalaureate Bridges to the future, part of NIH
Bridges program), and CAMP (California Alliance for Minority Participation).
Winslow Briggs gives interpretive talks to the public at a local state park
based partially on his research. Outreach to high-school students, teachers and
college undergraduates will continue in the form of summer internships. Finally,
it is anticipated that the research itself will ultimately impact both
agriculture and health issues.