* 0843358
* Microbial Structures in Neoproterozoic Cap Carbonates
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Tanja Bosak, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2012
* USD 249,829.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Microbial structures in Neoproterozoic cap carbonates

Tanja Bosak MIT, EAR-0843358

ABSTRACT Life on our planet endured extreme glacial conditions at least twice in
the past billion years starting at ~ 710 and at ~640 million years ago. This
proposal seeks to constrain the survival of microbial life and its interactions
with the environment during the subsequent times of global melting, as recorded
by unusual microbially-produced structures within global limestone deposits that
formed immediately after these two 'Snowball Earth' events. After the first
glaciation, an unknown mechanism folded microbially-bound deep water limestone
sediments to produce cm-sized roll-up structures. After the later global
glaciation, tubestones, 1-3 cm diameter elongated, sub-vertical tubular
structures formed in shallow-water limestone capping the glacial deposits. The
tubestones have been attributed either to the release of methane or carbon
dioxide or to the fast accretion of limestone in the presence of microbes, but
the mechanisms of their formation remain controversial. The formation of roll-
ups and tubestones will be investigated by mapping in geochemically and
stratigraphically well-constrained sections in northern Namibia and by analyzing
the petrography and carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of these structures.
The proposed work will also test a new hypothesis: whether tubestones can be
templated by oxygen-rich blisters formed in oxygenic microbial mats, by growing
modern microbes in the laboratory under conditions relevant for the later
Neoproterozoic post-glacial. The proposed work addresses the questions of how
physical, chemical and microbial processes leave a mark in the rock record and
how they did it during some of the most extreme times in Earth history. A better
understanding of mechanisms that form roll-ups or tubestones will address the
composition of microbial communities, carbon cycling, oxygenation and
sedimentation rates and the environmental chemistry during post-Snowball
deglaciations. This project will provide interdisciplinary training to a
graduate student and at least two female undergraduates. The results of
collaborative efforts between researchers at three different institutions (MIT,
Smith C. and Harvard U.) will be disseminated at an annual symposium.