* 0843904
* A New Biology for the 21st Century, Ensuring that the United States Leads the Coming Biology Revolution
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Ann Reid, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 04/30/2010
* USD 120,000.00

This action partially funds the National Academy of Science to convene a
committee to address the "New Biology for the 21st Century." The project has
also received funding from the National Institutes of Health and the Department
of Energy. It is an appraisal of the current state of life sciences research,
the potential for progress through synthesis and integration, and the resultant
implications for funding strategies, decision-making, infrastructure and
education. The committee includes about 15 members, representing the breadth of
the biological sciences, as well as members with expertise in the physical and
computational sciences and engineering with different institutional
perspectives, including liberal arts colleges, private research foundations,
major research universities and private industry. The committee also draws on
outside experts for additional areas of expertise. The committee plans 5
meetings between November 2008 and August 2009 including a "Biology Summit" on
December 3, 2008 at which senior officials of the major biology research funding
agencies will outline the potential of biology research and the challenges in
reaching that potential. The Summit proceedings are to be published in early
2009 and followed in the fall, 2009 by the committee's report on "how to get
there." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea underlying the project is that biology is
poised for a great synthesis. Biologists are increasingly able to combine their
knowledge of individual biological "parts" into an understanding of the whole
and to understand how living and physical systems are intertwined. Among the
questions the committee is considering are: What fundamental biological
questions are ready for major advances in understanding? What would be the
practical result of answering those questions? How could answers to those
questions lead to high impact applications in the near future? How can federal
agencies more effectively leverage their investments in biological research and
education to address complex problems? In what areas would near term investment
be most likely to lead to substantial long-term benefit and a strong,
competitive advantage for the United States?