* 0843652
* Function of HRBs and interaction of HRB1 with PP7 in blue light-mediated stomatal opening
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Min Ni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2010
* USD 107,860.00

Intellectual Merit: Drought is one of the major environmental factors that limit
crop yield. The stomatal pores of plant leaves, situated in the epidermis and
surrounded by a pair of guard cells, allow CO2 uptake for photosynthesis and the
loss of water through transpiration. Blue light regulates the stomatal aperture
and the signals are perceived by the blue/UV A light-absorbing phototropins and
cryptochromes. The signaling components that link the perception of blue light
to the stomatal opening response are largely unknown, and hypersensitive to red
and blue (hrb) mutants are of particular interest. The hrb mutants were
initially isolated for their short hypocotyl phenotype under red and blue light.
Interestingly, the blue light-induced stomatal opening response is also impaired
in the hrb mutants, and the mutant plants are more resistant to dehydration and
show reduced water loss and stomatal aperture. The strong stomatal phenotype of
the hrb mutants may be due to impairment in both red and blue light signaling
since red light often enhances blue light responses. The HRB1 gene has been
molecularly cloned and encodes a nuclear ZZ-type zinc finger protein. HRB1
physically interacts with phosphatase 7 (or PP7), a nuclear serine/threonine
phosphatase and a positive regulator of blue light signaling, through its ZZ-
type zinc finger domain. The goal of this project is to understand the roles of
HRBs in blue light regulation of stomatal aperture. How HRB1 functions within
the phototropin and cryptochrome signaling pathways and the function of HRB1 in
hrb2 and hrb3 backgrounds will be investigated. How HRB1 and PP7 interact in
vivo and genetically and the nature of their interaction will also be thoroughly
studied.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will provide excellent
opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to
gain significant research experiences, and most importantly, to develop their
ability to critically analyze and solve scientific problems. A diverse group of
undergraduates including African American and Hispanic students have conducted
research in this lab in the past. Six of the 13 undergraduates are minorities
from a campus-wide life science summer undergraduate research program. The
students are recruited throughout the country, spend 10 weeks on the campus,
participate in major research projects and a weekly seminar series, and present
their research results to their peers and mentors at a concluding symposium. In
specific aim I of this project, a specific training plan was outlined for the
undergraduates, ranging from physiological, genetic, to molecular studies. On an
even broader level, this project will open new possibilities to engineering
stomatal activity and help plants to survive desiccation. The stomatal aperture
is also regulated by other environmental cues such as drought in addition to
blue light. Given that hrb plants may still respond to ABA, a well-known drought
signal, these plants should enjoy the advantages of both constitutive and
induced protection under water-limiting conditions.