* 0843102
* Cooperation and Cheating in Bacterial Quorum Sensing
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Martin Schuster, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 02/28/2013
* USD 561,685.00

Scientific research. There has been an explosion of research directed at
understanding the mechanisms of how bacteria communicate and cooperate to
perform a variety of multicellular behaviors. Not until very recently have
microbiologists also begun to investigate these behaviors from the perspective
of social evolution. Dr. Schuster's long-term goal is to integrate mechanistic
and evolutionary approaches to investigate communication, also termed quorum
sensing (QS), and cooperation in the model bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa. P.
aeruginosa communicates via diffusible acyl-homoserine lactone (acyl-HSL)
signals to coordinate the expression of hundreds of genes, many of which encode
extracellular factors. Acyl-HSL QS is a widespread phenomenon in bacteria and
regulates diverse group behaviors such as light production, virulence, and
biofilm formation. The specific objective of this project is to conduct a
comprehensive characterization of novel forms of social behavior. Initially, the
focus will be on the recently discovered signal-blind obligate cheating and re-
evolved cooperation phenomenon that the Schuster group identified during an
experimental evolution study of P. aeruginosa. The obligate cheaters do not
contribute to the production of quorum-controlled public goods because they
harbor a loss-of-function mutation in the gene encoding the central QS
regulator. Such mutants have been isolated from natural environments suggesting
that cheaters arise also in vivo. The re-evolved cooperators emerged from
cheaters are predicted to harbor mutations elsewhere in the genome that restore
QS-dependent phenotypes. Very little is known about the genetic basis of such
transitions from an obligate to an autonomous life style. Candidate mutations in
the genome of a re-evolved cooperator point towards a novel regulatory mechanism
of QS gene expression. The specific aims of this project are to (1) characterize
the mutation(s) and underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for the cheater-
to-cooperator conversion, (2) screen environmental P. aeruginosa isolates for
the presence of social mutations and determine their frequency within the
population, and (3) characterize evolutionary fitness and cooperative behavior
of the cheater-turned-cooperator under social and asocial conditions. This
research is relevant to the evolution of many bacteria that rely on social
traits for evolutionary success, and has important implications for our
understanding of the evolution of cooperative behavior across all domains of
life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational impact. The described project provides
excellent educational opportunities for students. Dr. Schuster has and will
continue to train graduate and undergraduate students in the laboratory. Dr.
Schuster will also provide educational opportunities for high-school students
through an established program at Oregon State University. He has found that the
incorporation of evolutionary concepts in the study of microbiological problems
greatly enhances student curiosity and interest. Most experiments are
conceptually and technically straight-forward and are particularly well suited
for the engagement of high-school and undergraduate students in the scientific
process.