* 0843183
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Psycholinguistic Studies of Prepositions in English and Icelandic
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Cecile McKee, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2012
* USD 21,476.00

This dissertation project compares prepositions in English-speaking and
Icelandic-speaking children and adults. Some prepositions behave like function
words ("to" and "of"), and others more like content words ("in" and "on"). While
young children produce these words, research on natural speech finds the types
differentiated by onset and errors. The general pattern of function elements
missing from children's early sentences, a pattern with intriguing variation
across languages, could reflect limitations either in linguistic representations
or in the processing of those representations. The dissertation experiments
probe both comprehension and production in order to compare these different
accounts. Icelandic uses word endings to indicate the information that English
does with the prepositions under investigation. Developmentally equivalent
learners of English and Icelandic are therefore expected to perform
differently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard models of language production are
well tested by natural and experimental data from normally functioning and
impaired adults. But developmental predictions from these models are rarely
articulated or tested. Likewise, children's earliest utterances are more often
studied with the tools of corpus analysis. Experiments rarely focus on function
elements in speakers who use them inconsistently. This research is thus
methodologically unusual. It also has potential application to impaired
populations. The more detailed our understanding of early language production,
the better we will be able to distinguish normal from non-normal error in such
populations. Finally, the Icelandic component will enhance the partnership
between language acquisition laboratories at the University of Arizona and the
University of Iceland. While in Reykjavik, co-PI Nicholas will contribute to
training faculty and students there who are newly interested in
psycholinguistics. This will broaden the empirical options for Icelandic
linguists who are studying variation in their language.