* 0843428
* Development of Uncertainty Monitoring During the Preschool Years
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Simona Ghetti, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 195,000.00

When performing a cognitive task or answering a question, can young children
tell when they might be wrong? Can they use their subjective assessment of
uncertainty to guide decisions about future behaviors? How do children gain the
ability to introspect on the experience of uncertainty? Answers to these
questions will provide critical insight into basic mechanisms of cognitive
development during the preschool years. To date, a large body of research has
focused on young children's conceptual understanding of knowledge (e.g.,
children's understanding that knowing differs from guessing); however, the study
of uncertainty monitoring (i.e., the ability to perform on-line assessments of
one's own subjective experience of un/certainty in the accuracy of a response)
has been largely neglected. Yet the ability to monitor uncertainty has
significant implications. Children may learn more effectively if they recognize
when they are uncertain about their knowledge and, as a result, they act to
overcome this state of uncertainty (e.g., by asking for clarification,
requesting more information, studying materials more carefully). The proposed
research will examine the emergence and early development of uncertainty
monitoring with three experiments. Experiment 1 will investigate whether
preschoolers can introspect on their uncertainty. To do so, 3-, 4- and 5-year-
olds will be trained to provide confidence judgments on a number of cognitive
tasks. It is expected that even 3-year-olds will show some uncertainty
monitoring ability, as indicated by higher confidence ratings for accurate
compared to inaccurate responses in the task, but improvements in this ability
will be observed throughout the preschool years. Experiment 2 will examine 3-,
4- and 5-year-olds' ability to use their uncertainty to guide their decisions.
Experiment 2a will examine whether children are more likely to ask for
clarification when they are uncertain, compared to when they are certain,
whereas Experiment 2b will examine whether children are more likely to refrain
from responding when they are uncertain compared to when they are certain. It is
expected that even 3-year-olds will show evidence of reliance on uncertainty in
both contexts, but that, with age, children become increasingly attuned and able
to act on their uncertainty states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
evaluate one's sense of certainty about the likely accuracy of one's knowledge
and the ability to act strategically in the face of this evaluation are
essential to learning. Although there is a general consensus that children learn
rapidly from an early age, a dominant view is that young children cannot advance
their learning by reflecting on their own uncertainty states. The proposed
research will provide new insight into early learning and establish whether,
even at young ages, children gain from reflecting on their states of
uncertainty. In addition to providing critical insight into mechanisms of
learning and development, the results of the current research will have
important implications for educational settings and other contexts where
children's awareness of the degree to which they know or do not know something
is critical (e.g., legal settings). Findings from the proposed research may
promote the development of age-specific procedures that enhance young children's
ability to report on their current states of knowledge.