* 0843746
* Kinetic Mechanisms of ClpA Catalyzed Polypeptide Translocation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Aaron Lucius, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2012
* USD 545,997.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this research is to determine the mechanism of polypeptide
translocation catalyzed by the hexameric E. coli ClpA motor protein. Motor
proteins are essential enzymes for a variety of cellular processes that require
mechanical work. Therefore, an understanding of the mechanism of how such
enzymes couple the energy from ATP hydrolysis to movement along a linear track
is essential to our basic understanding of cell function. Of fundamental
interest in examining how such motor proteins operate is determining how far the
motor travels on its track per step (step-size), how much energy is used per
step (ATP coupling efficiency), how fast does it take this step (overall rate
and microscopic rate-constants), and what is the probability that the motor will
remain on its track vs. dissociate (processivity). Despite the fundamental
importance of these proteins in the life cycle of a cell, these parameters that
describe the mechanism of polypeptide translocation are not known for a protein
unfoldase such as ClpA. Determination of the mechanism of protein translocation
catalyzed by the E. coli ClpA protein unfoldase will be accomplished by
employing rapid mixing kinetic approaches. Using these approaches, this research
will yield measurements of the step-size, coupling efficiency, processivity, and
overall rates for protein translocation. To aid in the interpretation of these
parameters the ClpA self association and nucleotide driven association process
will be examined using thermodynamic and hydrodynamic techniques.

Broader Impacts This research will advance knowledge across different fields by
enabling others to begin examining a variety of polypeptide translocases
involved in such important cellular processes as ATP dependent proteolysis,
refolding of protein aggregates, and protein translocation across membranes.
This research presents opportunities for discovery by offering a vehicle for
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral research assistants from diverse
backgrounds to apply an array of biophysical approaches and molecular biology
techniques. This training occurs in the research lab and has translated into the
classroom. The principal investigator is strongly committed to broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and the broader research
community. This is being accomplished by actively seeking minority graduate
students at universities and colleges across Alabama and Mississippi, including
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Additionally, the principal
investigator is a member of the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and
Native Americans in Science (SACNAS). As such, the principal investigator and
members of the research group will be attending the SACNAS annual national
meeting in an attempt to recruit undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
candidates from underrepresented groups. This research will enhance the
infrastructure by maintaining established collaborations both within the
Department of Chemistry as well as across University of Alabama at Birmingham
campus. An additional benefit of this project to society is that it has the
potential to yield individuals highly trained in the application of an array of
biophysical and molecular biology techniques. This has the potential to globally
impact science and technology because students trained in these techniques will
be well sought after by both academia and industry worldwide.