* 0843229
* The REDfly Database of Transcriptional Regulatory Elements
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Marc Halfon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 12/31/2012
* USD 524,049.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The State University of New York at
Buffalo has received a grant to create a database and software tools to
facilitate the study of gene regulation, through transcriptional cis-regulatory
modules (CRMs). CRMs are a major class of genomic sequence elements required for
the temporal and spatial control of gene expression. CRMs play critical roles
with respect to normal phenotypic variation, birth defects, chronic diseases,
and evolution. Despite this clear importance of CRMs for many areas of biology,
our knowledge of these sequences is surprisingly limited. CRMs are vastly
underrepresented in current genome annotations, in part because most CRMs are
uncharacterized, but also because there has been little effort to curate the
literature for known CRMs or to develop appropriate databases to house CRM
information. This project, by producing a well-annotated collection of known
CRMs, will be of significant use in a number of important areas, including
studies of transcriptional regulation, of the evolution of CRMs and new gene
functions, and of genome structure. The project also provides training data for
computational approaches to CRM discovery, leading to improved methods for
identifying uncharacterized CRMs. The project has constructed the first database
of known CRMs for any animal, the REDfly (Regulatory Element Database for Fly)
database of regulatory elements for the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.
Funding under this award is allowing for the continued development and expansion
of REDfly into a fully comprehensive resource for Drosophila and for its
extension to regulatory elements from vertebrate model organisms, including the
zebrafish and mouse. Analysis of the REDfly data will lead to the discovery of
new important features of CRMs and to the generation of exciting new hypotheses
about gene regulation that are being tested experimentally in the laboratory.
REDfly also serves as a useful resource for education and training in genomics,
gene regulation, and genome annotation at the graduate, undergraduate, and
secondary school levels through a variety of courses, workshops, and informal
training activities. These activities create in REDfly a comprehensive
repository for cis-regulatory sequence and expression pattern data for three
major metazoan model organisms, making REDfly the most powerful available
resource for large-scale studies of the composition, organization, and evolution
of transcriptional cis-regulatory elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REDfly
database can be found at http://redfly.ccr.buffalo.edu.