* 0843590
* Developmental mechanisms of evolution:   loss of reproductive structures in birds
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Martin Cohn, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2013
* USD 588,160.00

The genetic mechanisms that regulate development of the genitourinary system
(reproductive and urologic organs) are among the least understood in
developmental biology. Paradoxically, birth defects of the external genitalia
are among the most frequently occurring malformations in humans, ranking second
only to heart defects. Some of the most common genital malformations in humans
-- such as an open urethral tube and a persistant cloaca (a single outlet for
urinary and digestive tracts) -- resemble the natural variation seen across
vertebrates. Thus, identification of the mechanisms that direct genitourinary
development in non-mammalian vertebrates will have implications for our
understanding of abnormal genitourinary development in humans. Moreover,
comparative developmental studies will identify the genetic mechanisms that
drive evolutionary change. This project investigates the developmental basis of
external genital evolution in birds, a group that exhibits a broad spectrum of
anatomical patterns that range from an almost mammal-like phallus to complete
absence of external genitalia. The approach will combine molecular, cellular,
and experimental embryological methods to determine the extent to which the
genetic circuits that regulate genital development are conserved between birds
and mammals. It is expected that the genetic program that directs genital
development in mammals also operates in the most primitive birds, which would
point to a surprisingly deep origin of a character that had been thought to be
exclusive to mammals. In addition, it is predicted that in a specific group of
birds (known as the galliformes), failure to form external genitalia results
from disruption of an ancient cell survival mechanism, and excessive cell death
causes a developmental arrest. Comparative studies using non-traditional model
systems, such as birds and reptiles, are needed to develop new models for
disease, and this project will contribute this infrastructure to the research
community. Identification of new avian (bird) embryo models is especially
important given the prohibitive cost of rodent models for many researchers at
small colleges and in countries with limited resources. The impacts of the
proposed activities extend beyond scientific discovery. By identifying actual
mechanisms of evolutionary change, this research will contribute to society's
understanding of how evolution works, which will improve our national literacy
in evolution. The project dovetails with educational outreach activities
involving students from elementary school to undergraduates, and contains
specific action items to increase participation of women and other groups
underrepresented in science.