* 0843656
* Structure and Function of Holliday Junctions complexed With Proteins Probed by Fluorescence and UV Raman Spectroscopic Methods
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Ishita Mukerji, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2015
* USD 816,749.00

This project studies a central intermediate in the important cellular processes
of DNA recombination and repair, which rely on the exchange of homologous DNA
strands through a four-stranded structure or Holliday junction. Both DNA repair
and recombination are vital functions of the cell, which are needed for cell
proliferation and maintaining a stable and active genome. Errors in these
processes can lead to the growth of tumors and a reduced life span. Protein- and
ion-binding leads to a change in junction structure. This study specifically
examines how proteins that are known to be involved in repair and recombination
and are known to bind to junctions alter these structures. In particular, the
ability of these proteins to either facilitate or suppress the exchanging of
strands is addressed by studying the structures of the protein-DNA complexes.
Two different methods are used to study the interactions: fluorescence
spectroscopy and a laser technique, UV resonance Raman spectroscopy. Using the
fluorescence method, the structure of the junction and the protein-binding sites
are examined and compared. The Raman technique, which examines molecular
vibrations, is used to probe the binding site of the ions. By elucidating the
nature of these protein-junction complexes and whether they facilitate strand
exchange, these studies address the overall mechanism of how DNA recombination
occurs in the cell and the overall function of these proteins. This work studies
these processes at a basic level and provides a better understanding of the
mechanisms of DNA repair and recombination and specifically, the role of these
proteins in maintaining a stable genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
that stem from the project are multifold. Teaching and training of undergraduate
and graduate students is one of the main impacts of this work. The PI's academic
institution is committed to fostering an environment that promotes the
integration of research and education at all levels, including the classroom.
Several of the courses taught by the PI draw directly from research in her
laboratory. The PI actively works to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in science through her activities as chair of the
Minority Affairs Committee of the Biophysical Society. These activities include
but are not limited to participation in diversity workshops, guest lecturer in a
summer mini-course in Biophysics geared towards underrepresented students and
acting as a poster judge at conferences for minority students. In addition, the
PI is committed to the advancement of women in science and participates in
leadership and mentoring activities at the local and national level. The PI also
participates in outreach activities such as 'Minds in Motion' at the K-12 level.
The majority of these outreach activities are particularly geared towards groups
that are traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.