* 0843653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Perceptual and Production (Re)Training of Allophones and Phonemes in L2 Spanish
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Allard Jongman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2012
* USD 10,880.00

When native speakers of American English begin learning Spanish, their
acquisition of native-like pronunciation can be hampered by the tap versus trill
distinction in words like CARO 'expensive' and CARRO 'car'. The trill proves
difficult because it does not exist in English. The tap exists as an allophone
of /t/ and /d/ in English words like 'writer' and 'rider', but English speakers
must learn to process it as a phoneme rather than an allophone. Similarly,
learners have difficulty acquiring the spirantization of voiced stops, where the
/d/ in CODO 'elbow' is produced as a voiced dental fricative, which is more like
the 'th' sound in English.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates whether
American English-speaking learners of Spanish can be trained to perceive and
produce the intervocalic tap, trill, /t/, and /d/ contrasts in Spanish.
Participants will be trained using both perceptual and production training
methods. Past research has reported that perceptual training alone improves both
perception and production and that production training alone improves both as
well, but the production training studies have not been limited to production as
trainees have been able to listen to the training stimuli.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both training modalities will be systematically controlled
in this study so that they can be directly compared. A third training
methodology will be introduced that includes both perception and production to
discover whether perceptual training, production training, or a combination of
the two is most effective. This study will use cross-modal priming and ERP data
in addition to traditional tasks (identification and production tasks) to
evaluate the effect of training, an innovative use of both tasks to determine if
trainees not only perceive and produce the trained L2 contrasts but also if they
unconsciously process these contrasts and if they have built new phonemic
categories for these sounds.