* 0843161
* Workshop and Principal Investigator meeting for Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles: Recent Progress and Future Directions
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2011
* Jonathan Cole, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 10/31/2011
* USD 185,953.00

This award supports a symposium to advance the science of biogeochemical cycles.
It will bring together ~70 individuals, including a diverse group of students
with young and more established scientists, to share recent research results and
perspectives in biogeochemistry. The symposium will be held in conjunction with
the annual meeting of the Ecological Society of America (Albuquerque, New
Mexico, August, 2009), which will allow many other environmental scientists and
students to participate. The symposium, and plans for an open access publication
and online presentations to disseminate the results, will promote the
interdisciplinary nature of biochemistry. Four scientific themes provide an
exciting conceptual organization: the evolution of biogeochemical cycles
throughout earth history; biogeochemical cycles as couplers of atmosphere,
geosphere and biosphere; the significance of humans as drivers of biogeochemical
cycles; and the dynamic feedbacks between global biogeochemical cycles and
climate change. The symposium will explore recent scientific advances in each of
these areas, and illustrate how biogeochemical cycles serve as feedback
mechanisms linking climate change with coupled human-natural systems. Invited
speakers and other contributing participants include a diverse representation of
aquatic, marine, terrestrial, and atmospheric expertise.