* 0843725
* Collaborative Research: An Earthscope Magnetotelluric Survey of the Southern Cascadia Subduction System, Washington
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 375,047.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pacific Northwest, and Washington
State in particular, are characterized by a subduction zone environment called
the Cascadia subduction system. The Cascadia subduction system is an area of the
Earth where the seafloor is colliding with, and is being pushed below the
overriding crust of the North American continent. The recycling of the seafloor
beneath the continent is a complex process: the collision and descent of the
seafloor can cause major earthquakes, slow slip and tremor, and volcanic
eruptions such as that seen at Mount St Helens and Mount Redoubt. In order to
understand these potentially devastating processes, the internal structure of
the Earth needs to be imaged at the point where earthquakes, fluid release and
melting are triggered, to depths of up to 200 kilometers beneath the surface.
Seismic techniques for looking into the Earth's interior are familiar to most
people, and they have been used in the Pacific Northwest as part of the USA wide
Earthscope program. However, other methods of imaging the Earth, such as the
magnetotelluric (MT) method, can provide information regarding the thermal
structure of the Earth and can pinpoint areas containing deep released fluids
and molten rock. MT uses naturally occurring electric currents generated by
lightning activity and by solar wind-ionospheric interactions, to estimate
Earth's electrical conductivity. Conductivity in turn depends partly on
composition and temperature, but it can be dramatically increased by small
amounts of fluid or melt provided that they form an interconnected network. The
EarthScope program has also established an array of MT stations over the U.S.
Cascadia subduction system, but the existing coverage lacks the spatial
resolution to address some of the key issues related to the dynamics of the
subduction zone. To rectify this situation, scientists from the University of
Utah and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute are collecting a dense profile of MT
stations across west-central Washington State coincident with a previously
recorded seismic profile, to rectify this situation. The co-located seismic data
will allow the development of techniques for jointly interpreting the two
complementary techniques and will provide insights into the understanding of the
evolution of the Cascadia subduction system. Societal benefits associated with
this research include applications to understanding of processes that contribute
to seismic and volcanic hazards associated with the Cascadia subduction system,
contributions to research infrastructure, and training of graduate students.