* 0843073
* Transcriptional Regulation During Oxidative Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Laurie Stargell, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2014
* USD 507,579.00

Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project directly addresses the fundamental
biological question as to how genes are turned on and off in response to an
environmental stimulus. Yeast is used as the model system and the response to
oxidative stress as the stimulus. The yeast system allows for the identification
and characterization of important players in living cells (in vivo), followed by
expansion and refinement of these studies at the mechanistic level (in vitro).
This multidisciplinary approach involving genetic, molecular, and biochemical
techniques provides research opportunities for students at various skill levels.
In addition, the oxidative stress response is a critical physiological response
that is extremely important to cell survival in an oxygen-rich environment.
Indeed, oxidative stress is also highly relevant to the human condition because
it plays fundamental roles in aging, neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer.
With the goal of understanding transcriptional themes in response to oxidative
stress, this project explores two main areas: the role of regulatory factors in
the response to oxidative stress and the mechanism(s) by which a single
activator can differentially regulate a wide array of genes. Taken together,
these combined studies will advance the understanding of the transcriptional
response to oxidative stress, and will add to the current knowledge of the ways
in which genes are turned on and off in response to an environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the intellectual merit, the project
will have broad impact in at least four ways. First, many aspects of these
studies will provide suitable projects for undergraduate trainees, who may have
time constraints as well as limited laboratory experience. Second, studies with
higher technical and time demands will provide outstanding cross-training
experiences for graduate students in a number of different disciplines
(biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology). It is important to note that a
majority of these techniques are versatile. Trainees could certainly utilize
these techniques to investigate other critical genetic mechanisms (DNA repair,
replication, recombination, RNA metabolism, epigentics, etc.) in their future
careers. Third, to propagate the tradition of outreach, both undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in taking gene expression studies into
elementary school classrooms. Fourth, results from this project will be
published in broad based scientific journals, and presented at local and
international meetings. Taken together, this project directly supports the
mission of the NSF to advance discovery and understanding, while promoting
teaching, training and learning.