* 0843399
* Structure, Function and Evolution of the TelomeraseRNA Subunit in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Dorothy Shippen, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2012
* USD 558,250.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; The overall goal of this project is to characterize
the structure, function and interactions of the telomerase RNA (TER) subunit in
Arabidopsis. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein reverse transcriptase that uses
TER as a template to direct the synthesis of telomeric DNA onto chromosome ends.
Preliminary data unexpectedly revealed that Arabidopsis, unlike all other model
organisms, has two TER subunits, TER1G7 and TER5G2. The RNAs display different
levels of expression, in vitro biochemical properties and protein binding
partners. Because maintenance of telomere tracts is essential to sustain genome
integrity and to promote cell proliferation in all eukaryotes, elucidating the
functions and interactions of the two Arabidopsis TERs is likely to provide new
insight into telomerase regulation and evolution. For Objective 1, genetic and
transgenic approaches are proposed to examine the functions of TER1G7 and TER5G2
in vivo. The relative contributions of the two RNAs in telomere maintenance will
be studied as well as the effect of altering the ratio of the two RNAs.
Objective 2 is to study TER1G7 and TER5G2 interactions with TERT by
reconstituting active RNP particles in vitro. These studies will investigate the
dimerization state of the RNP and its relationship to enzyme activity. In vivo
experiments are also proposed to study RNP composition and oligomerization in
Arabidopsis organs with different levels of telomerase activity. This work will
address fundamental aspects of telomerase function and regulation in plants, and
may also shed light on the physiological advantages of duplicating and
diversifying a key component of the telomerase
enzyme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Study&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is that it will provide
new insight into the structure, function and evolution of TER, a core component
of the telomerase holoenzyme. The novel aspect of this work is that it couples
the genetic tractability of Arabidopsis with in vitro biochemistry to explore
the function and dynamic interactions of two TER subunits. The results may not
only reveal underlying mechanisms contributing to the dramatic differences in
telomerase RNP biogenesis and composition observed in single-celled organisms
and in metazoa, but also may uncover new modes of telomerase enzyme
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The multi-
disciplinary nature of this work provides participants with expertise in cutting
edge RNA and protein biochemistry, plant biology and genetics. The studies to be
performed employ new tools to investigate telomerase RNA gene duplication and
diversification. In particular, since molecular evolution approaches have not
been applied to the study of telomeres in any model system, the potential impact
of this work on the field is high. Over the past 16 years, the principal
investigator has trained a large number of postdoctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate students. She has given numerous lectures for high school students
and teachers, and undergraduate and graduate student organizations, including
the 2003 Texas A&amp;M University Women in Science and Engineering Ethel
Ashworth-Tsutsui Memorial Lecture. The principal investigator has a long-
standing interest in laboratory management and in 2009 will be an integral
participant in an inaugural "best practices in laboratory leadership" workshop
to take place in the Texas A&amp;M Mays Business School. In 2002 the principal
investigator was an Instructor for the Burroughs Wellcome Fund/Howard Hughes
Medical Institute Laboratory Management Course, and in 2005 she presented a
lecture entitled "Leading a Laboratory" for the Women in Science organization at
the Annual Meeting for the Society for Free Radical Biology and Medicine in
Austin, Texas.