* 0843728
* Contribution of Dynamic Processes to RNA-Protein Complex Formation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Anne Baranger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2013
* USD 453,458.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the complex role of
dynamics in the association of RRM-RNA complexes will be investigated. The RNA
recognition motif (RRM) is a ubiquitous RNA binding protein that is found in all
organisms and is involved in all steps of gene expression. Thus, an
understanding of RRM-RNA binding is fundamental to a complete description of
gene expression. Conformational changes of both protein and RNA upon binding are
a general phenomenon in RNA-protein recognition, including RNA-RRM recognition.
The specific goals of this project are to develop a general approach for
investigating dynamic processes in RRM-RNA complexes using time-resolved
fluorescence methods supported by molecular dynamics simulations. This approach
will then be used to investigate more complex biological systems involving RRMs.
An essential component of the proposed studies is the investigation of the
dynamics of a series of modified proteins and RNA targets in two different RRM
proteins in order to determine the contribution of protein and RNA sequence to
dynamic processes involved in binding and identify general principles of RRM-RNA
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will have
broader impacts in the education of three types of students: research students,
chemistry students in Vietnam, and high school chemistry teachers. First, the
graduate and undergraduate students directly involved in the proposed work will
benefit greatly from the interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of the
project. The impact of the proposed research will extend beyond these students,
as it will be part of a larger comprehensive research program in the laboratory
and also will contribute positively to students' education in the collaborating
laboratories. Second, the PI will be involved in a project with Hanoi University
in Vietnam. This program involves visiting professors from Vietnam attending
classes taught by the PI at the University of Illinois, travel of the PI to
Vietnam to teach organic chemistry, and Vietnamese students working in the PI's
laboratory during summers. Third, the PI is participating in an NSF-funded Math
and Science Partnership project entitled "Institute for Chemistry Literacy
through Computational Science". This program creates a partnership between
Illinois faculty and rural high school teachers to broadly improve teachers' and
students' understanding of chemistry across the state of Illinois. The PI
teaches in a 2-week Summer Institute, where the high school teachers participate
in full-day workshops. The PI is involved weekly in serving as a mentor to a
group of 7 high school teachers using a bulletin board-type communication
system.