* 0843935
* Environmental sorting of vertebrate faunas:  Is guild-level locomotor and dietary ecomorphology an indicator of paleoenvironment?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* P. David Polly, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 04/30/2014
* USD 234,973.00

Environmental sorting of vertebrate faunas: &lt;br/&gt;Is guild-level locomotor
and dietary ecomorphology an indicator of paleoenvironment?&lt;br/&gt;P. David
Polly&lt;br/&gt; How do communities and species respond to environmental change?
This question is important to conservation ecologists, biologists and
paleontologists because the answers help understand what principles influence
which species are found together in a community, how those species and their
community will respond to changing climates and environments, and how we can
better determine past climates and environments from assemblages of fossils in
the geological record. &lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on how climatic and
environmental parameters in North America are associated with the average
locomotion and diet in terrestrial carnivores from two major biological groups,
the mammalian Carnivora and snakes, each of which have their individual
physiological and locomotor specializations, but both of which function
ecologically as high-trophic level carnivores in the same communities. The
project will study how two properties of the species coexisting in communities ?
locomotion and diet ? are associated with climate and environment on a
continental scale. We expect that species within a community will each be
specialized for their own niches, but at the same time we expect that the large-
scale climate and environment in a local area will restrict the range of
differentiation that is possible within a community (all species living in an
arctic tundra community, for example, must share specializations that allow them
to live in that environment). Our goal is to determine the extent to which
climate and environment are associated with the geographic distribution of
locomotor and dietary specializations to assess the possibility of inferring
past local terrestrial climates and environment from fossil communities using
these systems.&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is quantitative and geographically
comprehensive. From museum collections, we will take measurements of limbs,
bodies, and dentitions of carnivorans and snakes from across North America, with
the goal of obtaining a sample of 20 or more individuals for every North
American species in these two groups and of obtaining samples of 10 or more
across the entire geographic range of selected widespread species. We will also
measure limbs and dentitions from Pleistocene carnivorans in order to apply our
results to late Quaternary paleoenvironment reconstruction. These measurements
will be assembled using Geographic Information System (GIS) methods to map the
community-level patterns in locomotion and diet across the whole of North
America to study how they are associated with climatic parameters and we will
reconstruct Pleistocene climate and environment from this association and test
that reconstruction against climate models based on other lines of evidence.
&lt;br/&gt;