* 0843611
* Origins and Evolution of tRNA Synthetase Fidelity Modules
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Susan Martinis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

In every living organism, proteins are faithfully synthesized with high
fidelity. A family of enzymes, called the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, is
responsible for the first step of protein synthesis. In this step specific amino
acids are attached to their cognate tRNAs. Some of these enzymes are prone to
mistakes (attaching the wrong amino acid to the tRNA) and as a consequence, have
developed proofreading and editing mechanisms to reduce mistakes and ensure high
fidelity. A high level of accuracy is critical to the proper functioning and
viability of each cell. This project will investigate unusual examples of the
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, which appear to have compromised proofreading and
editing mechanisms. One case exists in an ancient archae called Sulfolobus that
thrives at high temperatures under acidic conditions typical of hot springs. A
different paradigm exists in Mycoplasma, an organism that has undergone genome
reduction. This reduced genome has selectively sacrificed the fidelity modules
in one of these synthetase enzymes. It is possible that the fidelity mechanisms
in these organisms have been compromised in order to provide an innovative
pathway to confer a selective advantage. Alternatively, these enzymes might have
adapted to rely on novel fidelity mechanisms. The goals of this project have
potential to shift existing paradigms about the evolution and fidelity of
protein synthesis as well as the maintenance of the genetic code. The project
may uncover novel biological mechanisms for cell adaptation and natural
selection.

Broader Impacts: This project is committed to enhancing scientific literacy of
the public via outreach efforts to young children in pre-school and elementary
school classrooms. An academic module with an experimental component will
introduce students to microbiology and the three kingdoms of life. This module
is designed to educate young children in fundamental biology concepts and is
expected to broadly impact and stimulate their interest in science. Graduate
student training and mentoring will be integrated throughout the research and
education plan to enhance professional and scientific development as well as to
provide role models to young children as well as undergraduate researchers.