* 0843678
* Transcriptional Analysis of the Deep-Sea Vent Epsilonproteobacterium, Caminibacter Mediatlanticus, in Response to Different Growth Conditions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Costantino Vetriani, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2013
* USD 381,321.00

Intellectual merit. The focus of this project on energy metabolism and quorum
sensing in Caminibacter mediatlanticus is particularly important as this
dominant deep-sea vent bacterium occupies the bottom of the chemosynthesis-based
food chain. This study is the first to collect physiologically relevant data
about primary producers at these sites, which will provide major insights on
microbial gene regulation and expression in response to changing conditions in
the environment. Building on information gained from the genome sequence of this
organism, this project will combine physiological experiments, carried out using
batch, continuous cultures, and in-situ incubations, with the quantification of
the expression of specific genes (by qRT-PCR). The significance of the proposed
study rests in the fact that gene expression in C. mediatlanticus will be
investigated under growth conditions that reflect, in terms of concentrations of
nutrients, those actually encountered by this organism in its natural
environment. Such genome-enabled studies are critical to acquire fundamental
information on gene expression in organisms that are ecologically relevant in
their natural habitat, and to bridge the gap between laboratory-based
investigations of pure cultures and environmental studies of natural microbial
communities. The biotechnological uses of these organisms are likely to have
significant impact across many fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact.
This project will offer training opportunities to one graduate student. Several
undergraduate students as well as high school students are also involved in the
project. A collaboration with the Mid-Atlantic Center for Ocean Science
Education Excellence (COSEE) will help to translate the research for K-12 and
public audiences. Furthermore, the Deep-Sea Microbiology Lab website, featured
by the National Science Digital Library Scout Report for the Life Sciences, will
ensure the rapid and wide dissemination of the results from this
research.&lt;br/&gt;