* 0843897
* Preattentive Visual Sensitivity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Chubb, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 08/31/2013
* USD 419,781.00

People have an extraordinary ability to almost instantly characterize objects by
their lightness and color. People have a corresponding ability to characterize
surfaces and objects by their visual texture properties. In their NSF-funded
research project, Charles Chubb and George Sperling at UC Irvine will use new
experimental paradigms and new analytic methods (involving perturbation methods
and dimensional analysis) to characterize humans' ability to perceive textures.
These procedures have already enabled the investigators to isolate previously
unknown texture-perception mechanisms. The current project now applies these
procedures to the formal systematic description and characterization of the vast
range of human texture-perception mechanisms with the goal of compiling a Table
of the Elementary Dimensions of Visual Sensitivity, somewhat analogous to the
Periodic Table of Elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the elementary
visual mechanisms that enable humans to accurately perceive their visual
environment is of fundamental importance and ultimately is likely to have many
useful applications. For example, the analysis of visual textures is carried out
in the brain, so understanding these visual processes will enable a better
characterization of brain injuries that interfere with these (previously
unmeasured) processes. Knowing both the range and the limits of human perceptual
processes will yield better understanding of what humans can and cannot perceive
in images, such as medical X-rays, military camouflage, and computer displays.
Indeed, simulating such human sensory abilities has been a critical element in
the construction of successful robotic sensing systems.