* 0843603
* Are Enzyme Active Sites Built in Multiple Layers?
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 428,428.00

The objective of this project is to obtain greater insight into how nature
constructs enzyme active sites. The project aims to establish the principle of
multilayer enzyme active sites and to gain understanding of how residues outside
the first layer influence the catalytic activity and specificity. This
understanding will have important implications for enzymology and for protein
engineering. Experiments and calculations are designed to understand how the
layers beyond the first one contribute to catalysis. In recent decades,
structural and biochemical studies have identified residues in active sites of
enzymes that directly participate in substrate binding and/or in the chemical
transformation steps. These residues generally are in direct contact with the
reacting substrate molecule and may be thought of as located in a "first shell"
surrounding the reacting species. This project builds upon preliminary evidence
that residues beyond the first shell also are important for catalytic function.
The focus here is primarily on the second layer, the residues in contact with
the first-shell residues. Systematic experimental studies to establish the
importance of second-shell residues in enzyme catalysis, and computational
studies to understand the varied roles that they play in enzymatic function will
be pursued. In this project, site-directed mutagenesis experiments and kinetics
assays will be performed on selected enzymes. These proteins will be chosen to
represent different kinds of enzymes with different degrees of predicted
participation by residues outside the first shell. Crystal structures of the
mutants will be determined to test for structural changes upon mutation.
Electrostatics calculations and molecular dynamics simulations will be performed
to understand the mechanisms by which second-shell residues participate in
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of how enzymes affect
catalysis can help to produce cleaner, lower cost, "green" industrial processes
and to the commercially viable enzymatic synthesis of biofuels. Students will be
trained in computational methods, in protein expression, mutation, purification,
kinetics assays, and crystal structure determination. Part of the project will
be integrated into the undergraduate Chemical Biology laboratory course. Ongoing
outreach efforts to minority students, particularly Native Americans, include
LSAMP student participation in this research project and a hands-on computer lab
demonstration to middle school students. A tracking system will be put into
place to follow the careers of research group alumni and will attempt to
quantify the impact of undergraduate research upon the future careers of
bachelor's degree students.