* 0843440
* Collaborative Research:   Multisensory guidance of marine animal navigation and prey capture
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Jelle Atema, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 03/31/2014
* USD 307,875.00

Understanding how animals navigate under water is not only fascinating in its
own right, it also contributes to instrumentation designs of underwater
vehicles, robots and surface vessels, impacts management of fisheries, and helps
protect the marine environment. Sharks have been chosen to demonstrate how they
navigate. While they can not detect a drop of blood a mile away, as often
stated, sharks do have impressive prey tracking capabilities. Sharks are
important in fisheries worldwide and have been severely depleted in recent
decades, often taken as unwanted by-catch in other fisheries. Yet, they are
essential top predators needed to maintaining a healthy ecosystem. This research
project will show how sharks use all their senses in hunting behavior, starting
with initial prey detection, through tracking and locating, and ending with
striking their prey. For more complete understanding, we compare a few shark
species that appear to use their senses differently mostly because they
specialize in different prey in different habitats. A team of experts in sensory
and shark biology, using unique testing facilities in Massachusetts and Florida,
has been assembled including graduate students being trained in the many
technical approaches needed for work on live sharks. The research directly
involves undergraduate and high school students and provides extensive outreach
to other students of all ages and to the public in general. The accumulated
knowledge should lead to a model of shark navigation and predation that can be
used for the conservation of sharks, protection of humans, and the engineering
design of underwater steering algorithms. The inevitable presentation of this
research in future television programs and video documentaries will disseminate
new knowledge to the public at large, both of sharks and of rigorous science.