* 0843866
* From Number Cognition to Number Grammar
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* J. Kathryn Bock, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2013
* USD 469,810.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation
support, Dr. Kathryn Bock will conduct three years of psycholinguistic research
on the cognitive processes involved in producing number agreement in spontaneous
speech. The project will investigate whether and how the number-perception
abilities that are present in early infancy serve basic functions in adult
language use. Contemporary views of the relationship between number and language
emphasize the effect that language has on number knowledge. The current project
emphasizes, instead, the effect that number knowledge has on shaping language.
The goal is to explain how speakers tacitly identify the perceptual and
conceptual precursors of linguistic number and how number information is used
under the normal time pressures associated with speaking. The pressures stem
from typical speech rates of more than two words per second and from structural
demands for number information that occur every five seconds or so in running
speech. The research will compare different accounts of how number perception
and conception come to influence language use, particularly whether the
influence arises during the choice of words, during the creation of sentence
structures, or both. The research methods call on laboratory tasks that measure
the accuracy, timing, locus of attention, and memory resources associated with
the production of number agreement between verbs and their subjects and between
pronouns and their antecedents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work unites two
cornerstones of human intelligence, the ability to count and the ability to
communicate. These abilities converge in the role that number plays in human
language, especially in grammatical number agreement. Far from being a
grammatical detail, agreement is a powerful vehicle behind the linguistic
expression of complex ideas. The research is designed to explore a previously
unidentified link between an evolutionarily primitive number sense and an
apparent universal feature of language. The primitive number sense is found in
humans and many other species, and is observable in very young infants before
the onset of language acquisition. The sense allows immediate and precise
individuation of objects up to a numerosity of three. Coincidentally, or not,
grammatical number systems (e.g., number agreement between subjects and verbs in
English) are limited to threesomes. There are languages with systematic,
distinctive agreement markers for one thing, two things, and three things, but
none that demand agreement for exactly four things. Two mysteries surround this
regularity. The first is why the limitation exists, and the second is why number
agreement is so common in the languages of the world. The aim is to find answers
to both of these questions. Such answers can serve in turn to support the
understanding of specific language disorders in children and language
disabilities in adults, the development of effective methods for second-language
learning, and the creation of workable systems for human-computer interaction.