* 0843631
* Collaborative Research: Chromium isotopes as redox indicators-  Oxidation and isotopic equilibration experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Thomas Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2012
* USD 162,982.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Chromium in its hexavalent form, Cr(VI), is mobile and toxic
in the environment. Reduction of Cr(VI) to the trivalent form, Cr(III), is a
very important process as it renders Cr immobile and less toxic. Reduction
induces stable isotope fractionation, and the PIs have led an effort to develop
53Cr/52Cr isotope ratio measurements as a new and much needed reduction
indicator. This approach is quicker and less complicated than the traditional
mass balance approach, and it appears to work as expected. Application of Cr
stable isotopes is expanding beyond contaminant geochemistry to studies
exploring biogeochemical cycling of Cr and attempting to constrain past and
present marine redox reactions and conditions. However, whereas Cr isotope
fractionation caused by Cr(VI) reduction has been studied in some detail,
fractionation caused by oxidation of Cr(III) to Cr(VI) and by Cr(III)-Cr(VI)
exchange reactions is poorly understood and must be explored to enable accurate
interpretation of Cr isotope data. Preliminary experiments with MnO2-induced
Cr(III) oxidation have revealed that the reaction product is variably enriched
(up to 1.1o/oo) in the heavier isotope. This cannot be a simple kinetic isotope
effect, which would produce an opposite shift. The observed isotopic
fractionation must be the composite effect of a multi-step redox reaction.
Considerable variation as a function of pH, solution chemistry, and Mn oxide
chemistry is expected, as these variables can affect the relative rates of the
reaction steps. This project will explore a range of these variables to develop
a systematic understanding of Cr isotopic fractionation during Cr(III)
oxidation, and to determine fractionation factors relevant to natural
conditions. Previous studies of isotopic exchange between Cr(III) and Cr(VI)
indicate that the process is slow, but the two species can coexist in aquifers
for many years. It is not clear if the rate is slow enough that the extent of
Cr(VI) reduction can be determined from Cr isotope data using Rayleigh
distillation models, which assume no exchange. This project includes highly
sensitive experiments needed to detect and quantify slow exchange over workable
reaction durations (less than several months). This project will measure
exchange rates, and also determine the isotopic fractionation factor for
Cr(III)-Cr(VI) equilibrium. Development of the Cr isotope approach to detecting
reduction will have impacts beyond academia; this new technique is already in
demand for Cr(VI) contaminant studies by environmental consultants. Use of Cr
isotopes in a wider array of geoscience studies has just begun, but we expect
important applications in oceanography, earth history (e.g., the history of
earth redox changes), and earth surface process studies (e.g., the role of shale
weathering in carbon cycle studies) as the understanding of Cr isotope
systematics becomes more complete. The project will synergistically benefit both
institutions, as it will bring students from an underrepresented group to the
Illinois campus to increase its diversity, while providing those students access
to a smoothly functioning mass spectrometry facility with a cadre of students
working on the same techniques. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;