* 0843312
* Probing the Metabolic and Physiological Significance of Sphingolipid Long-Chain Base Desaturation in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Edgar Cahoon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2013
* USD 550,500.00

Scientific Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sphingolipids are essential components of
the outer membrane of plant cells where they contribute to the ability of plants
to respond to environmental extremes. Sphingolipids also play important roles in
the regulation of basic processes in plant cells, including the initiation of
cell death in response to pathogens. Sphingolipids occur in plants as complex
mixtures of different chemical structures. The specific contributions of
different sphingolipids to the growth and physiology of plants is not well
understood. This question will be addressed in this project by the generation of
mutants of the model plants Arabidopsis and tomato with defined alterations in
sphingolipid structures. These mutants will be characterized by advanced
analytical methods to determine the impact on global sphingolipid metabolism.
Studies will also be conducted with Arabidopsis and tomato mutants to examine
how altered sphingolipid composition affects growth in response to environmental
stresses, including drought and high soil salinity. In addition to generating
fundamental new knowledge on sphingolipid metabolism and function in plants, the
results will provide information that could lead to improving the performance
and productivity of crop plants through breeding and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will offer educational opportunities and outreach to high school and
undergraduate students. The PI and co-PI will participate in the Partnership in
Research and Education in Plants, a program that engages high school students in
the scientific process by allowing them to devise experiments using mutants of
the model plant Arabidopsis. The PI and co-PI will meet with participating
students at a Saint Louis, Missouri-area high school and describe the important
functions of cellular membranes as well as sphingolipids in human health and
plant growth. The students will be provided with seeds for Arabidopsis mutants
that they will use for experiments to test hypotheses regarding growth and
environmental stress responses. The students will maintain interactions with the
PI and co-PI through an online laboratory notebook. The project is also designed
to provide research opportunities to undergraduates through the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln Undergraduate Creative Activities and Research Experiences
(UCARE) program, a two-year program that allows students to conduct literature
research and develop an independent research project. Through participation in
UCARE, the PI will recruit and mentor an undergraduate student examining the
effects of altered sphingolipid composition on growth and physiology of tomato
and Arabidopsis.