* 0843632
* Conformations of Biomolecules by Advanced Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Methods
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Tatyana Smirnova, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2015
* USD 699,933.00

Intellectual merit. This project is aimed at expanding the arsenal of Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) and, especially, high resolution high field (HF)
EPR methods by developing novel experimental capabilities to study fundamental
roles of intermolecular interactions in self-assembly and structure-function
relationships in multi component biological systems. Specific emphasis will be
put on elucidating lipid-protein interactions for the Sec14 protein family.
During the preceding phase of this NSF-funded project, an HF EPR-based method to
separate two major components of solvent effects on spin-labeled protein
residues and to detect hydrogen bond formation and local electrostatic effects
was developed. While the general concepts of membrane protein folding and
thermodynamic stability are beginning to emerge, the arsenal of experimental
spectroscopic methods for assessing local protein electrostatics and local
hydrogen bonding interactions remains severely limited. This research project
aims at further developing spin-labeling HF EPR and double-resonance methods for
mapping the hydrogen bonding environment for protein systems without the
necessity of preparing high quality crystals. The method relies on incorporating
small molecular tags, based on nitroxide radicals, into the protein structure.
These labels have molecular volume and structure similar to the native protein
side chain and, therefore, are known to cause only minimal perturbation to the
tertiary structure. The main advantage of such labels lies in the sensitivity of
their EPR spectra to the local electrostatic environment and hydrogen bond
formation resulting in essential biophysical data that are difficult to obtain
otherwise. The sensitivity of nitroxide spin labels to local electrostatics and
hydrogen bonding is further enhanced by high field and double-resonance EPR
methods under development. These methods will be further refined during this
project to elucidate an intriguing and largely unknown molecular mechanism by
which the Sec14 protein and its analogs regulate the interface between
phospholipid metabolism and membrane trafficking. Spin label EPR and a
complementary array of biophysical methods will be used to study how Sec14
recognizes, binds and transports phopholipids and how it interacts with
phospholipid membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The methods
developed in the course of this project will fill the gap in the existing
experimental capabilities of EPR and enable detailed biophysical studies of
local electrostatics and hydrogen bonding that are directly involved in
structure-function relationships of many biological systems of contemporary
interest - from model membranes and peptides to ion channels, transporters and
G-protein coupled receptors. The project will integrate research and teaching by
adding research-driven experimental tasks to a largely lecture course "Physical
Methods in Biological Chemistry" developed by the PI. In the course of this
project graduate and undergraduate students will be trained across several
disciplines including biophysical spectroscopy, chemical synthesis and methods
of molecular biology. The project will expand research opportunities for
undergraduate students, especially, minority students through the Alliances for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) and Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) programs. In an effort to reach out to undergraduate
colleges in rural North Carolina, the PI will continue collaboration with the
University of North Carolina-Pembroke. The PI and her group will be engaged in
science projects and demonstrations in the Centennial Middle School associated
with NCSU that will be coordinated through the Science House, a North Carolina
institution for K-12 outreach program.