* 0843520
* High-Resolution Structures and Ligand-Induced Conformational Changes of Membrane Proteins by Solid-State NMR: Methodology Development and Applications
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alexander Nevzorov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 776,892.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane proteins constitute 30% of the
human genome and, therefore, are of tremendous interest for modern structural
biology. However, their X-ray high-resolution structures are often difficult to
obtain due to the challenges in crystallization posed by the presence of lipids.
From this view, solid-state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (SSNMR) spectroscopy
represents a unique alternative method to study membrane proteins in their
native lipid environment without the need for crystallization. This is due to
the recent advances in sample preparation techniques using magnetically aligned
bilayers, which provide both membrane mimetics and full hydration. In addition,
SSNMR methods yield directly orientationally dependent observables as input for
structure determination at atomic resolution. This project is aimed at answering
important biological and biophysical questions by radically improving current
SSNMR techniques. The specific aims of this project are: (i) complete three-
dimensional structure determination of membrane proteins (ii) creation of new
methods for the studies of inter- and intramolecular contacts in membrane
proteins; (iii) detection of ligand binding and elucidation of the associated
conformational changes; (iv) efficient algorithms for calculating protein
structures from angular-dependent NMR restraints; (v) applications to specific
proteins and their ligands. The latter will include ion channels and their
agonists and antagonists; viral proteins; and larger membrane-bound receptors
(adrenergic and olfactory receptors). These goals will be accomplished through
the development of new SSNMR experiments on doubly labeled protein samples for
both spectral assignment, elucidation of intramolecular interactions, and
measurement of orientationally dependent observables such as dipolar couplings
and chemical shifts. The final goal is to assign the spectrum and calculate
complete three-dimensional protein structure from a single uniformly labeled
protein sample solely based on SSNMR data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will involve postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students with different ethnic
and geographical backgrounds. The methods to be developed herein are expected to
find their use in other applications including solution NMR and NMR of highly
ordered inorganic compounds such as zeolites and other nanostructures. The basic
results of this research on solid-state NMR methods of protein structure
determination in membranes will be included as part of the curriculum for a
graduate course on Macromolecular Structure covering modern methods of
biological structure determination. The computational algorithms and simulations
programs will be made available to interested research groups.