* 0843985
* CAREER: Charge and Energy Transport in Highly Ordered Small-Molecule Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Vitaly Podzorov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2014
* USD 535,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This Faculty Early
Career Award supports an integrated educational and research program addressing
the fundamental electrical and optical properties of high-purity organic
semiconductor devices, such as organic transistors and solar cells. These
devices are the building blocks of Organic Electronics, an emergent field that
promises cheaper, flexible, ?greener? electronics, and for which the underlying
physics has yet to be well developed. In the course of this program intrinsic
correlations between the crystal structure and electrical properties (e.g.,
conductivity) of high-purity organic semiconductors will be elucidated. Optical
properties, such as the dynamics of excitons (bound electron-hole pairs), of
these materials related to solar cell technology will be investigated. This
program will therefore result in a fundamental understanding of charge and
exciton motion and their dependence on the molecular/crystal structure of
organic semiconductors, thus contributing to an elementary understanding of
organic electronics and photovoltaics. The educational component of this project
is inherently integrated with research involving novel semiconductor materials
and devices. In addition to employing new pedagogical methods for teaching
undergraduate and graduate courses, the following innovations will be
instituted: (a) a new curriculum in semiconductor physics with an emphasis on
organic electronics, (b) special curriculum modules for high school teachers
created in collaboration with the Department of Science Pedagogy at Rutgers
University to introduce future scientists to the exciting field of modern
semiconductor technology, and (c) a web-based interactive tutorial on relevant
semiconductor technologies will be created. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This Faculty Early Career Award
supports an integrated educational and research program that addresses the
fundamentals of intrinsic (not limited by static disorder) polaronic and
excitonic transport in small-molecule organic semiconductors. High-quality
molecular single crystals used in this project will provide new opportunities
for fundamental condensed-matter physics research. The exploration of the
dynamical behavior of polarons and excitons in these systems is aided by the
clear advantage of high structural order, compared to polycrystalline and
amorphous organic films. Investigation of charge and energy transport in these
materials is critical to illuminate the basic physics of organic semiconductors
and to introduce organic electronics into the University curricula. The main
conceptual thrusts of the project are: 1) Investigation of novel transport
regimes and electron correlations in organic semiconductors at high carrier
densities; 2) Measurements of the exciton diffusion length in highly ordered
molecular crystals; 3) Exploration of the intrinsic polaron mobility in organic
lattices with different molecular packing; and 4) Understanding the effects of
disorder and charge trapping on charge carrier and exciton transport. The
educational component of this project will include; (a) the development of a
web-based interactive tutorial on Experimental Techniques in Semiconductor
Research; (b) the development of an innovative graduate curriculum on
Semiconductor Physics; and (c) the design of special curriculum modules for high
school teachers that will help to illustrate the exciting modern semiconductor
science and technology in high school classrooms.