* 0843064
* Co-transcriptional Recruitment and Activity of the Spliceosomal snRNPs
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Michel Bellini, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Research project. At the heart of each eukaryotic cell is the nucleus, a complex
structure highly organized into many distinct functional domains to perform two
fundamental roles: the maintenance of the genome and the distribution of the
genetic information. Among the sub-nuclear domains are the sites where genes are
transcribed into pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) molecules. As they are being
synthesized, pre-mRNAs undergo a series of complex processing events to produce
the messenger RNAs that are subsequently used for the synthesis of proteins. One
of these events, splicing, requires the five major small ribonucleoprotein
particles (snRNPs). Despite the critical catalytic role of snRNPs in splicing,
little is still known about the cellular mechanisms that regulate their
recruitment to pre-mRNAs. This program aims at moving the analysis of snRNPs to
the amphibian oocyte, a unique cell system where direct visualization of
individual transcription sites and other sub-nuclear domains is possible in the
transmitted light microscope. The main objective, using this in vivo system, is
to determine the characteristic elements of snRNPs required for their
interactions with pre-mRNAs and their co-transcriptional splicing activity. In
frog oocytes, the sites of active transcription correspond to the lateral loops
of the lampbrush chromosomes (LBCs). The research is based on two newly
developed assays, which permits one to follow the association of snRNPs with the
lateral loops of LBCs and to determine whether pre-mRNA splicing occurs on these
loops, respectively. In the long term, these studies will contribute to the
general understanding of the cellular mechanisms that govern the functional
organization of an active transcription unit, and how various subnuclear domains
interact to regulate pre-mRNA processing.

Broader Impacts. The giant size of an amphibian oocyte and its ease of
manipulation make it particularly amenable to an active outreach program.
Indeed, showing chromosomes and genes being actively transcribed in a
fluorescence microscope to students of all levels (undergraduate and highschool)
always succeeds at capturing their interest, while introducing them to the
principles of experimental science. The investigator will use the research to
continue fostering relations with teachers at neighboring high schools and
community colleges, contributing to the development of strong curricula and
providing their students, including women and minorities, with research
internships. The goal is to provide teachers with scientific support and to
expose students to research in an academic setting, while facilitating their
transition from small high schools and community colleges to large undergraduate
campuses.