* 0843604
* Investigating the Role of Orcs in Chromatin Organization and in Mitotic Progression
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Supriya Prasanth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: How the accurate
duplication of genetic material and its faithful segregation to daughter cells
is coordinated in multi-cellular organisms is an important question that remains
to be clearly understood. In eukaryotic cells these two events occur in
alternative oscillating cycles. Initiation of DNA replication requires the
ordered assembly of a multiprotein complex including the Origin Recognition
Complex (ORC) at origins of DNA replication. In mammalian cells chromosomal
domains occupy specific nuclear positions and replicate at defined times during
S-phase of the cell division cycle. Chromatin changes and specific modifications
orchestrate the establishment of spatio-temporal profiling of DNA replication
that is ORC-mediated. ORC proteins are critical not only for initiation of DNA
replication, but have also been implicated in non-preRC functions including
heterochromatin organization and silencing, chromosome segregation and mitosis
in several model organisms. The objective of this project is to address how ORCs
coordinate DNA replication with chromatin organization and mitotic progression
in mammalian cells. The association of ORC subunits with replication origins,
heterochromatin, centromeres/kinetochores, centrosomes and cytokinetic furrow
suggests that ORCs play a pivotal role in coordinating all stages of chromosome
inheritance cycle by interacting with different protein partners in a cell-cycle
dependent fashion. This project will identify the roles played by novel protein
partners that bind to ORCs during different stages of the cell cycle that will
address how ORC participates in various cellular processes. In particular this
project will provide crucial insights into the role of ORCs in the recruitment
and spreading of chromatin proteins to heterochromatin. Finally, several
approaches will be used to understand whether the role of ORCs in chromatin
organization and mitosis is independent of its function in DNA replication
initiation. Since the involvement of ORCs in chromatin organization is conserved
from yeast to humans the outcome of this project will have broad scientific
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research is amenable to an
active outreach program since it utilizes extensive microscopy and live cell
imaging that is visually appealing and brings out the power of cell biology in
understanding basic concepts of Biology. Being in a University setup gives a
unique opportunity to mentor undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows. This project integrates the use of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and
Cell Biology to capture the interest of students not only from Biology
background but also from Chemistry and Bioengineering. This project will also
involve providing students with a direct view of the concepts cell and molecular
biology including actively mentoring undergraduate students, including women and
minorities. This project will enable the understanding of a basic biology
question, on how a cell accomplishes DNA replication and signals it to undergo
chromosome segregation and cell division. &lt;br/&gt;