* 0843252
* Causal Supports for Early Word Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Amy Booth, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 484,083.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By the time children enter preschool,
most are phenomenal word learners, adding new words to their vocabulary every
single day. It is clear, however, that not all words are learned with equal
ease. What factors determine whether, and how rapidly, a particular word becomes
an accurate and lasting part of a child's vocabulary? With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Amy Booth will conduct research designed to
answer this question. Specifically, she will investigate the role of richly
meaningful conceptual information in facilitating early word learning. In her
studies, young children will be taught made-up names for objects and animals
that they have never seen before. Children will later be tested on how quickly
and how well they learned the new words. Both their ability to understand the
new words and to produce them on their own will be assessed. Dr. Booth's work
has already demonstrated that 3- to 4-year-old children are particularly likely
to learn and remember new words when they refer to objects with known causal (as
opposed to superficially perceptual) properties. Moving forward, Dr. Booth will
work towards explaining the mechanisms underlying this effect in a
socioeconomically diverse group of children. She will also attempt to specify
the impact of this effect across development and across a variety of natural
learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Booth's project will be
important both theoretically and practically. It will have implications for
time-honored debates regarding the potentially special relationship between
words and conceptually deep information. Moreover, by specifying the conditions
that optimize the likelihood that a word will be acquired and retained, it will
suggest educational strategies for maximizing the word-learning potential of
young children from both advantaged and disadvantaged backgrounds. Finally, this
project provides opportunities for several undergraduate and graduate students
to directly participate in research, thus helping to mentor the next generation
of developmental scientists.