* 0843417
* Collaborative Research (ETBC): Climate Warming and Northern Peatland Decomposition, Accumulation and Carbon Sequestration Examined Through Molecular and Paleohydrological Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ronald Benner, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2013
* USD 398,645.00

The widespread occurrence of northern peatlands (above 50Â°N) is a distinctive
and important attribute of the subarctic system that has global ramifications.
The net sequestration of atmospheric carbon in northern peatlands (274-489 Pg C)
has played a significant role in the global carbon cycle during the Holocene and
will continue to be an important factor in the carbon cycle of the Anthropocene.
A clearer understanding of how climate affects peat accumulation and
decomposition rates, and ultimately net carbon sequestration, is critical for
predicting how current and future warming will impact northern peatlands and the
global carbon cycle. We propose a novel approach to gain a mechanistic
understanding of the role of climate warming on rates of peat decomposition and
net accumulation in a network of cores collected from the West Siberian Lowland
(Russia), under a previous NSF-supported project, and the James Bay Lowland
(Canada), under a separate NSF-supported project. Net rates of peat accumulation
and carbon sequestration will be calculated from radiocarbon-dated cores.
Hydrological changes, represented by changes in water table depth, will be
directly calculated for the core sites using testate amoebae analysis. Detailed
chemical characterizations of peat samples will be used to develop molecular
indicators of peat decomposition. These molecular indicators and diagenesis
models will then be applied to quantify rates and extent of peat decomposition
and the relative importance of production and decomposition in determining
carbon sequestration rates. Instrumental climate data and published paleoclimate
research will be used to examine linkages among climate, hydrology,
decomposition and accumulation and the mechanisms controlling the balance
between peat production and decomposition. In view of current and anticipated
warming of the subarctic over the next century, the proposed studies will focus
on the Holocene Thermal Maximum (~8,000-4,000 Cal yr BP), the Medieval Warm
Period (~1,100 to 700 Cal yr BP) and the comparative impacts of Modern Warming.
Climate warming is having a disproportionately large affect on the hydrology,
biota and biogeochemical cycles of the subarctic system. Northern peatlands have
been major players in soil and atmospheric carbon cycling during the Holocene,
and this study will provide a clearer picture of how climate shapes these
processes. Novel approaches and potentially transformative concepts will be
developed to provide a quantitative understanding of the mechanisms controlling
carbon sequestration and release in northern peatlands. The research will
provide a data base of over 20,000 detailed assays on past and present peatland
biogeochemical conditions from ~40 core sites and ~100 surface sites in Siberia
and central Canada. This project will provide training, experience and support
for a postdoctoral associate in Benner?s laboratory at USC and a graduate
student in MacDonald?s laboratory at UCLA. They will present their data at
scientific meetings and prepare articles for publication in peer-reviewed
journals. Benner and MacDonald teach undergraduate and graduate classes that
cover various aspects of the global carbon cycle and climate change, and data
collected from this project will be used as specific examples in these classes.
This approach of bringing information from active research programs into the
classroom has proven to be very effective for increasing student awareness and
interest in science. An undergraduate student will be recruited to participate
in this project (Benner?s laboratory) as part of the Magellan Scholars program
at USC to provide research experiences for undergraduates. Results will be
posted on research websites and data contributed to appropriate national and
international data bases for widespread use.