* 0843148
* Cognitive Neuroscience of Visual Awareness
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Tony Ro, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 551,170.00

Under most circumstances, our visual systems are bombarded with much more
information than they can handle. Because of this information overload, the
majority of visual information is not subjectively experienced and seemingly
goes unnoticed as well as unprocessed within the brain. Despite this impression,
however, an increasing body of evidence suggests that unconscious visual
information is indeed processed within our visual systems even though we remain
unaware of it. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Ro and his
colleagues will examine the cognitive and neural mechanisms for conscious and
unconscious vision. One set of experiments will use procedures that will render
some visual events unconscious to participants in order to determine whether the
representations of unconscious visual stimuli are encoded at processing levels
that are distinct from consciously perceived ones. Another set of experiments
will use transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human primary visual cortex to
manipulate neural processing and hence awareness of visual events. These
transcranial magnetic stimulation experiments will investigate differences in
information coding, neutral structures, and cortical pathways for conscious and
unconscious vision.

This research will provide a better understanding of visual information
processing in the human brain and will lend some clues for developing useful
compensatory strategies in patients with visual deficits. This work could also
contribute towards the development of better visual assistive devices or
prostheses for patients with congenital or acquired visual deficits. In
addition, this project will provide training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows at The City College of the City
University of New York. The results of this funded research will be broadly
disseminated to both scientific and lay audiences and should contribute towards
enhancing scientific understanding by the public.