* 0843664
* Biosynthesis and Assembly of Phycobiliproteins in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Wendy Schluchter, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 433,500.00

Cyanobacteria are extremely important contributors to primary productivity in
the world's oceans. In order to perform photosynthesis and fix carbon,
cyanobacteria must absorb light. They achieve efficient light absorption
utilizing light-harvesting complexes called phycobilisomes that contain
brilliantly colored phycobiliproteins, which absorb light in the visible region
of the light spectrum. The actual light-absorbing molecules are bilin
chromophores, which are attached to each phycobiliprotein by enzymes called
bilin lyases. Additionally, some marine cyanobacteria in the genus Synechococcus
can harvest the blue light that dominates these environments due to the presence
of a yellow chromophore called phycourobilin. The goal of this research is to
determine how the yellow phycourobilin chromophore is synthesized and how all of
the chromophores are attached to each phycobiliprotein in three species of
Synechococcus (PCC 7002, WH8020, and WH8102). Several genes that encode
potential enzymes in these biosynthetic processes have been identified in the
genome of Synechococcus WH8020 and WH8102 by sequence similarity to other known
bilin lyases. The role of each candidate gene in chromophore attachment will be
evaluated by recreating the biosynthetic pathway for each phycobiliprotein
inside Escherichia coli cells. In addition, candidate recombinant bilin lyase
enzymes will be assayed for phycourobilin synthesis and attachment in vitro. In
collaboration with a structural biologist, one of the bilin lyases will be
purified and crystallized in order to determine its three-dimensional structure.

Broader impacts: In addition to providing fundamental knowledge about
photosynthetic light harvesting, this research will result in training two to
four undergraduates per year along with two graduate students. Students will be
recruited through mechanisms that encourage participation of underrepresented
groups in science. The PI will continue to co-author publications with her high-
school, undergraduate, MS, and PhD students. The PI has integrated her research
with the curriculum of a Biochemistry and Molecular Biology lab course, reaching
20 students each year.