* 0843368
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Adaptive Differentiation, Selection and Water Use of a Seasonally Dry Tropical Oak:  Implications for Global Change
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Jed Sparks, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2014
* USD 70,307.00

Climate change will alter key aspects of the environment for plants, such as
temperature and water availability. Very little is known about how plants will
contend with these changes, particularly species that are difficult to study,
such as long-lived tropical trees. This project examines short-term
physiological responses and the potential for long-term evolutionary changes in
response to experimental manipulations of precipitation in populations of a
tropical oak species that occur in different climates in Central America. The
project investigates the extent to which these populations are adapted to the
climate they currently experience and their potential response to climates that
are similar to those predicted for the future. New insights will be gained as to
whether impacts of climate change at the seedling stage enhance or constrain
adaptation at later life stages of the tree. In addition, the research will
identify the physiological and genetic mechanisms that enhance or limit
adaptation to altered climates in this tropical tree. The project fosters the
education, mentoring, and training of undergraduates, doctoral students, and a
postdoctoral associate in plant ecological physiology and quantitative genetics
at the University of Minnesota and at the University of Zamorano (Honduras).
This work offers unique training and mentoring opportunities for Latin American
undergraduates and para-taxonomists in Honduras and Costa Rica. It will also
develop a collaborative, interdisciplinary network between researchers at the
University of Minnesota, Cornell University, the University of Zamorano in
Honduras, the Area de Conservacion Guanacaste in Costa Rica, and the Center for
Ecosystem Studies (CIEco-UNAM) in Mexico.