* 0843104
* Collaborative Research: Calibrating the Isotopologue-47 Geothermometer in Soils
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/29/2012
* USD 86,375.00

Use of isotopologue-47 paleothermometer over the past several years is an
exciting new development that holds enormous potential for reconstruction of
paleotemperatures in the deeper geologic record. Paleosol carbonates are a
particularly attractive target for such analysis because they are so abundant in
the geologic record, and because temperature in soils displays a highly
predictable relationship to air temperature (unlike in many other systems).
Before this potential can be realized, the relationship between temperatures
estimated from isotopologue-47 analysis (expressed as Ä47) of modern soil
carbonate, and that of local air and soil temperature must be rigorously
established. &lt;br/&gt;We present unpublished results from a number of modern
soils that show that temperature estimates from Ä47 values systematically exceed
those of modeled summer maximum temperatures by 6±2°C. Part of the excess?up to
2-4°C?may be explained asymmetric summer heating of soil. The remaining excess
may be the result of contamination, the wrong assumed soil temperatures, or
perhaps non-equilibrium kinetic effects. Whatever the cause, the more key
question is whether the offset between actual and estimated values is
systematic. This must be tested with a much larger sample set and with direct
measurements of soil temperature. Here we propose to monitor temperature and
other parameters in modern soils from a range of settings for comparison to Ä47
estimates of temperatures. Our study sites include Arizona, Nevada, Hawaii, and
NW Argentina, taking in most of the natural temperature range for soil carbonate
formation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this on the larger scientific community
will be substantial, given the intense interest in using this new geothermometer
on a variety of research questions. Exciting potential applications of the new
paleothermometer include reconstruction of paleotemperature (±2°C) using such
long paleosol time series (17 Myr) as the Siwaliks in Pakistan, and of
paleoelevation, through the strong sensitivity of the temperature to elevation
in the world?s major orogens. Field and laboratory measurements and data
analysis are ideal training opportunities for undergraduates in the sciences,
who will be recruited from several institutions to participate in field and
labwork.&lt;br/&gt;