* 0843506
* Collaborative Research:  Development of sexual cycles in marine picoprasinophytes based on molecular homologies with Chlamydomonas sexual cycles
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Ursula Goodenough, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 07/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project addresses two overarching objectives
that will be explored in the prasinophytes, a group thought to represent the
ancestral alga that gave rise to the green lineage (which includes all land
plants). First, the hypothesis will be tested that homeoprotein
heterodimerization represents a conserved feature of haploid/diploid transitions
in green algae. Second, natural and/or genetically engineered sexual cycles will
be developed for the marine picoprasinophyte algae Ostreococcus and Micromonas
based on apparent homologies between their sex-related gene endowment and the
model green alga Chlamydomonas. The pikoprasinophytes have small genomes (4
sequenced to date) and are the subject of intensive ecological analysis because
of their widespread distribution in the marine environments where they perform
photosynthesis. The two collaborative laboratories will engage in intensive
undergraduate and graduate student training as well as mentoring of postdoctoral
scholars. The WISE program for disadvantaged 9th graders will focus on marine
ecosystems, algal ecology and evolution as well as basics of molecular biology
via hands-on work in local waters. The goal of this program is to keep young
women thriving in the sciences. Overall this collaborative project will deepen
our understandings of the algal homeoprotein "toolkits" co-opted and expanded
during the evolution of land plants, and facilitate studies of an ecologically
vital group of marine organisms.