* 0843133
* Available Constraints and Skilled Automatic Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Guy Van Orden, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2013
* USD 208,699.00

The same action can be conscious or unconscious, a wink versus a blink for
instance. Thank Freud for the original distinction, which has since become
pervasive in science and in everyday life. Yet at present the distinction lacks
any scientific basis other than intuition. No evidence, so far, has stood the
test of time to distinguish conscious behavior from unconscious automatic
behavior. Nonetheless the distinction remains widely accepted.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific definition hangs mostly on knowing what
automatic behavior is. We define consciously controlled behavior by first
defining automatic and unconscious behavior. Conscious behavior is then what
automatic behavior is not. In that light, scientists equate automatic behavior
with a kind of mindlessness, an absence of attentive, voluntary effort. In this
view, automatic behaviors are triggered by environmental events, in the way a
sudden burst of air can make you blink. But careful experiments have discovered
attention and volition play a role in many supposedly automatic behaviors,
leading to a reformulation of the definition of automatic behavior. Behavior can
be considered as more-or-less automatic as learned constraints gradually accrue
to coordinate perception, action and cognition. The present work will test a new
and promising metric of automaticity, based in fractal geometry, to gauge the
degree of automaticity in human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The test domain
is skilled and novice reading by college students, nonnative readers, and
children as they learn to read. Acquisition of reading skill has been seen
traditionally as a transition from controlled word decoding to automatic word
recognition. Thus a change in how we understand automaticity inevitably changes
how we understand skilled reading and reading acquisition, and speaks directly
to practical reading instruction. &lt;br/&gt;