* 0843197
* Arboreal snake locomotion:  A model system for studying effects of musculoskeletal design and environmental variation on three-dimensional movements
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Bruce Jayne, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 422,545.00

This project will use electromyography, three-dimensional kinematics and force
measurements to study the arboreal locomotion of snakes as a model system to
better understand axial function of vertebrates and very general features of
musculoskeletal systems and motor control. The narrow and cylindrical surfaces,
inclines and gaps between branches in complex three-dimensional arboreal
environments pose several demands well suited for determining: the limits and
tradeoffs for musculoskeletal performance, proximate factors influencing gait
selection, and the role of sensory information for modifying motor output and
choosing different routes in complex environments. The study species have
considerable variation in musculoskeletal anatomy that is universally important
for function including: the ratio of tendon to contractile tissue length within
muscles, the cross-sectional areas of muscle, total body length to weight, and
the numbers and mobility of skeletal joints. This anatomical variation likely
reflect tradeoffs between being flexible vs. stiff, strong vs. weak, and heavy
vs. light, all of which are generally important as well as specifically relevant
for snakes performing the different ecologically relevant tasks of actively
bending to conform and grip cylindrical surfaces vs. supporting a body draped
loosely over widely spaced branches. One study species is the brown tree snake,
which causes costly power outages in Guam, but determining the surfaces that are
impassable for this species and obtaining information on route choice and gap-
bridging should facilitate managing this destructive invasive species.
Interdisciplinary collaborators include a cognitive scientist specializing in
the integration of perception and motor control and applied biologists who are
attempting to decrease the economic costs of the brown tree snake. The project
emphasizes providing opportunities for early career development of biologists
from diverse backgrounds, disseminating scientific results to a wide audience
including web materials, and providing lectures with an emphasis on evolution
for K-12 students and the local community.