* 0843532
* Proton Translocation and Metal Chelation in Ferrochelatase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* William Lanzilotta, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 07/31/2013
* USD 557,428.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Heme is an
essential cofactor for a wide variety of biologically important proteins
including globins, cytochromes, transcription factors, peroxidases, catalases,
and others. With few exceptions, organisms that possess heme-containing proteins
possess the biosynthetic machinery to synthesize their own heme and do not
acquire heme from their diet. Inability to synthesize heme is lethal for most
organisms. The importance of the metabolic synthesis of heme is underscored by
recent evidence revealing that heme is also a regulator of a number of other
metabolic processes. In this exciting new role, these "heme sensors" must detect
and respond to heme but not bind it permanently. The terminal step in the seven
step biosynthetic pathway, the insertion of ferrous iron into protoporphyrin to
make protoheme (heme), is catalyzed by the enzyme ferrochelatase. In animals
this membrane-associated enzyme is located on the matrix side of the inner
mitochondrial membrane with its active site facing into the membrane. This is in
contrast to the bacterial ferrochelatases that are quite soluble. At the heart
of this investigation is the development of biophysical tools and techniques to
directly monitor proton translocation as well as metal binding and chelation in
porphyrin macrocycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implications of such technology
and experimental findings have much broader implications because proton
binding/transfer is a critical element of the vast majority of biochemical
reactions and many essential biochemical processes. In addition, it is now
widely recognized that metals play a critical role in approximately 30 percent
of all known enzymatic reactions. Taking advantage of the catalytic diversity
found in nature will be critical to sustaining the quality of life humanity
currently enjoys in the absence of abundant fossil
fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the broad importance of the chelation
reaction under investigation here, the experiments outlined in this project will
significantly advance our understanding of how metals are inserted into
porphyrin cofactors in general. In addition, a unique aspect of this project is
the application of organic synthesis and neutron diffraction to test specific
hypotheses regarding the atomic details of porphyrin deprotonation, metal
dehydration, and metal insertion. Given the established and emerging roles for
porphyrin cofactors in numerous enzymes, metabolic pathways, as well as clinical
applications, this work will have far reaching implications. In addition, the
application of both neutron diffraction methods and organic synthesis to probe
enzyme mechanism makes this project truly multidisciplinary and places this work
at the cutting edge of scientific discovery that will lead to and support new
technology development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the broader technological impacts, this research project offers an
exceptional educational opportunity in the context of a multi-disciplinary
approach to advancing discovery and understanding of structure-function
relationships in enzyme function. Funding will support training of two PhD
candidates and several undergraduate students in biophysical chemistry,
structural biology, biochemistry, molecular biology and organic chemistry. In
addition, this project will further advance the attraction of underrepresented
minority students to the physical sciences through an affiliation with the Peach
State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) as well as the
Center for Undergraduate Research Opportunities (CURO) programs. Both of these
programs have proven track records in helping these students find success in the
professional fields of their choice.