* 0843120
* Collaborative Research:   How to Fall from Trees:  Biomechanics and Ecology of Gliding Flight in Arthropods
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Stephen Yanoviak, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2013
* USD 264,005.00

Many tree-dwelling animals use aerial gliding to escape predators or to locate
resources. Wingless arthropods fall from trees with high frequency as "arthropod
rain", often landing in the unfamiliar and hostile understory. This work
combines phylogenetic, ecological, behavioral and aerodynamic approaches to
assess the overall biological significance of wingless flight. Morphological and
behavioral characteristics relevant to gliding will be measured for a large
number of arthropods, and will be mapped onto evolutionary trees to identify
correlates of this behavior. Species composition of ants falling from the tree
canopy will be compared with those that fail to glide to trees, and instead land
in the understory. The research will be conducted at rainforest sites having
high arthropod diversity in Peru and Panama. Finally, experiments focusing on
one common species of gliding ant will examine mechanisms of aerodynamic
control. This is the first study to associate gliding behavior in arthropods
with specific selection pressures, and the first to quantify the larger
ecological phenomenon of arthropod fallout in rainforests. It will more
generally evaluate the biological relevance of gliding behavior for the earth's
most diverse lineage, the insects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context,
information gathered in this study will be relevant to the emerging technology
of self-righting and maneuverable microair vehicles. The research will include
the training of a graduate student at the University of Arkansas, Little Rock
(UALR) and field assistants at study sites in Peru and Panama. We will
additionally work with historically under-represented undergraduates at UALR (an
EPSCOR institution). We will also conduct an outreach component in collaboration
with the California Academy of Sciences to present our findings to teacher
workshops. Our original gliding ant discoveries attracted considerable attention
from the popular media and the public at large, and we expect comparable
interest in results with other insect gliders.&lt;br/&gt;