* 0843297
* Darwinism Old and New: Research on the History of Evolutionary Biology
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sander Gliboff, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 214,337.00

This project, which is supported by NSF's Science, Technology, and Society
Program, focuses on a particular period in the history of evolutionary biology.
It will research a contentious period for evolutionary biology, from the 1880s
through the 1930s?roughly from the death of Charles Darwin to the eve of the
"modern evolutionary synthesis," when a consensus of sorts was reached on many
of the points of contention. It will be conducted in various European and
American archives and libraries. The eventual goal is to produce a scholarly
monograph and a series of preliminary articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
publications will focus on two generations of biologists in Germany and Austria
(foremost among them Ernst Haeckel, Richard Semon, Paul Kammerer, and Ludwig
Plate), their competition with each other and with scientists in Britain and the
U.S. to define "Darwinism" and modernize it in response to twentieth-century
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the challenges they faced were
discerning the nature and causes of variation, reconciling the rule of law in
nature with the unpredictability of evolutionary change, responding to the
increasing prestige and authority of experimentation over the evolutionist's
traditional comparative methods. The period includes the advent of genetics, the
chromosome theory, and new ways of conceptualizing heredity and variation. It
also includes the eugenics movement and rising expectations for biologists to
address social problems, as well as global and national political changes in the
wake of the First World War.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute
to the broadening scope of the historical literature on Darwinism by filling out
the international and inter-generational picture, revising standard views of the
politics of German biology, and especially by making new and stronger
connections between nineteenth- and twentieth-century Darwinian thought. It will
also be of interest to biologists and philosophers working on "evo-devo," the
new evolutionary developmental biology, to see how the relationships among
evolution, development, and heredity have been defined and debated before. In
addition, many issues addressed by this research have been in the public eye in
twenty-first-century America, and the project should have an impact on science
teaching and public understanding of evolution and its political, religious and
moral interpretations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;