* 0843522
* Broadcast-echo recognition for clutter rejection in bat sonar
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* James Simmons, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2013
* USD 447,661.00

This project examines how bats use sonar to perceive the location and shape of
targeted objects, like prey, and simultaneously avoid interference caused by
clutter, the echoes from untargeted objects. Bat sonar broadcasts are composed
of a wide range of ultrasonic frequencies. Experiments reveal that small
differences in the frequency content between broadcasts and their echoes have
disproportionate effects on the perception of objects. The echoes from targets,
located in front of a bat, contain all of the frequencies in the broadcast
except for those few that are removed by the target itself and bats perceive
both their shape and location. In contrast, bats perceive only the location, not
the shape, of objects located to the side or farther away. More frequencies are
removed from echoes that arrive from these locations. The bat's failure to
perceive shape and, at the same time, perceive the location of untargeted
objects allows the bat to avoid obstacles and orient to a target because the
clutter itself disappears from the part of the perceived scene concerned with
the identification of targets. This novel process is a defocusing method that
deemphasizes background objects in the bat's images and it has technological
significance for man-made sonar designs. Experiments using electronically-
controlled echoes will determine the effects of removing or displacing selected
frequencies on the perception of echo delay, used to determine target location,
and the echo spectrum, used to determine target shape. Experiments with bats
carrying a miniature radio microphone (Telemike) while they fly through a dense
obstacle array composed of rows of chains hanging from the ceiling will
determine whether bats make changes in the frequencies of successive sonar
sounds to avoid interference caused by clutter. The broader impacts of this
proposal include training of a postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student and
the results of this study are likely to be incorporated into human-devised
guidance devices.