* 0843919
* Development and Consequences of Affect Expression and Experience for Infants and Toddlers
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Brian Vaughn, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 04/30/2012
* USD 400,283.00

Developmental scientists agree that affects and emotions are elements of
virtually every aspect of both personal and interpersonal experiences across the
lifespan. This consensus on the centrality of affect in children's lives has led
to many studies on the emergence, understanding, and regulation of affect states
during the first years of life. These studies have suggested that most of the
primary affects are present in the repertoires of infants and toddlers by the
end of the second year of life, and children begin to acquire labels for these
internal states over the third to fifth years of life. Furthermore, many
investigators have assumed that affective states tend to be disruptive,
especially when they are experienced at higher intensities, and that the primary
task of the developing child is to acquire behavioral and cognitive tactics to
"regulate" these states. This assumption is contradicted by a functional
explanation of affects, which claims that these internal states are adaptations
designed to signal the infant/child about the state of the immediate context as
it has relevance for the child and to prepare the child to act in a manner
appropriate to the context. The traditional view on the meaning of affect for
young children is also at odds with a recent perspective from positive
psychology, which suggests that experiences of positive and negative affects per
se are critically related to concurrent experience and are predictors of future
adaptive behaviors. Finally, most currently available research considers parents
as the critical social elements of the child's social context and few data are
available for non-parental adults and peers as social contextual features of
very young children. Given that 50% or more of infants under 12 months of age
are now being cared for by adults other than their parents for significant
amounts of their waking day (with the proportion of children in care increasing
between 12 and 60 months of age), it seems prudent to examine both developmental
trajectories and the correlates/consequences of affect experiences for children
in group care. This study was designed to address a range of questions
concerning the emergence, change, and developmental outcomes associated with the
experience of both positive and negative affective states. To accomplish this
broad goal, an observational study of infants and young children, recruited
between 3 and 30 months of age, will be mounted, with participants being
observed for 30 minutes in each week (up to 80 consecutive weeks of
observation). At selected ages, children will be tested using standard
developmental assessments to document individual differences in general
psychomotor development, temperament, adult-child interactions relevant to
understanding intentionality, attachment security, and peer social competence.
Growth models will be used to examine the trajectories of change in affect
expression and in several developmental domains. Associations between affect and
various developmental outcomes will be assessed using both correlation and
structural equation model techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this
research will document the developmental pathways of affect experience from 3-6
months through 36-42 months of age (examining multiple cohorts, each recruited
at different age levels). This is the first such study involving children in
extensive non-parental childcare experience from early in the first year. The
study will examine central assumptions from positive psychology, namely that the
experience of positive emotions constitutes the very young child's first level
of awareness about the support for subjective well-being available in the
immediate social context (and conversely, that the experience of negative
affects signals contexts that undermine well-being). The research will estimate
the overall level and the nature of changes in affect experience over time. The
design allows for testing of critical assumptions from theories of attachment
and temperament regarding the social vs. innate influences on tendencies to
experience and express different categories of affect. Finally, this study is
designed to test the nature of relations between affect experience and peer
social competence. Results of this study will be useful for design and
implementation of curricula for infants and preschool children and will have
implications for caregiver preparation.