* 0843921
* SGER: Investigation of dynamic actions of cellulolytic enzymes with micro-cantilever sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Guoliang Yang, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2010
* USD 56,000.00

CBET-0843921 Xi

This research will advance the mechanistic understanding of dynamic actions of
cellulolytic enzyme cellulases on water-insoluble native substrates in a
heterogeneous system. The interactions between cellulases and plant cell
architecture and hierarchy, such as cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin
structures are currently poorly understood. This can be attributed partially to
the lack of an analytical tool capable of examining the interfacial interactions
between the enzymes and the solid substrates. Some of the existing technologies
such as Ellipsometry and Quartz Crystal Microbalance have recently been applied
in such studies but unable to achieve the sensitivity required for dissecting
the entire cellulolytic processes. Because cellulolytic enzymes are the key
enzymes in degrading the cellulosic biomass, the lack of mechanistic
understanding of cellulases has significantly hindered the progress of
developing an efficient and economic bioprocess to produce biofuel from
cellulosic biomass.

A novel method will be used to investigate the interfacial interactions between
cellulases and water-insoluble crystalline cellulose substrates by taking
advantage of an emerging micro-cantilever technology. This approach will allow
us to obtain a more quantitative assessment of cellulase actions and potentially
establish structural-functional relationships of both enzymes and substrates,
which will be essential for developing a new cellulase with improved efficiency
and stability for bioprocessing. A better understanding of these interactions
will also contribute to our fundamental knowledge of interfacial enzyme
catalysis in general, and more importantly will accelerate the development of
biofuels from cellulosic biomass as an alternative energy source that could
potentially have a profound impact on national economy, environment, and
national security.

The proposed research requires a multidisciplinary approach with a collaborative
effort of chemists, biologists, engineer, and physicists. This will facilitate
the on-going effort of developing a highly interdisciplinary research and
educational environment at Drexel University, which will potentially offer a
great opportunity for both graduate and undergraduate students to be exposed to
a broad range of scientific fields, and prepare them to tackle the complex
problems in their future scientific career. The results of this work will be
presented at relevant conferences, and published in peer-reviewed journals.