* 0843119
* Collaborative Research:  Development of sexual life cycles in the marine picoprasinophytes based on molecular homologies with Chlamydomonas
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Alexandra Worden, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,714.00

This interdisciplinary research project addresses two overarching objectives
that will be explored in the prasinophytes, a group thought to represent the
ancestral alga that gave rise to the green lineage (which includes all land
plants). First, the hypothesis will be tested that homeoprotein
heterodimerization represents a conserved feature of haploid/diploid transitions
in green algae. Second, natural and/or genetically engineered sexual cycles will
be developed for the marine picoprasinophyte algae Ostreococcus and Micromonas
based on apparent homologies between their sex-related gene endowment and the
model green alga Chlamydomonas. The picoprasinophytes have small genomes (4
sequenced to date) and are the subject of intensive ecological analysis because
of their widespread distribution in the marine environments where they perform
photosynthesis. Both labs will engage in intensive undergraduate and graduate
student training as well as mentoring of postdoctoral scholars. The WISE program
for disadvantaged 9th graders will focus on marine ecosystems, algal ecology and
evolution as well as basics of molecular biology via hands-on work in local
waters. The goal of this program is to keep young women thriving in the
sciences. Overall this collaborative project will deepen our understandings of
the algal homeoprotein "toolkits" co-opted and expanded during the evolution of
land plants, and facilitate studies of an ecologically vital group of marine
organisms.