* 0843340
* Dissection of the ERECTA receptor-like kinase signaling pathway in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Elena Shpak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 05/31/2014
* USD 406,000.00

Elena Shpak; proposal IOS-843340; Dissection of the ERECTA receptor-like kinase
signaling pathway in Arabidopsis

Plant species vary tremendously in size. While California's coastal redwood tree
can grow to a height of 350 feet, aquatic watermeal plants are so small that
they resemble specks of cornmeal. When variations due to climate and nutrition
are excluded, the mature size of plants is determined by their genes. To
understand how genes control plant size, the researchers are studying the ERECTA
family of genes which regulates division and differentiation of cells in
developing plant organs. How proteins encoded by the ERECTA family genes
function at a molecular level is not known. Preliminary research suggests that
two novel proteins are involved in a cascade of events called the ERECTA
signaling pathway. One of the proteins might control the stability of the ERECTA
protein. To examine the role of these proteins in plant growth, the researchers
will create and analyze plants where these proteins are dramatically reduced or
absent. Another goal of the research is to investigate the function of these
proteins and the regulation of ERECTA stability at the molecular level using a
biochemical approach.

Understanding how ERECTA functions might permit the design of plants with larger
edible organs or fast-growing crops yielding high biomass for alternative fuels.
ERECTA belongs to an important family of plant proteins called "receptor
kinases", and determination of its signaling mechanism might help us understand
many other signaling cascades. This project will provide a training platform for
high school, undergraduate and graduate students, as well as career development
of the new principal investigator. This project also includes integration of the
research with efforts to promote science among middle and high school students,
through participation in the Tennessee Junior Science and Humanities Symposium
and the Tennessee Science Olympiad, and efforts to update and reorganize the
undergraduate Plant physiology course.