* 0843756
* SGER:  Modeling Ionic Polymer Metal Composite Actuators and Sensors for Microgripper Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Ron Lumia, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2010
* USD 59,773.00

Ionic polymer metal composite (IPMC) materials represent a very different
approach to building microgripper fingers, in contrast with the standard
micromachining approach, where semiconductor fabrication tools are used to
create fingers out of polysilicon and related materials. Although there has been
substantial activity in modeling IPMCs, both as actuators and sensors, there is
a significant gap in the knowledge of this fascinating material. There is no
model that predicts the deformation and potential force that the material can
produce when it is cut into an arbitrary shape. This is a significant gap in
knowledge because it forces applications that use this material to simply guess
a ?good? shape for the microgripper fingers. With a model, the design of finger
shapes becomes an optimization problem, i.e., more scientific, less ad hoc. As a
consequence, the modeling results feed into a robust intelligence concept of a
microgripper finger that can perform micromanipulation while it senses its
environment in an effective and intelligent fashion. This work will develop a
model that computes the shape of an arbitrarily shaped IPMC microfinger given an
excitation voltage placed at any location on the finger. This will eventually
lead to microfinger designs that produce desired forces and deflections for
specific applications.