* 0843865
*  The Longitudinal Development of African American English and its Role in School Achievement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Susan Zeisel, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2013
* USD 447,492.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the development
of African American English (AAE) from childhood through adolescence and its
potential impact on literacy acquisition and school achievement based on a
unique, longitudinal database of 70 African American adolescents from low-and
middle-income families. For 17 years, the language, the school achievement, and
the social development of these youth have been progressively documented, from
infancy through childhood and adolescence. Interviews have also been conducted
with mothers during childhood and with peers as children progress in school in
order to compare the speech of these youth with family and friends. Family,
school, and social background factors that may affect the development of AAE and
school achievement during this period have also been documented longitudinally
in order understand the variety of background social and educational factors
that might influence vernacular language changes that occur through childhood
and adolescence. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project completes the data
collection for the final phase of the longitudinal study and undertakes the
detailed analysis of language change and variation during childhood and
adolescence. The study examines different paths of change in the use of AAE
during childhood and adolescence and how these trajectories are linked to
selected family, peer, and school factors. Patterns of language change may
include the stable use or non-use of AAE through childhood and adolescence, the
decline in the use of AAE over childhood and into adolescence, and a curvilinear
trajectory in which AAE variants intensify in early adolescence after a period
of decline or stability during the early elementary school years. The research
further examines how the use of AAE shifts in formal and informal situational
contexts through childhood and adolescence. The use of AAE is correlated with
youth, family, and school characteristics, and examined in terms of the
development of reading skills and other dimensions of school achievement. Growth
curve methods are used to quantify patterns of change in the development of
specific aspects of youths' vernacular dialect to determine their relation to
literacy development and school achievement. The findings should be of great
interest to parents, educators, and researchers concerned with risk issues
related to the school success of African American youth.