* 0843539
* Microbial stimulation of B cell development in rabbit GALT
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Dennis Lanning, Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 628,694.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Dennis Keith Lanning &lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: IOS- 0843539
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Microbial stimulation of B cell development in rabbit
GALT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike mice and humans, rabbits make protective
antibodies by altering their antibody genes in tissues found in the intestinal
tract, such as the appendix. This process requires signals from certain types of
harmless bacteria in the intestinal tract. The goal of this project is to
understand how intestinal bacteria cause rabbit B cells (the cells that make
antibodies) to make changes in their antibody genes. To achieve this goal, the
investigators will identify the pathway that rabbit B cells follow as they move
though the appendix, to determine when and where they interact with bacteria
from the intestinal tract. In addition, the investigators will determine whether
bacteria signal B cells to alter their antibody genes by binding to B cell
receptors that recognize molecules that are widely shared by different types of
bacteria. These studies will determine how harmless bacteria in the intestinal
tract cause rabbit B cells to make changes in their antibody genes that result
in antibodies that protect the rabbit from dangerous bacteria and viruses. The
investigators' results will add to a growing body of knowledge showing that the
bacteria living in the intestinal tract of animals are important for helping
animals develop normally and protect themselves from infections. This project's
broader impacts include its contribution to the investigators' dynamic and
interactive Department of Microbiology and Immunology, which has long been
active in outreach efforts to communicate science to elementary, high school and
undergraduate students, and the public. In addition, this project will provide 2
stipends per summer for the Department's Undergraduate Summer Research Program,
which provides hands-on research experience to college undergraduates
considering a career in biological or medical research.