* 0843680
* The Contribution of Speaking Rate, Talker, and Coarticulation to Lexical Tone Processing: Effects of Language Background and Training
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Joan Sereno, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 05/31/2013
* USD 284,641.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although listening to speech is
typically an effortless task, the actual cues to speech sounds continually
fluctuate due to context. A fundamental issue in the study of speech perception
is how listeners are able to extract and integrate information from the variable
speech signal. This project investigates how perceptual constancy is achieved by
examining three fundamental sources of acoustic variability: changes in the rate
at which an utterance is spoken, differences due to which talker produced the
utterance, and variations resulting from the sentence context. Specifically, the
project will collect data documenting the range of variation that occurs in the
production of utterances and how native speakers adjust to this variation. The
project will also examine how non-native listeners handle this variation. A
final component will determine how training procedures for non-native listeners
can help to achieve more successful second language learning. As such, the
present proposal will contribute to understanding how both native and non-native
listeners are able to adjust to changes in the speech signal such that
proficient language processing is possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
consists of a series of cross-linguistic studies involving the acquisition and
training of cues to speech perception. The research focuses on Mandarin Chinese
lexical tones as an ideal case for extending investigations beyond individual
speech sounds. The project will foster collaborative contact between U.S. and
Chinese institutions due to the international nature of the research. Findings
from these experiments will have direct implications for the teaching of second
languages and may highlight the need for specific phonetic training approaches
in second language classrooms in which learners are systematically exposed to
aspects of contextual variation (such as speaking rate, talker, and
coarticulatory information) to aid in language learning.