* 0843239
* Protein-Protein Interaction Surfaces in Diiron Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Brian Fox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 05/31/2013
* USD 807,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit: Protein-protein interactions help to organize complex
pathways of intercellular communication, promote efficient handling of essential
nutrients within cells, and control the action of enzymes utilized by all living
organisms. This project focuses on understanding the essential role of protein-
protein interactions in enzyme catalysis. The subject of the research is toluene
4-monooxygenase, a bacterial enzyme complex that plays a prominent role in the
catabolism of natural hydrocarbons and man-made pollutants in the environment,
and one that is increasingly used for enzymatic synthesis of valuable compounds.
Toluene 4-monooxygenase is an iron-containing enzyme. Two iron atoms, called a
diiron center, make up the active site where the reaction of electrons, oxygen
gas, and toluene occurs. High-resolution crystal structures of the essential
T4moH-T4moD complex, acquired during a prior NSF-funded project, suggest a new
paradigm for how protein-protein binding will control catalysis. The goal of
this research is to experimentally define how protein-protein interactions and
their associated structural rearrangements contribute to efficient completion of
a highly energetic, multi-step reaction. State-of-the art methods including
biochemical kinetics, protein crystallography, metalloprotein spectroscopy, and
computer simulations will be employed in the research.

Broader Impact: This project is an interdisciplinary effort led by an expert
team of internationally recognized researchers with training in biochemistry,
biophysics, chemistry, and computational methods. Knowledge gained will define,
at the atomic level, how the exquisite interactions of complex protein systems
can achieve difficult, highly selective chemical reactions. During the project,
a collaborative team of undergraduates, graduate students, and post-graduate
fellows will be assembled to complete the scientific objectives. High-school
students that successfully complete instruction from the Dane County Youth
Apprenticeship Program will be matched into the research laboratory for a 1- or
2-year internship, and will participate in all aspects of the project. The
apprentices are nominated by area high schools, and include participants from
underrepresented groups, diverse financial backgrounds, students from rural
areas, and students that will be the first from their family to attend college.
These interactions enhance the diversity of the research environment, increase
opportunities for mentoring, and expand the impact of this program to include
both research and training of new scientists.