* 0843403
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Roles of Perception and Production in Adult Acquisition of a New Dialect's Phonological System
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Zoe Ziliak Michel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2011
* USD 7,470.00

One goal of sociolinguistics is to explain the process of language change.
Language change entails the introduction of a new linguistic feature by one
language user and the adoption of this feature by others. Phonetic change
involves both speech production (how speakers pronounce the sounds of language)
and speech perception (how listeners process and interpret these sounds). A new
linguistic feature must be produced by the first speaker to use the innovation
and then both perceived and eventually produced by the other language users who
subsequently adopt the innovation.

Until recently, however, most sociolinguists have only recorded language users'
production and ignored their perception. This research investigates both the
production and the perception of a group of language users who are exposed to a
new linguistic feature. The results will yield a clearer picture of how
linguistic innovations spread from person to person. This in turn will allow
linguists to better understand the process of language change.

Data will be collected from three participant groups: lifelong residents of
Jasper, Indiana; lifelong residents of Chicago; and Jasper natives who have
moved to Chicago in adulthood. Participants will complete a reading task, a
perception test, and an interview. These tasks will provide data on
participants' production and perception of the Northern Cities Shift, a group of
vowel shifts typical of Chicago. The data will show whether and to what extent
the third group of participants has adopted the Northern Cities Shift. The
results will clarify the roles of production and perception in the spread of
language change and establish whether speech production or perception is more
malleable in adulthood. This study will help linguists understand how perception
and production interact in the adoption of a language change, which social
factors affect whether someone adopts a linguistic innovation, and ultimately
how and why language changes.