* 0843482
* Workshop On: Micro/Nanoelectronics: Devices and Technologies for Biomedical Applications. The Workshop will be held at IMEC in Leuven, Belgium from September 25-26, 2008.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Kensall Wise, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 07/31/2009
* USD 49,125.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt; This objective of this proposal is to request funding to support
a workshop aimed at speeding the development of micro/nanoelectronic devices for
improved healthcare. The workshop will be held at the Interdisciplinary
Microelectronics Center (IMEC) in Leuven, Belgium on September 25-26, 2008. The
workshop will bring together leading researchers from the microsystem and
nanobiotechnology communities to identify grand challenges, promote
collaborations, and recommend research needed to speed the use of these
technologies in biology and biomedicine. This workshop will bring together
scientists and engineers from micr/nano communities and biology and biomedicine
and will try to identify devices and systems that could be used for in-vivo and
in-vitro applications. The two disciplines seem destined to meet at cellular
dimensions, and this workshop seeks to bridge the gap between
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;After nearly four
decades, many of the microelectronic technologies needed for health care are now
emerging. Sophisticated signal processing tasks involving millions of
transistors can be performed on a single chip at microwatt levels. Wireless
technology has created global communication networks and is being reduced to
single chips capable of working in-vivo. MEMS-based sensors now exist for many
physiological parameters, and hermetic wafer-level packaging techniques suitable
for use in implants are emerging. Structures based on nanotechnology are being
combined with microfluidics and being developed to analyze DNA and screen for
proteomic biomarkers of Alzheimer?s disease, heart disease, and cancer. But many
challenges remain. Improved power sources are needed, some perhaps based on
energy scavenging, and the critical interface between the biological environment
and physical monitoring devices must be much better understood. True advances in
health care will likely require the integration of both.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;Health care is one of the most
important problems confronting the 21st century. In 2000, life expectancies
ranged from 35 years in Sierra Leone to 77 in the U.S. and 83 in Japan, and in
U.S. the cost of health care represented 13% of GDP. About 630 million people
worldwide were over the age of 60, but by 2050 this number will increase to over
two billion, an increase of 330%. Clearly something must be done to avoid
catastrophic health care cost. Diagnostic devices based on cellular/molecular
analysis and implantable microsystems for treating many of our most serious
chronic disorders are among the most promising approaches for meeting these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;