* 0843162
* Climate Change Science, Environmental Challenges, and Cultural Anxiety: Historical and Social Perspectives
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* James Fleming, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 25,000.00

This project funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society Program supports a
conference on historical perspectives on climate change at Colby College,
Waterville, Maine, 1-4 April 2009. This conference, titled "Climate Change
Science, Environmental Challenges, and Cultural Anxiety: Historical
Perspectives," is international in scope, interdisciplinary in nature, and
intergenerational in its inclusion of both graduate and undergraduate students.
Efforts are made to recruit minority participants and those from
underrepresented groups. A conference plenary session is advertised to the
general public. The conference is followed by discussion of the presented papers
being prepared for a special issue of Osiris, v. 26, which also includes written
commentaries from this meeting. Graduate and undergraduate students are
involved, with the former presenting their work in a special session aimed at
dissertation improvement and the latter reading all the pre-circulated papers
and serving as conference staff and attendees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field
of historical studies of climate and its changes has begun to emerge in the past
decade and is now poised to attract and engage a critical mass of new and
existing talent. Ten years ago this gathering would not have been possible.
Today, it represents the cutting edge of a growing field, with direct relevance
to climate change in its scientific and social aspects and to best practices in
the history of science and technology as applied both internally and to public
policy considerations. The intent is to produce a volume out of this conference
that is both fully historical and fully relevant. This meeting will bring new
perspectives to bear on a pressing set of public issues, consolidate that which
is known and that which needs further exploration, and serve as a defining
moment for historical work in this interdisciplinary field.