* 0843282
* Lipid Regulation of Transient Receptor Potential Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Damian van Rossum, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/29/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Most if not all plasma-membrane ion-channels are influenced by lipid
interactions, although few characterized roles for lipid-regulation of ion-
channels have been determined. Further, the lipid-binding domains in ion-
channels are often cryptic, and not identified by traditional bioinformatics
approaches. In this project, studies will be focused on the canonical TRP (TRPC)
channels regulate central physiological functions such as neuronal growth cone
guidance, vascular tone regulation, and secretion. TRPC channels are activated
downstream of G protein coupled receptors and phospholipase C (PLC), yet the
exact mechanism of their activation remains obscure. TRPC channels are activated
by lipids, yet the mechanisms are unknown. As TRPC channels do not contain
conventional lipid binding domains, novel approaches are necessary to identify
the structural and functional determinants of TRPC regulation by lipids. The
goal of this project is to computationally predict and experimentally verify
lipid binding domains within the TRPC family. The core predictive approach that
will be utilized within the course of this project is based on structural
comparison of functionally related proteins and identifying evolutionary
conserved amino acid that dictate the function of the given domain. These
predictions will be experimentally validated and assayed for their alteration of
(i) channel activity, (ii) channel multimerizaiton, (iii) trafficking, and (iv)
protein-protein interactions. The tools and data developed in this project are
expected to improve fundamental understanding of ion-channel regulation by
lipids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Both Penn State and University of
Pittsburgh are dedicated to the education of undergraduate and graduate
students. Dr. Patterson, Dr. van Rossum, and Dr. Kiselyov teach cell signaling
related undergraduate and graduate courses. The experimental paradigms and
principles formulated within this project will be brought into the classrooms to
illustrate the development of modern biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Patterson has established a scientific career
development graduate course during which the students will directly participate
in data analysis, manuscript and grant writing as well as scientific
presentations. Dr. Kiselyov and Dr. van Rossum will participate in teaching this
class, in particular covering areas of the course, which extend to channel
function, plasma-membrane signal transduction, and lyzosomal biology. The
present project will provide important experimental and logistical bases for
this course. Further, the course will be taught via simulcast to University of
Pittsburgh and Howard University and broadcast via YouTube, providing access to
anyone interested and incorporated into the University of Pittsburgh-run
Supercourse that connects the US educators with students in developing
countries. Both lab groups actively recruit undergraduate and graduate students
as volunteer and salaried researchers. This project provides an excellent
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate student researchers to gain hands-on
experience in modern biological research.