* 0843922
* High-Resolution Crystallographic Studies of Chemical Reactions and Electron Distributions in Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Philip Coppens, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2013
* USD 695,000.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program,
Professor Philip Coppens and his team will develop X-ray diffraction methods for
the detailed study of photo-induced processes in solids. Chemistry is often
referred to as a science of molecular change; studies of reaction mechanism are
therefore central to chemistry. The studies are designed to increase our
understanding of photo-chemical processes in which light is converted into
chemical energy. The research uses a combination of crystallography,
spectroscopy and theoretical calculations to study chemical reactions which take
place in either pure crystals or in multi-component framework-forming
supramolecular solids. The latter offer great versatility and therefore the
opportunity to observe the effect of the molecular environment on reactivity.
This includes the influence of steric restrictions imposed by the crystal matrix
on the reaction rate and the conformation of the product, the effect of the
chirality of the cavity walls on the nature of the product, and the effect of
host-guest energy transfer which can enhance the reactivity or suppress it,
depending on the direction of the transfer. Concurrent with these activities,
the Coppens group will continue development of the University at Buffalo
Databank of transferable aspherical atoms,including application of aspherical
atom scattering factors, their use in the calculation of the electrostatic
component of intermolecular interactions beyond the point charge model, and
charge density analysis of complexes with controversial bonding
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of chemical reactivity at the atomic
level is relevant for our understanding of chemical reaction mechanisms in
general including catalytic and physiological important processes. The project
concerns a frontier area of science which is pursued in many laboratories across
the world. One of its aims is to keep the US competitive in the field.