* 0843317
* Collaborative Research:   Use of genome-enabled tools to understand symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Pat Fidopiastis, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 05/31/2013
* USD 110,149.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pat Fidopiastis&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: Use of genome enabled tools to understand symbiosis &lt;br/&gt;IOS-
0843317&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The squid-Vibrio fischeri symbiosis has emerged as
an engaging and important model for studying animal colonization by bacteria.
The availability of several sequenced genomes in the genus Vibrio, has made this
a more powerful system than ever for elucidating the complex gene networks that
enable the contrasting lifestyles of bacteria. For this molecular genetics
project which integrates research and education, the investigators will
construct mutant bacteria with defects in each of the more than four thousand
bacterial genes present in V. fischeri. This tool for discovery will then be
used to characterize bacterial traits relevant to animal colonization in high-
throughput assays by six research teams comprised almost entirely of
undergraduate researchers. This library of mutants, along with data from the
multiple parallel assays, will provide a high-resolution network of
functionally-related datasets indexed by gene that will provide an unprecedented
view of gene function in the context of the entire genomes. This library of
mutants will be publicly available for bioinformatics analysis, and thus will
fuel the next generation of experiments. Research increasingly involves high-
throughput molecular genetic and genomics-based strategies for discovery that
often necessitate the coordination of large teams. Therefore, the large number
of students participating in this project will be well prepared for science
careers in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;