* 0843569
* RUI:  Characterization of a Yeast Gene (ENV7) Involved in Vacuole Structure and Function
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Editte Gharakhanian, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2013
* USD 721,589.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The lysosome is the major degradative compartment in eukaryotic cells and is
responsible for clearing of unwanted cellular material as well as down
regulation of cellular communication proteins on the cell surface. Thus, correct
sorting and delivery of molecules to the lysosome is an essential feature of all
eukaryotic cells. The late endosome is the convergence point of two different
trafficking pathways to the lysosome: the endocytic pathway and the biosynthetic
pathway. As such, distinct trafficking events occur at the late endosome as it
interfaces with three compartments: the trans golgi network, endocytic
endosomes, and lysosomes. The long term goal is to define the regulatory
processes at the late endosome to lysosome interface. The late endosome and
vacuole of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are functionally equivalent to the
mammalian late endosome and lysosome; its carboxy peptidase Y (CPY)-pathway of
vacuolar delivery parallels the mannose-6-phosphate pathway in mammalian cells.
Yeast offers the advantage of both conventional and molecular genetic tools; the
large majority of yeast genes identified in lysosomal trafficking have
orthologues in humans. The principal investigator has applied a novel
immunodetection screen to a genomic approach for isolation of mutants defective
at the endosome to vacuole stage of delivery and processing (env mutants). To
date, several new ENV genes have been uncovered, including three orphan genes
that have not been previously characterized. This project involves the molecular
characterization of the orphan gene YPL236C (ENV7) and its product, and
characterization of a mutant lacking the ENV7 gene by biochemical, microscopic,
and molecular approaches. In the absence of Env7 protein, highly fragmented
vacuoles are observed and a precursor form of a vacuole enzyme accumulates
inside cells. These results indicate possible defects in vacuolar function and
biogenesis. Based on published genomic and bioinformatic approaches, the Env7
protein appears to be a palmitoylated protein anchored to the vacuolar membrane;
it contains serine/threonine kinase domains and is unique in yeast as a possible
homologue of STK16, a myristoylated and palmitoylated mammalian serine/threonine
kinase. Kinases are important regulatory enzymes in cells and palmitoylation is
the only known reversible mechanism for anchoring proteins to lipid membranes.
Together, these possibilities render Env7 protein capable of important
regulatory functions. The intellectual merit of this project is its potential to
identify the role of a unique palmitoylated kinase in vacuole structure,
trafficking, and/or function.

The broader impact of this project is to continue productive research training
of undergraduate and masters students, enable continued summer research training
of high school and community college students, and maintain the research
vibrancy of the principal investigator within a comprehensive Hispanic Serving
Institution.