* 0843683
* Fundamental Goals and Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Vladas Griskevicius, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 79,120.00

This multi-site research project examines how fundamental motives such as
mating, self-protection, status-seeking, and affiliation influence basic
cognitive processes such as perception and memory. Whether decisions which
involve the allocation of critically important resources are influenced by
fluctuations in fundamental motivations, such as self-protection, mating, or
status concerns is of interest. These motivations frequently generate
nonlinearities in decision making, and are themselves evoked by the dynamical
interplay of chronic individual goals, ecological circumstances, and acute
situational forces -- processes foundational to complexity science. The
researchers propose a series of studies examining how fundamental motivations
might alter the psychological functions underlying everyday decision-making.
Specifically, they propose to conduct 20 conceptually related studies examining
variation in decision-making as a function of shifting individuals' focus
towards different fitness-relevant problems. Each experiment manipulates
different fundamental motivations (such as status seeking, self-protection, kin
care, disease avoidance, or mating), and examines the effects of such
motivations on decisions about economic risks or trade-offs between different
desirable economic and social outcomes. These motivations frequently generate
nonlinearities in decision making, and are themselves evoked by the dynamical
interplay of chronic individual goals, ecological circumstances, and acute
situational forces. Studies 1-2 examine risk in financial investing; studies 3-8
explore discounting of future versus probabilistic benefits; studies 9-12 focus
on financial loss aversion; studies 13-14 examine loss aversion to different
social benefits; studies 15-16 examine budget allocation between different
economic and social outcomes; and studies 17-20 examine budget allocation
between different outcomes in micro- versus macroeconomic decisions. This work
is influenced by theoretical developments at the interface of evolutionary
biology, cognitive science, and social psychology, and has potential for broad
theoretical advances with critical relevance to important everyday decisions.
The work proposed here is representative of complexity science.