* 0843519
* 2009 ACS Symposium on Stimuli-Responsive Polymeric Materials; held August 16-20, Washington, D.C.
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Shaoqin 'Sarah' Gong, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

The 2009 ACS Stimuli-Responsive Polymeric Materials Symposium will be held
August 16-20, 2009, in Washington D.C. during the 238th ACS National Meeting
&amp; Exposition. Stimuli-responsive polymeric materials is a multidisciplinary
research field involving chemistry, material science, physics, biological
science, and engineering. The purpose of this symposium is to bring together
scientists working in this diverse and fast-growing research field to share
their important and exciting research advances through oral presentations,
posters, and face-to-face communication. This symposium will emphasize new
chemistry to synthesize, new strategies to formulate, new tools to characterize,
and new theories/models to understand the stimuli-responsive polymeric
materials, as well as new devices made of such materials including sensors,
actuators, and smart drug delivery systems. A number of prominent researchers
worldwide from academia and industry will be invited to present their cutting-
edge research topics and discuss the potential opportunities and grand
challenges in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participation of young
researchers, including graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, as well
as women and those from underrepresented minority groups, will be strongly
encouraged. If successful, this symposium will help to (1) identify various new
strategies to develop novel stimuli-responsive polymers; (2) stimulate new
applications of such materials; (3) strengthen interdisciplinary research; and
(4) train the new-generation researchers in this diverse field. &lt;br/&gt;