* 0843304
* Collaborative Research:  Decorrelation of natural inputs in lateral geniculate nucleus of behaving monkeys
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Michele Rucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 04/30/2015
* USD 13,649.00

Information that leaves the eye first encounters a structure called the lateral
geniculate nucleus (LGN). From the LGN, information is relayed to the cortex,
where neurons have properties closely related to our perceptual experience. To
understand how the cortex acquires its remarkable abilities, data on its inputs
from the LGN are needed. When we view objects in the world, the neurons in the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) are stimulated by small regions of space called
their receptive fields. This project will record the electrical responses of the
LGN neurons of monkeys performing a visual task. Linear mathematical models of
the receptive fields of LGN neurons will be constructed based on their responses
to simple forms. These models will be used to predict responses of the LGN cells
to natural scenes. In addition, the effects of regions of space surrounding the
receptive fields will be assessed. These surrounding regions are expected to
reduce the activity of the LGN neurons so that they are more efficient and they
conserve energy. In addition to improved understanding of the mechanisms
underlying human perception, the results may help to generate ideas about
improved designs of artificial vision systems that have wide applications in
industry. This collaborative project will provide training for a graduate
student in neuroscience at the University of Texas and will also provide
training and data for graduate students doing mathematical modeling at Boston
University.