* 0843988
* Effects of Variability on Early Word Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Leher Singh, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2012
* USD 41,802.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do infants learn words? Before they
can attach meaning to words, children must understand what constitutes a word in
their language. This task is complicated by the problem of variability:
Everytime we hear a particular word, its physical form changes as a function of
the speaker, their emotional state, and the words that surround it. None of
these changes alter the meaning of a word, so listeners must disregard these
changes when deriving word meanings. This is often termed "the variability
problem." The variability problem has been extensively researched in adults but
has received relatively little attention in the population on whom it is likely
to exert the greatest influence - infants and young children who are building
their first vocabulary. The work proposed probes the effects of variability on
the genesis and expansion of early vocabularies in both monolingual and
bilingual learners. The questions addressed use standard behavioral paradigms
established in infant language processing research to investigate how infants
reduce complex linguistic input to its meaningful essentials. Analyses focus on
the efficiency and accuracy with which children learn words in spite of everyday
variability and on the mechanisms that facilitate this process. Findings are
expected to reveal possible mechanisms by which word learning emerges and
matures in both young bilingual and monolingual
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall importance of this work lies in its
focus on a fundamental, yet unresolved, question in language acquisition: How do
children develop knowledge about words given the immense variability of human
speech? The number of infants raised in multilingual homes from birth is
increasing rapidly in the United States. This research will inform evidence-
based practice (including child-rearing practices) and policy by exploring the
consequences of bilingualism for early vocabulary development.