* 0843165
* Functional Determinants of Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* James Nairne, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 05/31/2013
* USD 392,283.00

Functional Determinants of Memory James S. Nairne

Abstract

Our capacity to remember is certainly the product of an extended period of
evolution. Yet if human memory evolved, sculpted by the processes of natural
selection, then its processes likely bear the "footprints" of ancestral
selection pressures. In particular, our memory systems should be "tuned" to
retain information that is fitness-relevant, pertaining to survival and
reproduction. Until recently, psychologists have ignored this possibility, but
work in the researcher's laboratory has shown that thinking about the survival
relevance of information leads to superior long-term memory -- better, in fact,
than virtually all known study techniques. As one example, asking experimental
participants to rate a list of arbitrarily selected words for each item's
potential survival value leads to significantly higher rates of recall and
recognition than traditional study procedures (e.g., even effective techniques
such as rating items for pleasantness or forming a visual image). Still, the
psychological mechanisms that underlie fitness-relevant memory processing remain
essentially unknown and largely unexplored. Do we have special memory mechanisms
designed to retain fitness-relevant information? Are these mechanisms rooted in
the remnants of a stone-age brain? Our research explores these questions by
comparing and contrasting how memory operates in fitness-relevant and fitness-
irrelevant situations. The research investigates memory's role in the formation
of social contracts as well, and in the processing of prospective mating
partners. Do people have special memory mechanisms for retaining information
about people who cheat, perform altruistic acts, and for potential mates?
Answers to these questions will be determined by having people imagine
themselves in fitness-relevant situations, such as seeking food or a prospective
mate, followed by the administration of diagnostic retention tests. Previous
work suggests that the study of adaptive memory may lead to a fundamental
reconceptualization of basic memory mechanisms: Rather than general processes
designed to operate the same way in all environments, memory's operating
characteristics may well vary depending on the particular problem context.

To understand how memory works, and to develop effective techniques for memory
improvement, it is essential to understand the function of memory and, more
specifically, to understand how and why memory evolved. Memory likely evolved to
help us solve adaptive problems, such as finding food, avoiding predators, or
attracting prospective mates. Recognizing the adaptive roots of memory is key to
understanding its basic mechanisms, just as understanding the adaptive function
of the heart or the liver is vital to understanding their ultimate structure.
The researcher's research systematically explores the function of memory in
fitness-relevant contexts, such as the search for food, the avoidance of
predators, or in assessing the trustworthiness of potential cheaters.
Understanding how memory is used to solve the problems of survival, the
formation of social contracts, and reproduction will provide critical insight
into how and why memory systems formed, and why they work the way they do. As
our understanding of memory's inherent "tunings" increases, our ability to
calibrate our learning strategies, and to teach others to remember effectively,
will increase as well. For example, educators commonly promote study strategies
based on the processing of meaning, or "visualizing" the material, whereas the
researcher has shown that a few seconds of focused adaptive processing (i.e.,
how is the material relevant to survival or dealing with significant others)
produces substantially better long-term retention.