* 0843962
* International Materials Institute for Solar Energy Conversion
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Mark Ratner, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2014
* USD 4,174,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award Northwestern University
will establish an International Materials Institute (IMI) for Solar Energy
Conversion. Although conventional silicon and other semiconductor solar cells
have achieved high efficiency for solar energy conversion, their production
costs remain high. Organic photovoltaic cells (OPVC) might yield cost-effective
green energy for a wide variety of applications. The efforts of this IMI are
focused on theory-guided fundamental research on OPVC - new materials design,
processing, and device fabrication to understand physical processes and
limitations to efficient conversion and storage of solar energy. Northwestern
University, Louisiana State University and Argonne National Laboratory along
with Tsinghua University in China will form the core partnership to lead the
efforts of the IMI. Researchers from 35 more institutions worldwide including
USA, China, Australia, Germany, Japan, South Africa, and Taiwan will participate
as standing partners. IMI activities include exchange visits of faculty,
postdoctoral scholars, and students among core partners, annual symposia and
workshops for all partners to exchange research findings and development of a
global cyber-based network for year-around communication of solar energy
research. The IMI will integrate research and education with a strong focus on
global leadership development for graduate students, undergraduate courses on
energy conversion topics, teaching modules on solar energy topics for K-12, and
inform the public about solar energy conversion and its role in energy
conservation via museum and media presentations. A Leadership Council consisting
of the lead researchers from core partner institutions will provide oversight
and internal assessment of the research and education programs of the IMI.
Guidance and external evaluation will be provided by a rotating Technical
Advisory Board consisting of representatives from academia, industry and
government laboratories.