* 0844034
* RUI: Dynamic Control of Electrophilic Carbene Additions to Strained C-C Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Dina Merrer, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2014
* USD 283,626.00

RUI: Dynamic Control of Electrophilic Carbene Additions to Strained C-C
Bonds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports Dr. Dina C. Merrer's
undergraduate research program at Barnard College. The Merrer group elucidates
the mechanisms (pathways) of extremely exothermic organic reactions with low or
zero activation energies using experimental and computational techniques. The
group has thus far determined that dihalocarbenes add to strained carbon-carbon
(C-C) bonds such as those in cyclopropene and benzocyclopropene substrates in a
one-step manner, through a single transition state that undergoes post-
transition state branching of the pathway to several products. &lt;br/&gt;The
formation of multiple products in an organic chemical reaction typically
signifies the existence of multiple reaction mechanisms. However, when multiple
products appear to derive from the same pathway, using traditional transition
state theory (TST) to describe the reaction is inadequate. Formation of the
products is instead controlled by molecular dynamics. Molecular dynamics include
the motions, velocity, acceleration, and momenta of the reacting molecules as
well as the way in which these factors change molecular shape and potential
energy over the course of the reaction.&lt;br/&gt;The substrates in the carbene
addition reactions must possess a threshold amount of strain energy to induce
dynamic control, and this threshold lies between 30 and 40 kcal/mol. As detailed
in this grant, the group plans to: (a) determine the threshold strain energy in
C-C multiple-bond systems required to observe dynamic control, and (b) determine
the limits of reactivity of halocarbenes with C-C single bonds. These two goals
will be examined via mechanistic and dynamic studies of halocarbene reactions
with three classes of strained substrates: (1) cyclopropenes, cyclooctyne, and
cycloheptyne; (2) trans-bicyclo[n.1.0]alkanes; and (3) norbornadiene and
bridgehead olefins with strain energies between 30 and 40 kcal/mol.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted at Barnard College, a liberal arts
college for women affiliated with Columbia University. A liberal arts
environment provides exceptional opportunities to overlap research with the
education of undergraduate students. These research projects provide educational
opportunities for the PI's student co-workers not afforded them in the formal
laboratory curriculum. These include using both classical (product studies) and
modern (laser flash photolysis and computational chemistry) physical organic
techniques. To date, 14 Barnard undergraduates have participated in the research
funded by the PI's past NSF grant, nine of whom have since graduated. Of these
nine students, six have begun or will begin advanced-degree programs in
chemistry, biochemistry, medicine, or public health. &lt;br/&gt;This grant's
research will extend the chemistry community's understanding of carbene addition
mechanisms and the extent to which these mechanisms are governed by reaction
dynamics, as well as provide the PI with increased opportunities to excite and
encourage bright and capable women to pursue careers in science.