* 0844872
* CAREER: Approximation Algorithms and Hardness of Network Optimization Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Julia Chuzhoy, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 12/31/2013
* USD 460,690.00

CAREER: Approximation Algorithms and Hardness of Network Optimization Problems
Julia Chuzhoy

Network optimization problems play a central role in combinatorial optimization,
and they arise in virtually every area of computer science. Since many such
problems are NP-hard, a natural approach is to settle for efficient algorithms
that produce near-optimal, or approximate, solutions. Many powerful algorithmic
paradigms, and techniques used in proving lower bounds on approximability, have
been developed in the context of network optimization problems, leading to a
better understanding of many important problems in this class. Despite this
progress, some of the most fundamental network optimization problems remain
poorly understood. This research will focus on central open problems in the
areas of graph partitioning, graph coloring, network design and network routing.
One goal of this research is to advance the understanding of the approximability
of these problems. The PI would also like to explore the connections between
algorithm design and hardness of approximation proofs, and to combine tools
developed in the areas of approximation algorithms, graph theory, hardness of
approximation and probabilistically checkable proofs in exploring the
approximability of network optimization problems.

Better approximation algorithms for network optimization problems will lead to
improved performance for many applications, and will most probably require the
development of new algorithmic paradigms. Understanding and isolating features
that make problems intractable will help in finding better formulation for
practical problems in the framework of combinatorial optimization, when such
features can be avoided. The educational component of this project includes
introducing a new course on approximation of network optimization problems. The
PI will also participate in activities aimed at encouraging a broader
involvement of women in research in theoretical computer science. These
activities include participation in workshops and mentorship programs whose
target audience is advanced undergraduate and graduate female students.