* 0844106
* RUI:  The Role of Childhood Language Memory in Adult Language Learning:  Korean Adoptees Learning Korean as Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sun-Ah Jun, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 477,644.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Extensive research has demonstrated that early linguistic experience is critical
for achieving native-like proficiency in a language. However, what remains
unclear is whether early linguistic experience that is limited only to the very
early years can still aid the adult language learner when relearning the
language, even after many years of disuse. In one series of studies of Korean
adoptees who were completely cut off from Korean when they were adopted (between
ages 3 and 8), the adoptees do not seem to show any advantages of their early
experiences with Korean. In fact, they appear to show no memory for their
childhood language, which seems to indicate that without continued experience
with a childhood language, the benefits of early linguistic experience cannot be
maintained. In contrast, other studies indicate that adult learners of a
heritage language that they spoke or heard only during early childhood do show
benefits of such early, discontinued linguistic experience. Although they did
not have regular experience with the language after early childhood, these adult
learners speak with a better accent than those adult learners who have not had
such experiences, thus demonstrating that the benefits of early linguistic
experience can be maintained, even when that experience is not continued after
early childhood. Why is childhood language memory accessible for the adult
heritage language learners but not the adoptees? Perhaps the childhood language
memory is intact in both cases, but the adoptees cannot access their memory
because they have not used or heard the language in many years. In contrast,
adult learners of a childhood language may be able to re-access these memories
because relearning the language helps activate an old memory. Thus, if Korean
adoptees were to relearn their childhood language, they might be able to tap
back into their childhood language. Alternatively, adults who relearned their
heritage language may have had some limited but continued exposure to their
childhood language through family members or members of the heritage community.
This project will therefore investigate the relearning of Korean among adult
Korean adoptees, a group that would not have experienced continued exposure to
the language after early childhood. In Study 1, adoptees who are learning Korean
as adults will take part in a language assessment at the beginning and end of
their first-semester Korean language course. In Study 2, adoptees with no prior
experience with Korean will take part the same language assessment before and
after a series of perceptual training sessions focusing on Korean stop
consonants. In both studies, adoptees? performance will be compared to that of
English-monolingual non-adoptees to see whether adoptees show any advantage over
first-time learners of the language. They will also be compared to native Korean
speakers to assess how native-like their abilities are. We will also investigate
whether these effects vary with a range of psychological and emotional factors.

This study will enrich our understanding of how early language experiences can
impact adult language learning. It will inform us about the role of early,
discontinued language experience on later language learning, which has
implications for parents who may want to expose their young children to more
than one language. Additionally, the study will inform parents of
internationally adopted children who may want to help their children in learning
or maintaining their childhood language. It will also contribute to our
understanding of adoptee development by examining how pre-adoption experiences
may affect later development, even in adulthood. Finally, the study will aid in
the design of language instruction courses, especially for those programs in
which many of the language learners come from various types of heritage
backgrounds.