* 0844442
* CAREER:   Dissecting the Molecular Determinants of Specificity in Two-Component Signal Transduction Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Michael Laub, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2015
* USD 900,000.00

CAREER: Dissecting the Molecular Determinants of Specificity in Two-Component
Signal Transduction Systems Two-component signal transduction systems, comprised
of histidine kinases and their cognate response regulators, are one of the
predominant means by which bacteria sense and respond to environmental stimuli.
The versatility of these systems is reflected in their prevalence throughout the
bacterial kingdom, with most species encoding tens or hundreds of such proteins.
The faithful transmission of information through these signaling pathways and
the avoidance of harmful cross-talk demand exquisite specificity of kinase-
regulator interactions. This project aims to map the amino acids that dictate
the specificity of these interactions. The work incorporates both computational
studies of amino-acid coevolution as well as rational mutagenesis coupled with
detailed biochemical characterizations. Finally, the research aims to examine
the fitness consequences to increased cross-talk between closely-related
pathways. This work will help to reveal (i) the fundamental basis of molecular
recognition in an important class of signaling proteins and (ii) how cells
coordinate the specificity of multiple, highly-related pathways. Broader
Impacts: Understanding protein-protein specificity is a fundamental challenge in
biology. While structural approaches can sometimes reveal the basis of
specificity, that is not always the case, and some transient signaling complexes
are refractory to structural analysis. The tools and approaches developed in
this project may serve as an alternative, or complement, to structural
approaches for understanding protein-protein interactions. Finally, a complete
understanding of interaction specificity will enable the rational reprogramming
of signaling pathways, leading the way to better, more sophisticated synthetic
signaling circuits, with potential applications in bioremediation and biosensor
development. This project also includes efforts by the primary investigator to
develop and enhance two innovative new courses. As biology becomes an
increasingly quantitative discipline, there is an urgent need to update the
training of today's graduate students. The PI aims to further develop a new
course called "Quantitative Biology" that provides graduate students at MIT with
critical skills in statistics, probability, bioinformatics, microarray analysis,
modeling, and systems biology. In addition to traditional lectures and primary
literature discussions, students learn Matlab, a powerful tool for solving
mathematical and computational problems in biology. The PI is also developing a
new laboratory course that enables undergraduates to conduct novel, cutting-edge
research projects using new tools and technologies, such as DNA microarrays.
Finally, the PI is also actively involved in establishing a new,
interdisciplinary microbiology graduate program.