* 0844707
* CAREER: Wind Power - Multilevel Control, Intelligent Grid Integration and Real Time Digital Simulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jie Cui, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Wind Power - Multilevel Control, Intelligent Grid Integration
&lt;br/&gt;and Real Time Digital Simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: The objective of this research is to
investigate methodologies for real time modeling and simulation, novel control
structures, and intelligent integration technologies for high penetration of
wind power. The approach is to (1) derive multilevel coordinated control and
protection for wind power operation at levels of a System Operator, a Wind Power
Plant Dispatch Center, and individual Wind Turbine Generators; (2) investigate
application of intelligent technologies for wind power grid integration; (3)
establish a reconfigurable wind power simulation platform for realistic,
dynamic, real-time modeling and simulation of wind energy conversion
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This research will yield
fundamental contributions in terms of new theories, control algorithms, and
technologies for wind energy utilization. Specifically, the research will
provide solutions to key issues for resilient and reliable wind power system
operation. If successful, our timely findings will facilitate the deployment of
large-scale wind power into the future smart grid and thus enable our society?s
paradigm shift to renewable energy resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project will yield many far-reaching benefits for society and the
nation as a whole by training of well-qualified workforce and participation of
underrepresented groups in wind power engineering, a rapidly evolving area faced
with international competition. Through the project, collaborations with leading
industries and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory will bring technological
breakthroughs for wind energy utilization; outreach and recruiting activities
will attract more minority students and the younger generation into the power
engineering field. The power engineering community will benefit from broad-based
dissemination of the research findings in leading journals, conferences,
workshops, internet, short courses and tutorials.