* 0844386
* Flexarray 3D Passive Seismic Imaging of Core-complex Extension in the Ruby Range, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Simon Klemperer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 136,197.00

The most highly-extended regions of continental crust, known as core-complexes,
and their bounding structures, typically mapped as low-angle faults even though
these defy predictions of the mechanical behavior of the crust, are among the
most controversial aspects of continental extension. These features have defied
easy explanation because scientists have lacked clear images of their deep
underpinnings. Earthscope's FlexArray is allowing a new generation of imaging
procedures. Traditionally, seismologists studying the lithosphere have been
restricted by limitations on available equipment to deploying single lines of
receivers, allowing imaging of two-dimensional cross-sections through the crust.
Earthscope's FlexArray finally provides enough instrumentation that a two-
dimensional array at the surface can be deployed, allowing reconstruction of a
three-dimensional (3D) image volume at depth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Basin-
and-Range Province in Nevada offers unparalleled exposure of diverse styles of
extension, including the metamorphic core complexes that juxtapose ductilely
deformed mid-crustal rocks with unmetamorphosed, brittly-deformed supracrustal
rocks. This relationship implies significant horizontal extension, compensated
at the scale of the whole crust either by large-magnitude simple shear or
significant lateral and vertical flow of the lower crust. Elucidating the
relationship between simultaneous deformation of the upper and lower crust
requires geophysical data of sufficient resolution to convincingly show how the
surface geology is linked to - or disconnected from - features at depth.
Uncertainty in the total stretching involved is a major unknown in tectonic
reconstruction of extensional provinces wherever such core complexes occur
around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation?s
Earthscope Science program is teaming with the Petroleum Research Fund of the
American Chemical Society to sponsor a 3D study of the classic Ruby Mountain
Metamorphic Core Complex and its adjacent basins (Lamoille-Huntington Valley
&amp; Ruby Valley) to look for evidence of crustal flow into the metamorphic
core. This region is being targeted because the existing data that surround the
Ruby Mountains allow detailed interpretation of the new geophysical results in a
larger 3D volume. The detailed FlexArray geophysical studies of the crust and
upper mantle, using a 40-station array of passive, broadband seismometers, will
provide an important link between Transportable Array data and surface geologic
data to develop understanding of continental structure, deformation and
evolution, and the lithospheric-scale processes involved in extensional orogens.
Established passive-recording techniques (ambient-noise tomography, receiver-
function velocity inversions, common-conversion point imaging, crustal
anisotropy analyses) are being applied in 3D instead of the more commonplace two
dimensions, and at a higher resolution (5-km spacing) than is yet typical for
this class of studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this experiment will
allow evaluation of models for crustal flow at depth beneath extending regions,
and thereby help understand the progression of lower-crustal strain in space and
time across extending regions. Characterizing these processes in more detail is
a fundamental step towards advancing our knowledge of continental rifting and
the evolution of sedimentary basins world-wide. The results should also be of
interest to gold-mining companies active in Nevada: the Ruby Range may expose
underpinnings of the adjacent Carlin Trend, the largest gold-producing region in
the Americas, as well as helping understand the geologic framework that gave
rise to Nevada's most destructive earthquake for over 50 years (the February
2008 Wells magnitude 6 earthquake).