* 0844162
* Co-Evolution of Orographic Precipitation Patterns and Topography in the Western Ghats, India
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Stephen Nesbitt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/28/2014
* USD 339,484.00

Precipitation is a fundamental driver of erosional processes and strongly
influences topographic evolution. Topography affects the spatial distribution of
precipitation in mountain ranges such that precipitation patterns and topography
form a coupled system and evolve together. The Western Ghats of India provide a
natural laboratory for interdisciplinary study of the interactions between
precipitation and topography. A steep and high escarpment stretching for more
than 1500 kilometers has persisted over tens of millions of years. The South
Asian Summer Monsoon produces heavy precipitation across the region that but
does not penetrate into narrow canyons in the Ghats Breaches. The relationship
between topography and precipitation patterns will be better constrained with
existing TRMM (Total Rainfall Measuring Mission) satellite precipitation radar
data and a new in-situ precipitation gauge network. A mesoscale atmospheric
model, the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, will be used to
investigate airflow, cloud, and precipitation processes through case studies and
idealized simulations. This model will establish the dominant precipitation
processes and clarify the dynamics that govern the observed relationships
between precipitation patterns and topography. The relationship between
precipitation patterns and erosion will be examined by comparing suspended
sediment yield and reservoir sedimentation rates with precipitation patterns.
The long-term relationship between climate and topography will be investigated
with a numerical landscape evolution model. It is expected that the decrease in
precipitation toward the headwaters of narrow canyons will limit incision and
favor a transition toward broad embayments. This mechanism has the potential to
heal irregularities in the escarpment front and help to maintain steep
topography over very long time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project asks
two fundamental questions: how does precipitation influence the evolution of
topography and what feedback mechanisms exist? These questions are inherently
interdisciplinary, and the idea that atmospheric and geologic processes are
intimately linked is an important research area in the earth sciences. The
relationship between rainfall patterns and mountain ranges is particularly
important, since these may affect how climate changes in the future. The use of
satellite measurements, numerical models, and field measurements will provide a
quantitative assessment of the interaction among precipitation patterns, erosion
rates, and topography. This approach allows for examination of both the effects
of topography on local climate and the impact of climate on physical landscapes
down to the scale of individual river basins. Such knowledge will be useful in
land-use planning and in protection against natural hazards. Collaboration with
Indian scientists ensures that the knowledge gained will be available for
application to development and conservation planning in the region.
Additionally, graduate and undergraduate students in India and the United States
will participate in the research.