* 0844850
* CAREER: Opportunistic Middleware for Delay-Tolerant Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Christine Julien, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2015
* USD 422,680.00

0844850&lt;br/&gt;Christine Julien&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at
Austin&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Opportunistic Middleware for Delay-Tolerant
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delay-tolerant networks are characterized by
extreme unpredictability of connectivity due to disconnections between senders
and receivers that often persist for long periods of time. This style of network
has become increasingly important, largely due to emerging applications, such as
enabling access to the Internet in remote areas, social networking, and mobile
search and rescue. Existing solutions are generally tailored to very specific
applications, instead of focusing on application properties in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project uses applications' common
characteristics to drive the development of coordination support for delay-
tolerant networks by simplifying application development and providing an
expressiveness that enables new classes of fluid and responsive applications.
The project begins by developing an understanding of coordination in delay-
tolerant networks by developing a theory of temporally extended conversations
among communicating parties. To support these conversations, the research also
examines the creation of new communication protocols that adapt their behavior
in response to changing conditions, enabling the communication infrastructure to
continue to meet applications' requirements, even as the network's operating
conditions change. To support this adaptation, the project develops new notions
of context-awareness, or the ability to collect and interpret information about
an application's environment. The project ties these three components together
to create an adaptive middleware for delay-tolerant networks that provides a
software support system that enables application developers to use simple
constructs to create expressive coordinating applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project includes an education agenda
that relies on these tangible applications for delay-tolerant networks to
increase the accessibility of mobile computing to students and the public
through hands-on demonstrations and course projects.