* 0844941
* CAREER:   Toward the Genetics of Meiosis:  Integration of Meiotic Molecular Biology and Public School Science Outreach
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Jeremy Ward, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 875,000.00

Scientific Research This project uses a combination of genetics, cell biology,
and molecular biology to determine the structure and function of the mouse gene
Cyclin B1 interacting protein 1 (Ccnb1IP1) during male and female meiosis. This
research has three components: (1) to determine the complete gene and messenger
RNA transcript structure for Ccnb1IP1, (2) to determine specific protein-protein
interactions involving CCNB1IP1 during meiosis in mice, and (3) to identify the
extent and cause of chromosomal defects in female meiosis. This research will
advance knowledge across the field of meiotic biology by providing a new mouse
resource for study, by elucidating the protein networks necessary for
progression through meiosis, and by determining the key constituents of female
meiosis. This work represents an important contribution to the research
community because it increases the understanding of meiosis, a process of
central importance for the generation of life's diversity through sexual
reproduction.

Broader Impacts This project describes a program to conduct state-of-the-art
molecular biological research and to integrate that research into the curricula
of local public schools. An outreach program will be developed and staffed by
Middlebury College undergraduate students, using a mobile DNA lab called the
Gene Wagon, as an integral part of the undergraduate research program. Students
will travel to local schools and, in collaboration with local teachers, will
design and implement genetics-based educational laboratories. Additionally, this
project will engage public school teachers through direct participation in
primary research each summer. This project will improve interest and learning in
biology in a school district with high rates of students below the poverty
level. The benefits to society of this project are that basic research in
meiosis will provide fundamental information regarding how organisms reproduce,
generate genetic diversity, and as a result how they evolve. Further the
principal investigator will be preparing teachers and students to succeed as
scientists. The community outreach program will directly affect all local
students but will be particularly beneficial to the rural poor. As a model, this
program will also serve to stimulate the implementation of other such outreach
programs in the area.