* 0844890
* CAREER: Passivity-Based Distributed Frameworks for Multiuser Shared Haptic Collaboration over the Internet
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2016
* Dongjun Lee, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 02/29/2016
* USD 455,889.00

The main goal of this project is to develop theoretical foundations for
robustly-stable and high-fidelity shared haptic collaboration among
geographically-distributed multiple users over the Internet. For this, the
project utilizes: 1) distributed architecture for real-time responsiveness of
each user?s haptic feedback regardless of Internet?s latency; and 2) passivity
(of total distributed architecture) as a means for robust-stability of haptic
interaction with a wide-range of heterogeneous human users. More specifically,
the project focuses and investigates the following three key research tasks: 1)
discrete-time passive haptic simulation algorithms for consistent/scalable
deployment of the shared virtual environment, particularly among
(computationally) heterogeneous users; 2) haptically-convincing physics-based
passive hierarchical model reduction frameworks to mitigate
communication/computing burdens, particularly when the shared virtual
environment is of large-scale; and 3) high-performance passive local replica
synchronization frameworks over the Internet for crisp/stable shared haptic
experience, and fundamental performance limitation given communication
imperfectness.

By providing systematic and theoretical frameworks, this project will
significantly advance the current state of the art, which is largely heuristic,
ad-hoc and qualitative. This project is also expected to produce new
results/perspectives/frameworks for general haptics/telerobotics as well as for
adjacent research fields.

The theoretical foundations laid by this project will make many powerful
applications closer to reality (e.g. virtual collaborative surgical training,
pre-manufacturing product evaluation, virtual collaborative sculpting,
haptically-enabled networked games, etc). Perhaps more importantly, this project
may fundamentally change how we interact with each other in the cyberspace.

Education/dissemination activities of this project will include: development of
new hands-on and research-level robotics courses; student advising/mentoring,
particularly for minority students; haptics summer camp for K-12, particularly
for female students; seminars in local high schools and public demonstrations;
project web site, international collaboration, and book writing.









