* 0844015
* Social and Statistical Mechanisms of Prelinguistic Vocal Development
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Jennifer Schwade, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 03/31/2013
* USD 351,859.00

How do infants learn to produce the sounds of their language? The vocal
abilities of infants change dramatically over the first year of life. Beginning
with the earliest, immature vocalizations, infants make rapid progress,
typically producing their first words by 12 months of age. Along the way, they
begin to produce speech-like syllables and to structure sequences of syllables
in accordance with the phonological patterns of their language environment.
While the vocal achievements of the first year are well-described, not nearly as
much is known about the mechanisms of change that drive vocal development.
However, many studies of song learning in birds, as well as the investigators'
preliminary studies, indicate that the social environment is a source of rich
structure and feedback that can guide early vocal learning and development. Can
prelinguistic infants use social feedback to create new, more developmentally
advanced vocalizations? The investigators hypothesize that two processes enable
social influences on vocal learning. During the first 6 months, infants learn
that their babbling reliably affects adults' behavior. From this early learning,
infants become attuned to social responses to their vocalizing. Over the next 6
months, infants use the contingent reactions of caregivers to their babbling to
guide their vocalizations towards the phonological patterns of their language.
Acquiring knowledge of underlying patterns that govern the relations among
multiple examples is a process known as statistical learning. To investigate
these processes of vocal learning, the form and timing of caregivers' reactions
to their infants' sounds will be manipulated. First, the process of learning
associations between babbling and caregivers' reactions will be investigated in
2- to 5-month-old infants. Infants' information-processing capacities and
caregivers' natural responsiveness to babbling will be used to predict
individual differences in learning. Second, the statistical properties and
contingency of speech to 9-month-old infants will be manipulated to assess their
effects on vocal learning. The role of statistical learning in speech perception
and production will be directly compared. Finally, the relation between the two
learning mechanisms (associative learning at 2 to 5 months and statistical
learning at 9 months) will be determined. Findings from these studies will allow
the investigators to construct a new theoretical framework for vocal
development, integrating data from social learning and speech perception. The
experiments will benefit from new applications of digital technologies that
allow caregiver behavior to be manipulated in real-time (via instructions given
over wireless headphones) during naturalistic interaction. At the same time,
changes in infants' vocalizations will be recorded and analyzed.

The proposed research has broad and fundamental implications for educating
parents in providing optimal learning environments for their infants. An
understanding of the role of socially guided learning in speech and language
could be used to help caregivers to be more sensitive to infants' behavior in
ways that would facilitate development. Investigating social influences on
phonological development will contribute to the study of speech-language
pathology and of processes underlying both successful and disordered
communicative development. This research will provide a framework for
understanding the role of early social learning in communication and language
deficits such as those seen in autism and Down's syndrome. By elucidating
mechanisms by which infants learn from caregivers, these findings will be useful
in designing behavioral interventions for infants with developmental disorders.