* 0844084
* CAREER: Evaporation-Driven Self-Assembly of Hierarchically Ordered Structures from Confined Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Zhiqun Lin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 10/31/2011
* USD 406,251.00

0844084&lt;br/&gt;Z. Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal
is to develop a simple, yet robust, one-step method via evaporation for creating
nanostructured materials with hierarchical order in a precisely controllable
manner, dispensing with the need for lithographic techniques and external
fields. To achieve this goal, two specific objectives are proposed: (1) create
hierarchically ordered structures via the synergy of evaporation-driven self-
assembly at the microscopic scale and spontaneous self-assembly at the
nanoscopic scale; and (2) develop theoretical models to understand the
mechanisms of structure formation. We intend to design hierarchical structures
consisting of either diblock copolymers or quantum dots (QDs) self-assembled at
the nanoscale that can serve as multifunctional materials for potential
applications in optical, electronic, optoelectronic, and sensing materials and
devices. Hierarchically ordered structures are produced by combining two or more
self-assembling processes on different length scales, i.e., dynamic self-
assembly via irreversible solvent evaporation in restricted geometries (i.e.,
curve-on-flat geometries) at the microscopic scale and spontaneous self-assembly
of diblock copolymers or QDs at the nanoscale. This approach utilizes concurrent
self-assemblies as a means to precisely organize unique nanomaterials into
spatially ordered structures. The research findings will be treated within the
broader context of nanomaterials science and utilized for nanoscience and
nanotechnology education. Integrated educational activities will be developed to
expose a wide range of audiences, including K-12 students, to this new
nanoscience and nanotechnology knowledge, thereby promoting general awareness of
its importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research is manifested in the innovative studies of exploiting restricted
geometries (i.e., curve-on-flat geometries) as unique environments for
controlling flow within an evaporating droplet, which, in turn, regulates the
well-ordered structure formation in one step. The proposed CAREER project is
significant because it will lead to a new paradigm for creating hierarchically
ordered structures on surfaces in a simple, controllable, and cost-effective
manner (i.e., potentially transformative research) for potential applications in
photonics, electronics, optoelectronics, biosensors, nanotechnology, and
biotechnology. The outcomes from the research are thus expected to make
significant contributions to the advancement of nanomaterials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed work includes stronger
nanoscience and nanotechnology education across several levels. A new course on
Nanostructured Polymeric Materials for senior undergraduate and junior graduate
students will be developed. Female undergraduate students will be recruited for
summer nanomaterials research from Iowa State University's Program for Women in
Science and Engineering (PWSE), thus strengthening the involvement of an
underrepresented group in the project. Summer workshops will be created for K-12
teachers who, in turn, will share the new information with their students. Web-
based lesson plans on polymeric nanomaterials and nanocrystals will be developed
by female high school interns for 5th-8th graders nationwide. This activity will
ultimately expose elementary and middle school students to the nano-world.
Knowledge generated by this CAREER project may lead to the creation of novel
devices and materials that exhibit unique functions due to hierarchical
arrangement of nanoscopic building blocks, thereby transitioning fundamental
scientific discoveries into useful technologies that benefit society.