* 0844891
* SBIR Phase II:  Educational Particle Image Velocimetry Suites
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* MURAT OKCAY, INTERACTIVE FLOW STUDIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 790,463.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a
low cost educational Particle Image Velocimetry (ePIV) suite including both
hardware and software for fluid science and engineering education at university
undergraduate and graduate school levels. The proposed PIV is the state of the
art technology in fluid flow research that enables visual and quantitative
analysis of the flow field. Industrial/research level PIV system usually costs
over $100,000. The high cost and safety considerations - because of the use of
high power Class IV lasers - prohibit adaptation of PIV systems in the US higher
education system. Current PIV systems typically use two pulse lasers with 50
mJ/pulse energy and 5 nanossecond pulse duration. This translates to a total
power of 10 mega Watts if it was a continuous laser. In summary, although it is
very challenging to develop a PIV system that works with only a single 15
milliwatt continuous laser and a regular CCD camera, the Phase I outcomes
indicate that it is feasible. The project will create learning materials by
developing software as a virtual teaching assistant for the education process,
where the students can develop enhanced understanding of fluid flow by
interactive experiments through a computer terminal in the classroom. Hence, the
software will be an instrument that can be used in diverse educational settings
because of its effectiveness as an education tool, high-tech appeal, compact
size, low cost and safety.

Fluid mechanics is a highly visual subject. During the teaching process one must
take full advantage of this fact. ePIV gives the opportunity to achieve this to
its full extent making this technology easily accessible. The educational suite
will provide faculty the latest technology as a teaching tool at a very
affordable price, allowing them to acquire new knowledge and skills and to
revise their curricula and teaching practices. The low cost of ePIV will allow
schools with very limited budgets to use and teach the state of the art
technology to their students. The project envisions bringing this new technology
from technical colleges to BS, MS and Ph.D. granting institutions. Due to its
simplicity of operation, low cost and being highly visual, the ePIV technology
can even be used at museums, science centers and similar institutions to develop
exhibits in science and engineering. This tool can also be used to promote fluid
mechanics and science in general even to non-science and non-engineering
students.