* 0844916
* CAREER:   Leaf microclimates and plant-insect interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Harry Woods, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2015
* USD 837,367.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." Plant-eating insects make up over one quarter of all
macroscopic organisms, and the plants they eat another quarter. Little is known,
however, about the factors influencing which insects occur on which plants. The
proposed studies examine a set of questions about how leaf microclimates - the
temperature and relative humidity adjacent to a leaf's surface - influence
insect-plant associations. In particular, the studies are structured by three
questions. First, how different are leaf microclimates from nearby macroclimates
(the conditions that a meteorologist would call "climate")? Second, how do
insects interact with available microclimates? This section focuses both on
females searching for places to lay eggs and on eggs and larvae in different
microclimates. Third, how does the effectiveness of other, better-known plant
defenses (secondary compounds and trichomes) depend on leaf microclimate? This
application of environmental biophysics to the study of plant-insect
interactions will illuminate basic questions about insect ecology, and it will
serve as a platform for understanding effects of global climate change on insect
herbivores, including crop pests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be carried
out in the context of a new educational initiative at the University of Montana
- the Montana Program on Insects in the Environment, or M-PIE. M-PIE will focus
on three areas. First, MPIE's core will be an upper-division undergraduate class
on the environmental biophysics of plant-insect interactions. This yearly class
will prepare students to be active collaborators on the projects. Second, M-PIE
will establish formal ties to University of Montana's Project TRAIN (Training
American Indians in Environmental Biology), and one environmental sciences
student from Salish Kootenai College will participate in M-PIE every year.
Third, M-PIE will support local high schools in Missoula by training 2 teachers
in Years 2-4, with the goal of helping them develop teaching units on insect-
plant biology.