* 0844760
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Evolution of the Colorado Plateau and Its Relation to the Surrounding Tectonic Provinces Using USArray Data
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Alan Levander, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2011
* USD 144,465.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Cenozoic, southwestern
North America underwent a shift from Farallon subduction to the present Pacific
- North American strike-slip plate boundary, the San Andreas fault system (SAF).
As a result, much of the southwestern U.S. experienced extension, in part the
result of orogenic collapse prior to and during the transition from convergence
to the current transform boundary. Yet deformation and volcanism still occur at
great distances from the plate boundary, through the Basin and Range, around the
edges of the Colorado Plateau, and in the Rocky Mountains. The structure of the
continental lithosphere is linked to structures deeper in the upper mantle
beneath each of tectonic provinces, and the details of the lithosphere and
deeper structure and the overall response to the change in tectonic regime are
not clearly understood. As the USArray Transportable Array rolls across the
continent, it is uniformly covering the Western U.S., recording teleseismic
earthquakes. These data, plus data integrated from the LA RISTRA, Deep Probe,
and CD-ROM experiments in addition to data from the COARSE array in Arizona,
will provide a wealth of information on the lithosphere and upper mantle
structure. These models will be constrained by previous active source and
petrologic data. This project is examining, in 3D, the Earth's discontinuity
structure from the crust thru the 660 km discontinuity to systematically look
for important tectonic/geodynamic indicators: sources of isostatic support,
regions of thermal disequilibrium, partial melt, and rheological heterogeneity,
slab fragments and slab interactions with the transition zone. The resulting
images will be used to interpret the 4D tectonic and geodynamic evolution of the
Colorado Plateau in relation to the evolution of its surrounding tectonic
provinces: southern Basin and Range, southern Rocky Mountains, and the Rio
Grande Rift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses a combination of surface
wave tomography and P- and S-wave receiver functions to clearly image the base
of the crust, the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary (LAB), and the upper mantle
structure through the transition zone beneath the Four Corners area of the
southwestern U.S. USArray Transportable Array teleseismic data combined with
previous broadband array studies have been used to make common conversion point
(CCP) stacked PdS and SdP receiver function and surface wave tomography image
volumes. The receiver functions have been made with two types of scattered
waves: P converted to S (PdS), and S converted to P (SdP). The use of both PdS
and SdP allows for independent models of the same area, and provides different
frequency bands of investigation and different raypaths to image lithospheric
and upper mantle structure. Since receiver functions and surface wave dispersion
have different sensitivities to velocity structure jointly inverting the
receiver functions and the shear velocity values provides independent estimates
of structure. A receiver function images velocity-density discontinuities, not
the absolute velocity structure. It senses the high frequency velocity
fluctuations, and in some cases density fluctuations in the vertical direction.
Phase velocities of surface waves, on the other hand, are most sensitive to the
absolute shear velocity structure. In principle the two can be inverted jointly
to overcome the non-uniqueness of the receiver-function inversion and the lower
vertical resolution of surface-wave tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mapping 3D
variations in the Moho, the LAB, and the transition zone discontinuities with
multiple methods will provide a consistent framework for interpreting 4D
Cenozoic extension, compression, and local convection features (upwellings,
decompression melts, and mantle drips) beneath the southwestern U.S. Results of
this study will be useful to non-seismologists interested in continental
evolution, extensional dynamics, geodynamics, volcanology, and structural
geology, both in the western U.S. and elsewhere. The methodology will be
applicable to other regional array data, including future USArray data. Two
graduate students will be trained in the use of seismic array data and
integrated geophysical interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
research objectives of this project, the award will support a new investigator
at the University of Southern California and the education and training of two
graduate students.