* 0844304
* EMBS Forum on Grand Challenges in Biomedical Engineering - Engineering the Future of Brain Science
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

CBET-0844304&lt;br/&gt;Bin He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support the workshop called "EMBS Forum on Grand Challenges in Biomedical
Engineering - Engineering the Future of Brain Science" The Forum workshop will
review progress made, and determine challenges facing the scientific community
in understanding the brain at a systems level in the next decade. The Forum will
address the following questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How neural activities at
the cellular or sub-cellular levels contribute to the system-level brain
functions; How can we image the brain with high spatial and temporal resolution
by developing new imaging modalities or new informatics methods to accomplish
similar goals via integrating multimodal imaging data; &lt;br/&gt;How can we
understand the network behavior of neuronal networks consisting of millions of
neurons; and how can we interface the brain with environment and restore
impaired brain functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will have the
following specific topics: Neural Informatics, Neural Circuits, Neural
Connectomics, Neural Imaging, Neural Interfacing, Neural Prosthesis, Neural
Computation, and Neural Sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Forum Workshop will
bring together leading scholars, government officials and representatives from
industry to discuss and identify critical issues and challenges facing the
biomedical engineering community and larger society. The results of the Forum
will provide further guidance to the scientific community, government and
industry with regard to how should we engineer the future of brain science. The
Forum workshop will include identification of important challenges for the
larger society, broad dissemination of the forum outcome via EMBS network and
media coverage, publication of special issue in international scholarly journal,
and strong international participation.