* 0844645
* CAREER: Transport Control in Fluidic Micro and Nanochannels
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Dimiter Petsev, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0844645 Petsev, D.N.

The physical laws governing the small length-scale transport in micro and
nanofluidic channels differ from the macroscopic case. The PI will investigate
these laws and focus on transport of fluid, current and solutes in nanochannels
fabricated in a silica-based matrix. The PI will test the hypothesis that small
current leakage across the silica layers affects the electric field. Testing of
the hypothesis that the counterion valence is important for the transport in
nanochannels will use the same experimental approaches and will add a level of
complexity that will allow a better understanding of the transport in confined
fluidic nanochannels in the silica media. Finally, examination of the fluid flow
and analyte transport in micro and nanofluidic channels using electroosmotic
force generated by remotely operated semiconductor diodes and alternate current
fields is planned. This study will introduce further complications due to
relaxation and polarization effects related to the ionic distribution in the
vicinity of the diode/solution interface. The deep understanding of single and
multiphase transport at such length-scales is of paramount importance for the
successful implementation of micro and nanofluidics in engineering. The
execution of the research will improve the knowledge of micro and nanofluidic
systems and the design, fabrication and operation of integrated electronic-
fluidic chips for micro and nanofluidic applications. Micro and nanofluidics are
important thrust areas for the University of New Mexico in both research and
education. Selected topics will be introduced in the Introduction to Transport
Phenomena undergraduate course that is taught by the PI. Dr. Petsev is also
developing a new graduate course on the fundamentals of Nanofluidics, which was
taught for the first time recently. The University of New Mexico traditionally
has a leading role in the education of Hispanic and Native American in New
Mexico. The proposed program will enhance and complement the PI's outreach
activities for Hispanic students and set up a strong outreach program that
includes Native American high school students. In addition, two students from
the high school will join the PI's group for summer hands-on research. The goal
of this effort is to encourage and augment the college enrollment of Native
American students particularly in the areas of engineering and natural sciences.