* 0844081
* International Network for Advanced and Multifunctional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Shashank Priya, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2015
* USD 975,000.00

This award, funded by NSF Division of Materials Research, establishes a Network
for studies in Multifunctional Materials Research. With this award a team of
researchers, educators and collaborators from seven countries and ten
institutions plan to develop a global network to advance fundamental materials
research in the area of multifunctional materials systems. Three US
institutions, University of Texas at San Antonio, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University and Rutgers University, lead the interdisciplinary effort
along with teams from India, South Korea, Thailand, Belgium, China, France and
Brazil as international counterparts. Multifunctional materials systems are
class of tailored materials that have more than one desired function (for
example, piezoelectricity, ferromagnetism, ferroelectricity or luminescence) for
a given set of conditions. The research themes emphasize design, simulation,
synthesis, and characterization of multifunctional materials through fundamental
understanding of physical principles that govern materials properties.
Experimental, theoretical, and computational studies on thin films,
heterostructures, and nanocomposites, with potential applications for sensors
and high density memory storage, are carried out by the international team that
includes active student involvement. Activities build on the existing research
and education connections world wide and aim to provide an online problem
solving environment via "Remote Laboratory" where experiments prepared and
monitored by local users are accessible in real time to other participants.
Institute members collaborate to develop new online courses that integrate
research and education with international experience. There will be
international workshops and conferences on multifunctional materials to
strengthen networking mechanisms among researchers and students. This network
offers opportunities for students, junior and senior researchers to conduct
research abroad and participate in conferences. These include, Exchange Student
Scholarship to conduct research at international institutions, Exchange Scholar
Award to postdoctoral scholars and junior faculty, Senior Research Fellow Award,
and Student Travel grants for attending international conferences.