* 0844602
* CAREER: Developing 1,2,3-triazole skeletons as novel chiral building blocks in asymmetric catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Xiaodong Shi, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project will work on the development of 1,2,3-triazole
and its derivatives as novel ligands in promoting stereoselective functional
group transformation for facile C-C and C-N bonds construction. While formation
of 1,2,3-triazole through click-chemistry has been extensively applied in
chemical and biological researches, most of the reported research focused on the
application of click chemistry as biological compatible linkers and little
progress has been made in the development of this interesting structural motif
as new functional group in asymmetric catalysis. Studies to further elucidate
the unique functionality of this motif and how it influences the metal catalyst
reactivity will be undertaken. Combinatorial type screening of ligands with
various transition metal cations will be carried out to identify new useful
catalysts. Hypothesis driven studies of new asymmetric catalysis will be also
performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Xiaodong Shi of the
Department of Chemistry at West Virginia University. Professor Shi's research
efforts revolve around the development of new methods for the preparation of
1,2,3-triazole derivatives and asymmetric catalysis. Such chemistry will
contribute to the fundamental understanding of ligand influence on catalyst
reactivity and stereoselectivity. Successful development of the methodology will
have an impact on synthesis in the pharmaceutical and chemical industries.