* 0844280
* The Physiological Basis of Natural Variation in Germination Responses of Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Kathleen Donohue, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2012
* USD 351,606.00

The physiological basis of natural variation in germination responses of
Arabidopsis thaliana&lt;br/&gt;In the life cycle of Arabidopsis thaliana and
many other species, two developmental switches determine overall life history
and consequent population biology: the switch to germination and the switch to
flowering. Much is known about genes associated with adaptation in flowering
time, molecular genetic pathways of flowering, and geographic distribution of
natural variation in flowering time. Comparable effort devoted to understanding
germination timing has the potential to provide significant insight into
adaptation of entire life history schedules and the genetic basis of population
variation. This research therefore focuses on the genetic basis and evolutionary
ecology of germination timing. &lt;br/&gt; It has recently been found that the
gene family of photoreceptors, the phytochromes, have important functions during
germination that may give them the ability to regulate the season of
germination. New data indicate that phytochromes are involved in both
germination and its opposite trait: dormancy. Moreover, contributions of
different phytochromes to germination depend on temperature. This research will
test whether phytochrome can regulate the temperature of germination through
mutant studies, compare gene expression in different phytochrome mutants, and
test whether natural variation in germination involves variation in the
expression of these same pathways. A geographic analysis of natural variation in
germination responses will test for evidence of natural selection on germination
on a regional scale. In addition to testing fundamental mechanisms of
phytochrome regulation of germination, the proposed research will test for
natural variation in the germination pathways regulated by phytochromes and test
whether that natural variation is due to variation in expression of phytochrome-
regulated genes or due to variation in phytochrome sequence itself. &lt;br/&gt;
These studies of the genetic basis of germination responses and the geographic
distribution of variation in germination will contribute significantly to our
understanding of processes of range expansion and distributional changes
accompanying environmental change. By combining modeling of flowering time and
germination phenology, the goal is to predict life history and demography as a
function of changing environmental conditions. Results of the phenotypic survey
and microarray studies will be made available to the community and provide a
foundation for future studies of the genetic basis of natural variation in
germination. This research also supports international collaboration and
training at various levels in genomic, physiological, and computational
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;