* 0844035
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing the Limits of Adult SLA: A Psycholinguistic Study of Near-Native Sentence Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Bill VanPatten, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

The question of whether adult learners can acquire native-like knowledge and
ability with a second language has long been of fundamental importance in the
field of Second Language Acquisition (SLA). Much previous investigation of this
issue has employed traditional pen-and-paper measures, following the formal
linguistics tradition, and has yielded conflicting findings. Few studies have
used modern psycholinguistic techniques to explore how near-native knowledge of
grammar can be applied in online sentence processing. The rapidly growing new
area of second language sentence (L2) processing, on the other hand, has mostly
followed existing first language research and is just now beginning to answer
questions unique to SLA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National
Science Foundation and under the direction of Dr. Bill VanPatten, Ms. Jill
Jegerski will conduct a dissertation study that addresses the following research
question: Can adult second language learners acquire native-like syntactic
processing behavior? The proposed project will draw on previous research from
both SLA and psycholinguistics, examining the upper limits of language learning
from a sentence processing perspective. Specifically, the performance of near-
native speakers of Spanish, screened for native-like proficiency and long-term
immersion in Mexico and independently tested for offline grammatical competence,
will be compared to that of native speakers in four self-paced reading
experiments. Each will test a different prediction of the shallow structure
hypothesis. The different types of sentence processing will be measured in a
single, within-subjects design and reading times will be reported and analyzed
statistically for individual near-native participants as well as for the group--
these are methodological innovations as neither has been employed in previous
study of sentence processing. Thus, the design and outcome of this investigation
will both advance current knowledge and facilitate future empirical research on
language acquisition, language processing, and the human language capacity in
general.