* 0844713
* The Science of Science Policy: New Findings Workshop
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2011
* Irwin Feller, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 02/28/2011
* USD 104,551.00

The National Science Foundation's Science of Science and Innovation Policy
(SciSIP) program has been directed at underwriting the development of
fundamental knowledge, including theories, data, tools and human capital. The
SciSIP program also seeks to develop a community of experts across academic
institutions and disciplines focused on SciSIP. The workshop and follow on
activities are designed to contribute to both objectives.

Intellectual Merit The workshop is designed to: - Provide the SciSIP program
with an opportunity to have a collegial discussion of the work in progress under
SciSIP's first two rounds of awards well before this work begins to appear in
professional forums and publications. - Provide a common forum for researchers
from the diverse set of disciplinary perspectives reflected in SciSIP's awards
to exchange information about work in progress, while subjecting each approach
to collegial review; - Pose questions/openings to grantees to consider how their
current grants might be extended, revised, augmented to more directly consider
national science and innovation policy issues; - Identify gaps in SciSIP's areas
of emphasis.

The attendees include approximately 40 recipients of SciSIP awards, NSF
personnel, and representatives from a cross-section of governmental, academic,
and non-governmental organizations.

The rationale for a bridge building activity among researchers and practitioners
is grounded in a corpus of research literature which documents the importance of
such workshops in fostering substantive dialogue across analytical perspectives.

Broader Impact Two follow on activities will highlight SciSIP's activities and
the workshop's findings. The first of these is a report based on a distillation
of the workshop's discussions augmented by essays by the co-PIs and distributed
widely. The second is a special panel "The Current and Emerging Status of the
Science of Science and Innovation Policy", devoted to the workshop's findings,
and organized at the American Association for the Advancement of Sciences' AAAS
Forum on Science & Technology Policy.