* 0844766
* Outreach Activities for the National Science Foundation?s  Innovation Through Institutional Integration (Icubed)  Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 349,665.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Quality Education for Minorities
Network&lt;br/&gt;Title: Outreach Activities for NSF?s Innovation through
Institutional Integration Initiative&lt;br/&gt;Ref: Shirley McBay&lt;br/&gt; HRD
0844766&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, the
Quality Education for Minorities Network (QEM) will provide outreach and
technical assistance to minority-serving institutions to increase their
knowledge and understanding of the National Science Foundation?s Innovation
through Institutional Integration (I-cubed) initiative. The Innovation through
Institutional Integration initiative challenges institutions to think
strategically about the creative integration of NSF-funded awards and is itself
an integrative, cross-cutting effort within the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QEM will conduct six two-day information
and technical assistance workshops for two-person teams form minority-serving
institutions. The workshops will be held in geographically dispersed areas of
the country and are designed to accommodate 144 participants during Fall 2008
and Spring 2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The technical
assistance offered will enable minority-serving institutions to develop an
inventory of current NSF ? and other Federal entity funded STEM projects on
their campuses and learn about the mission and key concepts of the I-cubed
program. The technical assistance will enable participants to critically examine
intra- and inter-institutional opportunities for partnerships, international
initiatives, and efforts at critical junctures that have synergistic and
integrative potential for advancing STEM research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the
proposed project include increased participation of the minority-serving
institution community in the Innovation through Institutional Integration
initiative, as well as enhanced minority-serving institution infrastructure for
STEM research and education through innovative and institutional integration. As
opportunities provided by the I-cubed program are better understood and
minority-serving institutions develop competitive I-cubed proposals, the pool of
principal investigators engaged in integrative STEM education and research
programs will represent a more diverse source for ideas and talent to improve
STEM initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;