* 0844494
* Algorithms for the Analysis of Data from Massively-parallel Genome Sequencing
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Steven Salzberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 03/31/2013
* USD 409,919.00

New generation DNA sequencing technologies are revolutionizing modern biological
research. Scientists can now generate the rough equivalent of an entire human
genome (~3 billion base-pairs of DNA) in just a few days with one single
sequencing instrument. Until recently, such amounts of data could only be
generated at large genome centers using hundreds of sequencers. The analysis of
these data is complicated by their size - a single run of a sequencing
instrument yields terabytes of information, often requiring a significant scale-
up of the existing computational infrastructure. This project is developing
parallel algorithms for analyzing new generation sequencing data with a specific
focus on the Map-Reduce paradigm implemented on a highly-distributed computing
cluster supported by Google and IBM. The project is primarily focused on
developing algorithms for sequence alignment and sequence assembly ? critical
tasks in the analysis of genomic data ? and involves the adaptation of string
matching and graph algorithms to the Map-Reduce paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This work will potentially lead to parallelism-enabled genomic
analysis software that will allow researchers to analyze new generation
sequencing data through web-scale computational resources, thereby obviating the
need for establishing and maintaining a local high-performance computing
infrastructure. The software developed during this project is being made
available under an open-source license in order to encourage broad use and to
enable future research. The research is integrated with teaching and mentoring
of graduate and undergraduate students and the results of the work will be
disseminated through journal publications and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;