* 0844946
* Mechanistic Role of Additives and Solvent in Sm(II)-Based Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Robert Flowers, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/28/2013
* USD 390,000.00

Samarium diiodide (SmI2) and other Sm(II)-based reductants provide unique
reagents for a variety of important synthetic transformations. One of the
distinctive features of Sm(II)-based reductants is that their reactivity can be
drastically altered by changing the solvent or by adding cosolvents or other
additives. Although great strides have been achieved in the use of Sm(II)
reagents in organic synthesis, the role of solvent and additives in reactions is
poorly understood, and, as a result, the full potential of these reductant-
additive combinations has not been realized. This work is directed towards
understanding the relationship between solvent and additives and their effect on
the rates and selectivities of Sm(II)-mediated functional group conversions
through two discrete mechanistic studies.&lt;br/&gt;The first study will define
the relationship between the affinity of solvents, proton donors, and
coordinating or chelating additives for Sm(II) reagents and the relationship of
these variables to the reactivity of Sm(II). This work will establish the degree
to which coordinating solvents attenuate the reactivity of Sm(II) through
interaction with substrates and commonly utilized additives providing chemists
with important mechanistic data comparing the reactivity of Sm(II)-cosolvent
complexes in a range of solvents in which they are commonly used. Overall, the
goal of this portion of the work is to address the effects of solvation at the
molecular level through the treatment of solvent as a high molarity ligand, not
a medium of fixed dielectric constant. The second study addresses the
mechanistic function of Ni diiodide and other transition metal salts on
Sm(II)-mediated reductions. The impact of catalytic Ni diiodide and other Ni(II)
salts on a range of reactions of SmI2 will be critically examined through a
series of mechanistic studies employing stopped-flow spectrophotometry and
reaction calorimetry. Mechanistic studies of reactions providing evidence for
Ni(0)-based chemistry will be further investigated using reaction progress
kinetic analysis. As these studies proceed, the intermediacy of Ni(0)
nanoparticles will be examined to distinguish homogeneity from colloid-based
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of this work is designed to provide a
mechanistic understanding of Sm(II)-based chemistry that can be extrapolated and
applied to a range of important and useful processes. Studies utilizing this
approach are likely to provide longer term benefits to the scientific community
than simply the demonstration of a single synthetic application. The work
contained in this proposal will also provide important professional preparation
for graduate and undergraduate students in the mechanistic study, use, and
applications of a reagent that is becoming increasingly important in organic
synthesis. Students will receive training in the use and application of a range
of useful techniques not typically used in standard organic laboratories and
therefore the breadth of tools used in this project will provide unique training
and perspective to organic students. Inclusion of undergraduate students from
the Lehigh advanced laboratory course sequence in the mechanistic study and
development of reactions employing the SmI2/catalytic Ni diiodide system will
provide important training not typically acquired in a traditional undergraduate
laboratory course.