* 0844899
* CAREER: Theory of Feedback and Entanglement with Continuous Quantum Measurement in the Solid State
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Andrew Jordan, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2014
* USD 425,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports an integrated research and education program emphasizing
the theoretical study of feedback control and entanglement production with
continuous quantum measurement in solid state systems. A theory will be
developed that describes quantum state evolution. It applies stochastic path
integrals to account for real-time feedback on the quantum system. This theory
should shed new light on quantum control theory, non-unitary quantum dynamics,
and the measurement problem. Theoretical proposals for experiments in fabricated
quantum Hall geometries will also be developed. The work supported under this
award provides a good environment to introduce graduate students to a frontier
area of theoretical physics, intimately connected with parallel experimental
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this CAREER award
includes the development of a quantum strangeness course for local high school
students that builds on the successful and long-standing Rochester Scholars
programs. A series of mini-lectures and demonstrations will also be developed to
get local high school students more interested in the basics of quantum physics.
This program for local high-school students is offered during the school breaks
and the summer, and interested undergraduate physics students will be involved
in equipment set-up, assist in the demonstrations, and work individually with
visiting high school students. The lecture series will educate and interest high
school students in some of the most exciting and intriguing areas of quantum
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports an integrated theoretical research and education program on how to
control quantum mechanical states in materials and to advance understanding of
the consequences of quantum mechanics on measurement. Recent experimental
advances have led to the ability to place atoms and make structures that are
some ten to a hundred thousand times smaller than a human hair. This opens the
possibility of manipulating quantum mechanical states to make new device
technologies. In this world of the tiny, quantum mechanics as opposed to the
more familiar classical mechanics that describes our macroscopic world, provides
the appropriate description. This research project focuses on how quantum
mechanical states entwine to form entangled states, the consequences of quantum
mechanics on measurement, and how to develop the analog of feedback in the
quantum mechanical world. Many devices based on classical mechanics use the
output signal to control their operation and enable a desired result. Quantum
mechanics places constraints on measurement and how feedback might be possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to control quantum mechanical states in
materials would constitute a major technological breakthrough and provides a new
window into the quantum world. This work contributes to the emerging areas of
quantum engineering and quantum information science which may lead to new device
technologies, particularly information technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of this CAREER award includes the development of a quantum
strangeness course for local high school students that builds on the successful
and long-standing Rochester Scholars programs. A series of mini-lectures and
demonstrations will also be developed to get local high school students more
interested in the basics of quantum physics. This program for local high-school
students is offered during the school breaks and the summer, and interested
undergraduate physics students will be involved in equipment set-up, assist in
the demonstrations, and work individually with the visiting high school
students. The lecture series will educate and interest high school students in
some of the most exciting and intriguing areas of quantum physics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;