* 0844644
* CAREER:  Development of GIS applications for the study of aquatic biodiversity:   Assessing environmental factors regulating fish assemblages across multiple scales
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,01/31/2016
* Jason Knouft, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2016
* USD 584,948.00



North America contains the highest diversity of aquatic species of any temperate
region on Earth. Unfortunately, aquatic ecosystems in North America are
experiencing ongoing human-induced impacts from land use transformations and
climate change. Not surprisingly, aquatic species are some of the most
threatened taxa in North America. Geographic information systems (GIS)
facilitate the organization, manipulation, and analysis of biological and
environmental data in a spatially explicit manner. The development and
application of GIS techniques in aquatic systems offers a much needed framework
to assess the impact of environmental variability on the distribution of aquatic
organisms. The goal of this research is to develop GIS-based research tools to
investigate the climatic and landscape characteristics regulating aquatic
biodiversity at continental, regional, and local geographic scales. At the
continental scale, GIS environmental data, including precipitation, temperature,
and landcover, will be used to identify the factors regulating the distributions
and diversity of all North American fish species. At the regional scale, climate
data will be integrated with a hydrologic model to assess the influence of
hydrologic variability on fish assemblages in Illinois and Alabama. At the local
scale, fine-scale GIS data will be developed to examine the relationship between
intra-annual habitat variability and fish abundance. The broader impacts of this
work will be realized through the generation of data and techniques that
facilitate an understanding of the impacts of climate variability and land use
characteristics on the diversity and abundance of species in aquatic systems. In
addition, annual workshops will be developed that provide GIS-based training to
aquatic scientists from universities, government agencies, and non-profit
organizations. The primary goals of these workshops include the enhancement of
the technical and intellectual infrastructure for GIS-based studies of aquatic
biodiversity, and the generation of a community of interactive scientists
focused on GIS applications in aquatic sciences.