* 0844455
* Chemical Dynamics and Green Chemistry Strategies with Organic Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 710,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Miguel Garcia-Garibay at the
University of California- Los Angeles, who will seek to gain a deeper
understanding of chemical reactivity in crystalline solids by taking advantage
of absolute kinetic measurements. At the same time, he proposes steps towards
ambitious green chemistry synthetic applications involving challenging natural
products of the pyrrolidinoindoline alkaloid family. In the second part of this
proposal, studies aimed at a deeper understanding of a very exciting quantum
chain decarbonylation reaction recently established with crystals of
diphenylcyclopropenone are described. Professor Garcia-Garibay will investigate
the scope of this reaction to include structures that unveil highly emissive,
linearly conjugated chromophores. In the third part of this proposal, while
studying the scope and steric limits of the reaction, enantioselective syntheses
and classic resolution strategies to prepare optically pure compounds will be
explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed understanding and prediction of
chemical reactivity in the solid state will address many on-going problems,
which includes the undesirable decomposition of pharmaceuticals, the degradation
and aging of structural solids, and the fatigue of solid state devices. In
addition to challenges arising from this work being at the frontiers of current
reactivity theories, reactions in solids have attracted a great deal of interest
during the last few years due to their potential in the development of Green
Chemistry strategies to reduce the use of harmful solvents. The PI has been
successful in attracting women and minority students to his research group by
maintaining a highly supportive and creative environment that has fostered many
careers in science education. The impact of this research extends beyond UCLA
though collaborations with colleagues from neighboring institutions, including
Mount St. Mary University (a women's college), Loyola Marymount University (an
undergraduate institution), and Cal State Los Angeles (a comprehensive
university with a MS program in Chemistry), all of which have a high enrollments
of Hispanic and African American students.