* 0844693
* CAREER: Redox-Active Ligand-Mediated Multielectron Bond-Making and Bond-Breaking Reactions at Later First-Row Transition Metal Centers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Jake Soper, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2014
* USD 616,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program supports the research of Professor Jake Soper of the Georgia Institute
of Technology (GIT) to examine the development of more cost-effective 3d metal
catalysts as surrogates for expensive platinum group metal catalysts in small
molecule activation and functionalization. The research promises an enhanced
ability to use molecular oxygen as a selective oxidant under mild conditions.
This challenging project examines the multiple electron redox capacity in later
first row metal ions (ions that typically effect only one electron redox
changes) by incorporating redox-active, charge-localized catecholate and
amidophenolate ligands into the metal coordination sphere. These ligands supply
an additional one or two electron transfer capability. New methods for the
assembly of carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bonding also result from this
research. The educational plan includes the development of a new lecture series,
focusing on energy-related research which will demonstrate chemistry
fundamentals to junior Advanced Placement (AP) students at Westlake High School
in Atlanta, Georgia. Mechanisms have been mapped to transfer this lecture series
to other chemistry classes at Westlake High School as well as to similar
programs in the state of Georgia and nationwide. A series of five-week summer
laboratory internships for college-bound high school juniors and seniors is in
place in the School of Chemistry and Biochemistry at GIT. The education program
increases the participation of underrepresented groups in chemistry.