* 0844586
* SGER: Resonant Microsensor Based on Decoupled Sensing Scheme for Liquid-Phase Biochemical Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Oliver Brand, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2010
* USD 69,964.00

Resonant Microsensor Based on Decoupled Sensing Scheme for Liquid-Phase
Biochemical Sensing

The objective of this research is to develop a resonant (bio)chemical
microsensor for liquid-phase applications, which overcomes the challenge of
fluid damping on the sensor resolution. The approach is to decouple the
microfluidics, in which the actual bio(chemical) interaction takes place, from
the transduction element, i.e. the mechanical resonator. The proposed sensor
concept ensures high Q-factor operation of the microresonator, thus improving
its short-term frequency stability and ultimately the sensor resolution.
Moreover, the design simplifies the microfluidic interface, a channel with
appropriate (functionalized) electrodes, thus avoiding challenges associated
with direct exposure of a three-dimensional resonant microstructure to the
liquid. The goal of the 1-year SGER is to fabricate the proposed sensor and
demonstrate its applicability through: (i) chemical sensing of volatile organic
compounds in water, and (ii) sensing of biomarkers based on antibody-antigen
interaction. The intellectual merit of the research stems from the development
of a new sensing concept for resonant microsensors, which decouples fluid
interaction from the actual resonator vibrations. The research enables to apply
the advantages of resonant sensors to liquid-phase sensing applications, which
are normally plagued by large fluid damping and, thus, deteriorated sensor
resolution. The broader impact stems from the availability of a highly sensitive
microsensor with simplified fluidic interface for today?s liquid-phase sensing
applications ranging from environmental monitoring to point-of-care medical
diagnosis. Thereby, the cross-disciplinary research trains graduate and
undergraduate students in areas spanning from electrical engineering to biology
and medicine. Moreover, the underlying microstructures, namely miniaturized
beams, are simple enough to be used in K-12 outreach programs to spark interest
in science and engineering in general and micro- and nanotechnology in
particular.

