* 0844528
* Databasing of the Bird &amp; Mammal Collections at Illinois State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Angelo Capparella, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 105,077.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the first
computerized database of the 7,600 specimens of birds and mammals in the John
Wesley Powell-Dale Birkenholz Natural History Collections at Illinois State
University. This includes scientific study skins, skeletons, taxidermy mounts,
frozen tissues, and stomach contents. Most specimens are from Illinois dating
from 1867 to the present; the rest are from other states and countries. A
collections website for online data access will be developed on the School of
Biological Sciences website (www.bio.illinoisstate.edu). The one-year project
creates three jobs: Technical Associate, Graduate Student Curatorial Assistant,
and Undergraduate Student Curatorial Assistant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal goal is to make these collections easily accessible via the Internet
for local, national, and international research and teaching activities. The
collections database also will contribute valuable biological and geographic
data on the diversity, ecology, and distribution of birds and mammals to online
global data portals, including the Ornithology Information System and the Mammal
Network Information System. The project will serve as a model for small but
significant university collections to integrate their specimen records with
those of major museum collections worldwide. This will greatly expand the
opportunities for specimen-based research and teaching, including conservation
activities by nongovernmental and governmental organizations.&lt;br/&gt;