* 0844933
* CAREER: Understanding and Controlling Anisotropy and Transport in Lonomers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Louis Madsen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2015
* USD 475,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Efficient fuel cells, reverse-osmosis membranes,
and ?artificial muscle? actuators require new polymeric materials with finely
controlled molecular and nanoscale structures. Developing new classes of energy-
related materials represents a pivotal step toward
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;Madsen (PI) will undertake characterizations of
molecular alignment and nanoscale morphology in phase-separated ionic polymers,
focusing on the critical hydrophilic phase that allows fast transport. This
project will build models relating mesoscale transport and alignment to
important bulk properties such as proton conductivity using advanced NMR methods
in combination with electron microscopy, conductivity measurements, and
transport simulations. Madsen will additionally develop methods for controlling
morphology using various solvents, annealing, and electric and magnetic fields.
These investigations will critically inform processing protocols and rational
synthetic strategies.&lt;br/&gt;Madsen?s university education program will bring
advanced polymer NMR to Virginia Tech via novel lab sessions and a graduate
course. A K-5 program will bring faculty and students together with girls and
parents to develop scientific intuition, thus initiating future scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen fuel cells form
a promising link in future sustainable energy production and distribution
cycles, while clean water needs worldwide are increasingly demanding advanced
purification techniques. Water and energy represent our most pressing needs for
sustainable life on this planet. Advanced polymers can fill these roles, but
require further development to enter everyday use.&lt;br/&gt;This project,
directed by Prof. Louis Madsen at Virginia Tech, will focus on revealing new and
pivotal aspects of advanced polymers used in water purification and in fuel
cells. In order to understand these materials in depth and improve performance,
Madsen will apply a broad range of analysis and computer modeling techniques.
These fundamental studies hold promise for greatly enhancing power and clean
water production.&lt;br/&gt;Madsen?s project plans encompass education of
promising university students, and also outreach to K-5 girls and their parents.
The latter program aims to build strong future scientists from a group still
under-utilized in today?s workforce. Madsen plans to use the relevance of these
basic research issues to all citizens as well as his familiarity with ?how
things work? all around us to drive participant engagement.&lt;br/&gt;