* 0844820
* Arabidopsis 2010 Collaborative Research:   Quantifying mutation parameters in a fitness landscape:   Spontaneous mutation in A.  thaliana in its native range.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Charles Fenster, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2015
* USD 537,688.00

Mutations are errors in replication that result in offspring having a different
gene than either parent. They play a fundamental role in many biological
phenomena; they are the ultimate source of all genetic variation and are
manifested as the rich diversity of life on earth. Mutations are also the source
of genetically based diseases of humans and other organisms. Despite the
biological importance of mutations, little is known of their fundamental
properties, including their rate of production and their effects on the health
of the organism. The goal of this project is to estimate mutation rates and to
quantify the effects of mutations on the survivorship and reproduction of
individuals. These characteristics will be estimated by allowing mutations to
accumulate in the offspring of a number of homozygous parents, using the plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. Any genetic differences in the offspring must be due to
new mutations. The effects of these mutations will be quantified at field sites
where parental plants were originally collected. The rate and fitness effects of
mutations will be determined in the field, where they would actually occur,
providing a more realistic estimate than is possible in controlled laboratory
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research significantly advances the
fundamental understanding of mutation effects, and has broad implications for a
range of biological questions from understanding the origin of heritable
diseases to the role of mutations in the fate of small populations. Because the
study organism, Arabidopsis thaliana, is a widely used model organism, these new
mutation resources will become a valuable resource for the community of
researchers studying this species or its close relatives. Students from under-
represented groups will be recruited to participate in the research, and the
investigators plan to develop new student labs in ecology and genetics at the
high school and undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data and
biological resources will be made available to the public either through
publications or long-term repositories such as the Arabidopsis Biological
Resource Center (http://www.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/abrchome.htm.