* 0844256
* Using Modern Burrowing Organisms to Interpret the Paleoenvironmental, Paleoecological, and Paleoclimatic Significance of Continental Ichnofossils
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Daniel Hembree, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2015
* USD 156,000.00

Using Modern Burrowing Organisms to Interpret the Paleoenvironmental,
Paleoecologic, and Paleoclimatic Significance of Continental Trace Fossils

Daniel I. Hembree, Ohio University EAR-0844256

Abstract

Ichnofossils provide a critically important in situ record of
paleoenvironmental and paleoecological change that has become an essential
aspect of sedimentology, stratigraphy, and paleontology. Data collected through
experiments performed with modern marine organisms have revealed the behavioral
and environmental factors that affect marine ichnofossil morphology and
distribution. This proposal seeks funding to study the burrowing behavior and
biogenic structures of extant terrestrial animals for application to the study
of ichnofossils. By studying the behavior of continental tracemakers, the
morphology of their burrows, nests, tracks, and other traces may be correlated
to continental environmental factors such as temperature and precipitation,
depositional environments, and such substrate characteristics as soil
consistency, moisture level, and organic content. In addition, if trace
morphology can be linked to specific taxa or body morphologies, then these
traces may be used in lieu of body fossils to determine the geographic and
temporal range of different groups of organisms. This study will evaluate two
hypotheses concerning the connections between trace morphology, tracemakers, and
environment: (1) continental ichnofossil morphology can be linked to specific
taxa allowing ichnofossils to be used to determine the geographic and temporal
range of ancient organisms; and (2) continental ichnofossil morphology varies in
a predictable manner with changes in environment and climate. These
morphological variations can provide such paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic
data as temperature, soil moisture, substrate consistency, and sedimentation
rates. To test these hypotheses an integrated study will be employed that will
include detailed laboratory studies of burrows, tracks, and trails produced by
continental invertebrates and vertebrates as well as the analysis of changes in
ichnofossil morphology due to changes in substrate consistency, soil moisture,
and surface air temperature. Laboratory studies will involve the study of twenty
six species of terrestrial annelids, arthropods, amphibians, and reptiles in
large, substrate-filled terrariums in temperature-controlled rooms. The test
animals will be exposed to variations in temperature, soil moisture, and
substrate composition. Biogenic structures produced in the laboratory including
subsurface burrows and chambers as well as surface tracks and trails will be
photographed and cast for morphological analysis. This project will include the
production of an online neoichnological database that will be invaluable to
students and professionals in both academia and industry for the interpretation
of ichnofossils and sedimentary facies. Using this database ichnofossils can be
directly compared to modern traces to determine likely tracemakers, means of
excavation, behavioral significance, and environmental conditions at the time of
burrow construction. The online database will be accessible through the Ohio
University Department of Geological Sciences website and will provide detailed
descriptions, measurements, and photographs of modern traces. The primary
contributions to training achieved by this grant will be training three graduate
students and up to ten undergraduate students in laboratory techniques of
specimen-based ichnology and paleontology as well as the presentation of results
at scientific meetings and in scientific journals. This project will train
graduate and undergraduate assistants in the skills necessary for future careers
in geology or paleontology. In addition to students directly assisting in the
project, students in introductory paleontology, paleoecology, and ichnology
courses at Ohio University will use the animal laboratory to complete short
laboratory projects as part of their regular course work. These projects will be
designed to teach students how to formulate hypotheses, test hypotheses with
experimental techniques, interpret results, and write scientific reports.
Finally, many of the casts and reproductions of biogenic structures produced in
this project will be used to create a museum exhibit for the Cincinnati Museum
of Natural History and Science. This exhibit will be designed to educate the
public on the interaction of animals and the soil environment as well as the
role of ichnofossils in modern paleontology.