* 0844947
* CAREER: Collaborative Information Behavior: Exploring and Supporting Collaboration during Information Seeking and Retrieval Activities
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2016
* Madhu Reddy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2016
* USD 551,475.00

With the advent and continuing spread of the Internet and the World-Wide Web,
information resources are becoming more and more widely available. As people in
all walks of life try to use these resources to find answers to questions about
issues ranging from finance to personal health, there is a general recognition
that it is very difficult for individuals to find relevant information. One
approach to dealing with this problem is to combine the abilities and
experiences of multiple information seekers. Future information retrieval
systems will therefore have to focus not only on how individuals can access and
search the volumes of available information, but also on how they can
collaborate with each other to find the most relevant information that meets
their needs. The mounting evidence that collaborative information behavior (CIB)
plays an important role in organizational work notwithstanding, most information
retrieval systems (and their underlying conceptualizations of information
behavior) still adopt the individual user's perspective. Focusing solely on
individual information behavior has led to processes and technologies that often
constrain CIB, which can be acutely problematic in settings where teams and team
work are important. The PI argues that while individual information behavior
cannot be ignored, we must strive to develop processes that equally support CIB,
because effective integration of information retrieval technology into
collaborative environments requires us to incorporate not eliminate
collaboration in these technologies. His goal in this project is to address our
current inability to do that, by improving our theoretical understanding of the
CIB process and by advancing the design of information retrieval systems as
well, in the hope of thereby alleviating the impediments to team success in
critical domains. To these ends, the PI will investigate CIB in team settings
within the healthcare and education domains. He will develop a model of CIB,
design and implement a collaborative information retrieval prototype system, and
conduct both laboratory and field evaluations of it. Project outcomes will
include a better understanding of how and why people collaborate when searching
for information, and how to design technologies that effectively support that
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will lead to
the development of new processes and technologies that will allow people to
share their knowledge, techniques, and results with each other in order to
quickly and effectively meet their information needs.