* 0844851
* Deductive and probabilistic reasoning
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Philip Johnson-Laird, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 04/30/2013
* USD 464,939.00

Almost all humans are capable of deductive, inductive, and probabilistic
reasoning, even if they have had little or no training in logic or the
probability calculus. This research project aims to discover the mental
processes underlying their reasoning and to develop computer software that
implements the same processes. There are two reasons for the project. First, the
development of an integrated theory of reasoning elucidates a key component of
human mentality. Second, a program that simulates reasoning is a major step
towards fulfilling a long-standing dream ? going back to the seventeenth century
? of an automatic system for evaluating inferences and for identifying
fallacies. The computer program would therefore be a tool for improving
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory underlying the project is that
reasoning depends on simulating events in mental models. The project begins with
series of psychological experiments to test the theory?s new applications to
several crucial domains, which include how the meaning of premises and general
knowledge can yield ?kinematic? mental models that unfold in time, how certain
descriptions lead to systematic but compelling fallacies, and how the subjective
probabilities of unique events derive from evidence that is not numerical. The
experiments contrast the model theory?s predictions with rival accounts.
Kinematic models predict a trend in the time to make inferences, because earlier
events in a temporal simulation should be easier to access than later ones. The
research then uses the experimental results and prior data to formulate a model
theory that unifies the different components of everyday reasoning. The studies
of subjective probabilities fill a major gap in the model theory and in the
theory of subjective probability: how reasons yield numerical probabilities. The
unified theory will be implemented progressively in a computer program, which
will allow users to determine what follows from what. It will embody a mental
architecture for higher cognition organized around operations on mental models.
All the software will be in the public domain.