* 0844801
* CAREER: Endogenous Signaling Through the Farnesoid X Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Gregory Tochtrop, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2015
* USD 893,105.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Scientific Impacts:

This CAREER project aims to understand the complex feedback network between bile
acids and their cellular sensor, the farnesoid X receptor (FXR). Bile acids are
ubiquitous physiologic small molecules present in all mammals and most
vertebrates that play a central role in digestion. Interestingly, when looking
across species, the chemical composition of the bile acid pool is quite diverse.
Even within a species, there can be significant variability, as seen in humans.
The goals of this project are twofold. First, an approach will be developed
using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy in conjunction with
synthetic organic chemistry to develop bile acid probes to understand how these
molecules interact with and signal through FXR. Second, these probes will be
used to study central questions of bile acid selectivity between FXR and a class
of lipid binding proteins that also bind bile acids. As the goals of this
research are twofold, so is the global impact. First, this research project will
develop NMR as a tool for dissecting complex binding interactions, which will
have the effect of expanding the repertoire of tools that can be used by
scientists to study such systems. Further, this work will help to illuminate
broader questions about the function of FXR and lipid binding proteins as they
relate to bile acid homeostasis.

Broader Impacts:

The pedagogical goals of this project integrate with the research, but focus on
biological and chemical education at a more basic and fundamental level. The
audience of the described efforts spans from sophomores in high school to
sophomores in college and aim to integrate fundamental aspects of both organic
chemistry and biochemistry into basic courses at an introductory level. The PI
also plans to partner with local high school teachers and integrate their
students into scholarly research activities. In addition, a plan is detailed to
work with colleagues who are engaged in writing textbooks for introductory
classes and local colleagues at Case Western Reserve University to make vertical
progress in the way that basic science courses are taught.