* 0844836
* CAREER:  Seismic Behavior of Slickensided Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Christopher Meehan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2015
* USD 404,821.00

&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project is to improve understanding of the seismic behavior of
slickensided surfaces in fine-grained soils. This will be achieved while
actively engaging undergraduate students through a service-learning outreach
program focused on engineering reconnaissance in the aftermath of natural
disasters. ?Slickensided surfaces? are planes of weakness formed in stiff clays
due to large shear displacements concentrated on a landslide slip surface.
Slickensided surfaces are commonly encountered in clay shale or overconsolidated
clay slopes. Their low strength is a significant source of slope stability
problems. Although slickensided slopes and the structures they support may be
stable under static load conditions, movement along pre-existing slickensided
rupture surfaces can represent a critical mechanism for sliding during
earthquakes. Little information is currently available concerning the shearing
resistance that can be mobilized along pre-existing slickensided rupture
surfaces under seismic loading conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this
lack of understanding, the PI will develop a unique torsional shear device that
will be used to form slickensided shear planes in clay soils, and to measure the
static and cyclic shear strengths along these slickensided surfaces. This device
will be used to test a wide variety of pure clay minerals and natural clay soils
to develop a fundamental understanding of the seismic behavior of slickensided
shear surfaces. Additional testing will also be performed to determine the
relationship between soil pore pressures and the measured dynamic strengths, to
examine the effects of pore water chemistry on soil shear behavior, and to
evaluate the post-shaking static shear strengths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
integrated education plan will support the PI?s research efforts through the
development of a unique service-learning and outreach program: DElaware Students
Engineering in response to Natural Disasters (DE-SEND). DE-SEND will be
comprised of a volunteer cadre of undergraduate students that will mobilize
following natural disasters to perform rapid engineering reconnaissance. DE-SEND
students will perform: 1) senior thesis projects to analyze and disseminate data
gathered during reconnaissance efforts, 2) senior design projects to solve
natural-disaster-related problems, and 3) outreach efforts to local
undergraduate student organizations and K-12 schools. Students will also collect
and analyze soil samples to support the PI?s on-going research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved knowledge of the development and
properties of slickensides will lead to improvements in the seismic analyses of
clay slopes and to improved understanding of the skin friction on driven piles.
The PI?s educational goal is focused on developing a new, non-traditional
learning environment outside the classroom (DE-SEND). This endeavor presents a
unique opportunity to ?bring the students to the problem,? to excite them about
engineering using a novel approach. Observing catastrophic engineering failures
caused by natural disasters will be an eye-opening experience for many
undergraduate students, and is an ideal educational opportunity for training the
next generation of civil engineers.&lt;br/&gt;