* 0844526
* SGER - Probing Oxygen Reduction Reaction Kinetics Using Heterostructured Thin-Film Microelectrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Yang Shao-Horn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2009
* USD 87,966.00

CBET-0844526 Shao-Horn

This objective of this research is to conduct a study of oxygen reduction
kinetics to improve our fundamental understanding of oxygen reduction on
perovskites, including the relationship of kinetics to surface-specific
structure and composition, and exploit this understanding to enhance and
stabilize oxide surface electrocatalytic activity. In this project, we focus on
our efforts in probing oxygen reduction kinetics by correlating oxygen surface
exchange of (La, Sr)x(Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu)yOz perovskite microelectrodes to the bond
strength of transition metal and oxygen, where our research is centered around
two hypothesis: (1) the surface exchange rate is influenced largely by the
electronic structure of oxides rather than oxygen vacancy in the structure; and
(2) interface between perovskite ABO3 and A2BO4 type oxides, where such
interfaces may enhance oxygen surface exchange as shown by Kawada's recent work.
These hypotheses will be examined using the following concepts: (i) for a given
transition metal valence state, going from Mn to Cu, the surface exchange rate
would be enhanced as the transition metal and oxygen bond strength is reduced;
(ii) compositional changes at the ABO3 and A2BO4 oxide interfaces can modify
bond strength of transition metal and oxygen as oxygen vacancy may decrease the
ionic activity of metal and oxygen bonds and thus lower the bond strength, which
might be exploited to enhance oxygen surface exchange rates.

The proposed research employs model thin-film microelectrodes to fabricate well-
defined systems that allow fundamental investigation of oxygen reduction
reaction rate-limiting steps on mixed ionic and electronic conducting perovskite
electrocatalysts, and discover the fundamental principles that governs oxygen
surface exchange rate. The information would allow researchers to create
materials with fast oxygen surface exchange guided by the fundamental
principles, and design electrode microstructures at the nanometer-scale for
efficient oxygen reduction at intermediate temperatures.

The proposed research efforts will generate broad intellectual properties
significant to electrochemical energy technologies and create knowledge of
interest to the field of catalysis at large. The proposed integrated research
and education activities train future energy leaders with interdisciplinary
knowledge in electrochemical energy conversion and materials. The outreach
program will teach high school teachers and students about energy basics, and
will serve to engage K-12 to support energy research and conserve energy through
workshop, classroom curriculum development and Service Learning projects.