* 0844186
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Lithospheric Suturing and Passive Margin Development Beneath the Southeastern U.S.
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Lara Wagner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 302,505.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the culmination of the lithospheric
accretion that built the Appalachian Mountains (250-320 million years ago) the
lithosphere of another continent (Gondwana) collided with proto-North America.
The suture between these two lithospheres is delineated in the crust beneath
southern Georgia by variations in fossils, rock types and ages, and a zone of
southward dipping reflectors imaged by seismic reflection data. However, the
location and geometry of the suture in the mantle is
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine the
position and shape of the lithospheric suture in the mantle, and to measure any
contrasts in crust and mantle physical and chemical properties across the
suture. 85 EarthScope USArray Flexible Array broadband stations are being
deployed in two N-S linear arrays that straddle the suture. One line stretches
from North Carolina to the coast of the Florida panhandle. The other extends
from South Carolina into central Florida. These stations, together with the
stations of the EarthScope USArray Transportable Array, will record seismic
waves from around the globe. These data will be analyzed to measure three-
dimensional variations in isotropic and anisotropic wave velocities, and the
velocity models will be interpreted in terms of temperature, rock composition
(including volatile content), and rock deformation
fabrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address a series of fundamental
questions. How does the crustal suture connect to mantle structures? Did mantle
accretion occur on shallow dipping shear zones, or did it occur at least in part
on more vertical contacts that imply horizontal shortening over a broad depth
range? If dipping mantle interfaces exist, do they represent relict subducted
lithosphere, or are they shear zones unrelated to prior subduction? What does
anisotropy in seismic velocities imply about the distribution of deformation
during accretion? What was the direction of subduction associated with the
collision of Gondwana and Laurentia? Continental break-up followed the
lithospheric collision, leading to the opening of the Atlantic Ocean. How was
the continental lithosphere affected by this episode of extension, rifting and
magmatism? Is there evidence for delamination of the lithosphere? What are the
present-day patterns of flow in the weak mantle asthenosphere that underlies the
lithosphere?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is directly supporting the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students. We are developing
educational materials that use this research project to build understanding of
concepts such as continental collision, mountain building, and continental
break-up. Experiment results will be used in our undergraduate and graduate
classes, and in outreach to schools in the vicinity of our home institutions in
Georgia, North Carolina, and Rhode Island.&lt;br/&gt;