* 0844098
* Collaborative Research: Terrestrial Paleoenvironmental Record Through the Permian-Triassic Transition of Texas and New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 271,397.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project involves a collaboration between scientists at
the Berkeley Geochronology Center, University of California, University of New
Mexico, New Mexico State University, and Southern Methodist University. The
project?s overarching goal is to determine environmental conditions in
terrestrial environments preserved in sedimentary strata of northwestern Texas
and southeastern New Mexico, over a brief time interval including the transition
between the Paleozoic and Mesozoic Eras, when the greatest mass extinctions
known in Earth?s history occurred. A detailed program of paleomagnetism
integrated with geochronology (using the 40Ar/39Ar and U/Pb methods) are used to
provide a high resolution, regional chronostratigraphic framework. Supported by
the chronostratigraphy, a regional model of depositional conditions and
environments for the Quartermaster Formation will be developed. Analysis of
fossil pollen, where present, will elucidate ecological conditions (and changes)
across the time interval spanning the extinction horizon. Isotopes of oxygen and
carbon are used to quantify atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations and
surface air temperatures. The results will help clarify the environmental
tolerances of the Earth system, and aid understanding of the causes of the most
profound biotic catastrophe known in our planet?s history. As participants in
field and laboratory components of the research, undergraduate and graduate
students at the participating institutions will receive hands-on training in the
diverse scientific disciplines employed in the project.