* 0844115
* I2CAM - International Institute for Complex Adaptive Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* David Pines, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2014
* USD 4,800,000.00

This award continues support for the International Institute for Complex
Adaptive Matter (I2CAM) that was founded in 2004. This Institute is based at the
University of California and includes senior researchers from several
universities within the USA and partners from Brazil, France, Germany, India,
Switzerland, Ukraine, and United Kingdom. This International Materials Institute
(IMI) is funded by NSF's Division of Materials Research. The IMI's research
focus is to identify organizing principles behind the emergence of new, complex,
collective phenomena and behavior in soft condensed matter, strongly correlated
electron and biological systems. The Institute organizes exploratory workshops
and schools on cutting edge research topics in emergent phenomena in complex
adaptive matter, including human brain, bringing together materials scientists,
biologists and neuroscientists. I2CAM also offers travel grants to junior
scientists and graduate students to attend conferences, workshops, or schools as
well as provides support for short international exchange visits to start and
develop collaborative projects. Furthermore, postdoctoral research fellowship
awards are also supported by I2CAM for collaborative research at two (or more)
international institutions. Over 70 institutions in US, Canada, Europe, Asia,
Australia, and South America participate in I2CAM activities. Outreach efforts
of I2CAM include: Emergent Universe project with a goal to develop an online
science museum devoted to explaining the concept of emergent phenomena in matter
to general public; a series of videos called Great Explanations on quantum
criticality, amyloid matter, protein folding and biological motors to be posted
on YouTube and SciVee; ICAMIPEDIA is an effort to develop a base of articles on
emergent phenomena in matter which go beyond Wikipedia in detail without being
excessively technical. The IMI's management consists of Co-directors, Board of
Governors, Executive, Steering, Coordinating, and Fellowship committees as well
as an External Advisory Committee that provides an annual review and council.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by DMR-OSP, PHY-PoLS, PHY-
AMO, BIO-IOS, BIO-MCB and OISE.