* 0844745
* Phylogenetic Relationships and Evolution of Skull Mechanisms in Perciform Coral Reef Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Mark Westneat, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 02/28/2013
* USD 411,950.00

A grant has been awarded to the Field Museum of Natural History under the
direction of Dr. Mark Westneat to study the evolution the diverse community of
coral reef fishes and their skeletal structure. Coral reefs are centers of
marine biodiversity where millions of species coexist. Reef fishes are a major
component of the animal life in these habitats in terms of species number,
economic resources, and the colorful, moving beauty of a living reef. The reef
fish evolutionary tree, or phylogenetic history, depicting the diversification
of these fish over time is largely unresolved. In addition, there is much that
we have to learn about the way reef fishes feed, survive and coexist in the
complex ecology of coral reefs. This project combines novel DNA information to
examine the evolutionary tree of large groups of coral reef fishes with studies
of how fish species feed to explore evolution in one of the most diverse species
radiations on Earth. The main objective of this grant is to understand the
evolution of coral reef biodiversity, and to do that we need DNA data on
hundreds of species. By using a combination of mitochondrial and nuclear genes,
including genes that play a role in embryological development (for a total of 10
different genes), this project will analyze a total of 648 species of fishes to
understand their phylogenetic history and use this family tree to explore
evolutionary patterns in reef fishes. The second objective of the proposal is to
combine phylogenetic research with engineering features of fish skulls to reveal
patterns of evolutionary biomechanics. Engineering models of skull function link
the variation in skull anatomy to feeding mechanics such as bite force, gape
speed, and jaw protrusion, giving us a better understanding of how animals
function in the reef habitat. For a broader audience, this project contributes
to museum collections, education, and exhibits. Students at the college,
graduate, and postdoctoral levels are involved with all aspects of the proposed
research, including sequencing, analysis, and presentation. International
collaborations are underway with people from Austria, Australia, Chile, Kenya,
Madagascar, New Zealand, The Philippines, and Thailand. A new museum exhibit at
the Field Museum highlights the genetic research proposed here. This research
will be incorporated into the new Encyclopedia of Life project through
initiatives coordinated by the Biodiversity Synthesis Center at the Field Museum
in Chicago.