* 0844977
* CAREER: An Innovative Performance-Based Simulation Framework for High-Rise Buildings against Wind Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Luca Caracoglia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project is the development of a methodology
for the analysis of wind loading and structural response uncertainty for tall
buildings affected by wind hazards. This study will contribute to the
quantification of such uncertainties through a combination of analytical and
numerical simulation methods, which will be validated through an experimental
study in wind tunnel. Attention will be focused on the loading induced by
synoptic and hurricane winds. The deliverables will include the implementation
of a set of numerical and analytical computer methods for the quantification of
the damage. The following issues will be considered: 1) discomfort levels for
occupants, 2) damage to the fa√ßade of the building, 3) damage to other non-
structural elements, 4) immediate occupancy criteria for essential facilities in
the aftermath of a severe wind storm. The analysis of economical impacts, for
example associated with maintenance repairs and downtime losses, will be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research activity will
contribute to the minimization of economic losses on tall buildings affected by
wind hazards. The outcomes of the study will also provide indication for the
derivation of simplified design rules for structural design. Integrated
educational and outreach activities will include: direct training of graduate
and undergraduate students, department-level and college-wide demonstrations for
graduate and undergraduate students, creation of an expert system for awareness
against wind hazards, short courses for practicing engineers, technology and
data sharing through the collaboration with a wind engineering cyber-
infrastructure network&lt;br/&gt;