* 0844913
* CAREER:   Advancing Viral RNA Structure Prediction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Susan Schroeder, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2015
* USD 750,000.00

RNA viruses are one of Nature's most successful self-assembling nanosystems.
This Career Award project aims to determine the conformation of ribonucleic acid
(RNA) inside viral particles. The conformation of the RNA has remained elusive
since the first crystals of viruses were studied 50 years ago. Viral RNA changes
conformation as the RNA is replicated, translated, and encapsidated. A viral RNA
sequence encodes the structure and the function of the viral RNA, viral
proteins, small interfering RNA (siRNA), and target sites for host small RNA. As
genome sequencing projects produce increasingly vast amounts of data, the need
for tools to interpret genomic sequence information at a structural level
becomes increasingly urgent. This research will provide fundamental knowledge to
better understand the structure of encapsidated viral RNA, improve predictions
of RNA structure from sequence, and thus elucidate dynamic viral RNA structure-
function relationships. Satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV) will be studied as
a small model system to improve viral RNA structure prediction. Excellent
crystallographic data for STMV particles has revealed the position and length of
RNA helices within the viral particle. A lack of RNA secondary structure
information limits the complete modeling of STMV RNA structure. Current programs
predict a large number and variety of RNA secondary structures within a small
free-energy range, but the lowest energy structures are inconsistent with the
crystallography data. The STMV RNA secondary structure will be further probed
with chemical modification reagents and site-directed mutagenesis. Prediction
programs will be modified to include global restraints, such as the number and
length of helices, and to search low energy structures more efficiently.
Thermodynamic parameters for RNA secondary structure motifs form the basis for
most RNA structure prediction programs and are essential for predictions based
on free energy minimization. Although consecutive terminal noncanonical pairs at
the ends of RNA helices commonly occur, the thermodynamic parameters for this
motif have not been explored. Measuring thermodynamic parameters for RNA also
provides an excellent opportunity for undergraduates to apply concepts from
physical chemistry and biochemistry courses to a practical biological problem
and contribute to an ongoing effort to improve RNA thermodynamic
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include
the improvement of the thermodynamic parameters and RNA folding algorithms that
are widely used by the RNA research community through the internet. Thousands of
scientists use these RNA prediction programs to analyze data, generate
hypotheses about RNA structure-function relationships, or design siRNA
strategies. The project provides long-term research and educational
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and post doctoral students at the
interface of biology, chemistry, and computer science. Students are encouraged
to develop skills in the communication of science to the general public through
science based displays relating to the research project at the local library.