* 0844859
* Symposium: Unknown Knowns and Known Unknowns,  Chemical Oceanography in a Changing World
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Jay Brandes, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

This award will provide the major funding to the Skidaway Institute of
Oceanography to convene a Symposium on Ocean Carbon Cycles to be held February
23-26, 2009 in Savannah, Georgia. The primary goal of this conference is to
bring together investigators studying various aspects of ocean carbon cycling
and to have them discuss their approaches and progress in addressing analytical,
methodological and conceptual challenges pivotal to the study of carbon cycles
during a period of climate change. The presentation of ?cutting edge? material
and informal exchange of scientific ideas among scientists with different
experiences and expertise are vital to the continued development of marine
biogeochemistry as a whole. The Symposium will assemble about 80 participants,
including graduate students and researchers ranging from recent PhDs to 30-year
veterans.

The Symposium will be organized around four sessions: (1) Carbon cycling as seen
through the filter of biomarkers- what do we know and what do we need? (2)
Marine Margins: Passive or aggressive players in biogeochemical cycles? (3)
Paleoproxies: Carts and horses or chickens and eggs? (4) What questions should
we be asking about ocean biogeochemical changes during the next century?

Session topics have been selected to provide a prospective view of carbon
cycling in an Anthropocene ocean. A special issue of an appropriate Journal
(i.e. Marine Chemistry or Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta), will be dedicated to
coverage of the Symposium. All speakers will be invited to contribute papers for
the special issue and session chairs will provide summaries and syntheses of
each session. Symposium participants will also be invited to contribute short
papers on related topics to the special issue. All contributions will be subject
to peer review. All four of the session chairs have been selected and a slate of
speakers has been identified. The speakers will seek to provide insight to
state-of-the-art research topics, whereas session chairs will strive to create
an environment conducive to lively discussion.

To complement the support provided by NSF through this award, other funds have
been secured through the Petroleum Research Fund and Geochemical Society.

Broader Impacts: Integration of research and education in this symposium will be
enhanced by the involvement of a large number (15+) of graduate students.
Graduate students will be involved in all aspects of the proposed symposium,
including poster presentations, round table discussions and discussions between
talks, and the submission of manuscripts covering their research. The symposium
is also organized to have many young scientists as speakers in the four
sessions. This emphasis ensures that the information presented at the symposium
reaches those who will be shaping the future in marine biogeochemistry. The
planned publication of the research findings and primary consensus of needs and
opportunities also makes the proceedings of the symposium available to a broad
spectrum of the scientific community.