* 0844540
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation of Highly Nonlinear Granular Crystals for the Development of New Mechanical Systems and Acoustic Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Chiara Daraio, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 12/31/2013
* USD 418,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is creating and understanding new metamaterials based on engineered, ordered
granular crystals. Metamaterials are artificially composite systems, having
their fundamental components (for example spherical grains) arranged in precise
geometrical structures, that present properties not found in other natural
systems. It will study how stress waves propagate in these new materials with
experiments, and will develop numerical and analytical models to predict their
behavior. It will research wave behavior at interfaces and will study the
interplay of discrete effects and periodicity, disorder and localization,
creating parallels with other physical phenomena. The understanding provided by
studying these new materials will allow the creation of novel devices like
tunable acoustic lenses, vibration absorbers, energy traps and
actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal impact of this work can be
identified with the potential discovery of new systems that will affect everyday
life (i.e. new acoustic methods for imaging/surgery, protective systems and
signal transformation/redistribution in communication). It will also offer a
great educational platform: creating and understanding new mechanical systems
requires learning how to balance in depth fundamental physics with imagination,
inspiring young generation to ?think out-of-the-box?. It will engage graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students in several cooperative activities
combining groundbreaking studies with the development of practical applications
and patentable devices. It will particularly emphasize undergraduate education,
motivating women and underrepresented groups toward science. The
multidisciplinary aspects of this work will foster collaborations with other
research institutions, with industry and with the broader community. The
proposed plan will create two new academic courses and will organize summer
schools with strong international emphasis.