* 0844394
* Evaluation and Adaptation of an Ion Sensitive Field Effect Transistor for Seawater pH Applications
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Todd Martz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2011
* USD 433,884.00

pH is of fundamental importance to contemporary issues in chemical oceanography
such as ocean acidification and biogeochemical cycling, yet continues to be
chronically undersampled in both space and time. This problem can only be
overcome through the development of sensors capable of stable, long-term
autonomous operation in situ. The approaching age of ocean observatories
desperately needs such sensors for the various types of proposed platforms (e.g.
moorings, profiling floats, gliders). The PI?s propose to evaluate the
performance of the ion sensitive field effect transistor (ISFET) for measuring
seawater pH. Initial tests at MBARI indicate that commercial ISFETs may now be
capable of long-term operation in the surface ocean with minimal sensor drift. A
side-by-side assessment of commercially available ISFETs will be carried out at
MBARI. Off-the-shelf ISFETs will also be deployed on ocean moorings to test the
effects of biofouling and to determine the necessary anti-biofouling measures.
Concurrent to this, MBARI will work with existing chip technologies to build an
ISFET sensor specifically intended for seawater pH measurements. In designing
the customized ISFET, special attention will be given to pressure tolerance and
type of reference electrode. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;pH value is among the most critical chemical parameters to
our study in oceanography. At present time, there is no any other progress as
successful as PI's work in obtaining long term pH measurement in seawater.
Benefit of this development is almost no limitation to entire ocean science
community. The improved ISFET pH sensor technology from this effort will
certainly be valuable to our development towards other chemical sensors for
gaining long term monitoring ability. In addition, the experience and knowledge
gained through this sensor related development will also benefit wide ranges of
the engineering community in dealing with long term monitoring of chemistry in
aqueous system. Its hard to name anything more important than the carbon cycle
in the ocean right now, and this sensor would be a great help in understanding
its spatial and temporal variability. A successful sensor would have wide
application in ocean observing system and in all sorts of autonomous vehicles as
well as ship-based field programs. Their WATCH program will involve under-
represented groups in the data analysis. &lt;br/&gt;