* 0844566
* CAREER:  Holistic 3D Brain Image Parsing by Integrating Implicit and Explicit Models
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,10/31/2013
* Zhuowen Tu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 10/31/2013
* USD 459,956.00

Designing automated algorithms to extract and analyze anatomical brain
structures from neuro-images is of significant scientific and clinical
importance in detecting abnormal brain patterns, analyzing various brain
diseases, and studying the brain growth.

This project will develop a general statistical modeling/computing framework to
perform 3D holistic brain image understanding. The framework emphasizes
rigorous, efficient, and effective learning-based statistical models to
integrate the complex appearances, varying 3D shapes, and the large spatial
configuration of anatomical brain structures.

Implicit models through discriminative approaches have the advantages of fusing
a large amount of information and obtaining decisions quickly. Explicit models
through generative approaches can directly represent the information and thus,
better explain the structure and model the transformation and scale change. The
PI explores harmonic relationships between discriminative and generative models
for 3D image parsing by combining implicit and explicit models along several
directions: (1) learning-based models with rich appearance, and implicit shape
and context; (2) integrating skeleton with surfaces for 3D shapes; (3) effective
3D shape representation and similarity measure; (4) component-based simultaneous
registration and segmentation.

This research will contribute to automating the process of extracting a large
number of anatomical structures, and enhancing the shape analysis needed for
detecting brain diseases, monitoring health conditions, studying drug effects,
and discovering brain functions. The scope of the proposed model goes beyond
medical image analysis and can be applied in other problems of statistical
modeling/computing, computer vision, multi-variate labeling in machine learning.

