* 0844722
* A Survey of Freshwater Ascomycetes from the Neotropics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Carol Shearer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 02/28/2013
* USD 557,500.00

Freshwater ascomycetes are microscopic fungi that decompose dead plants and wood
in aquatic habitats. These fungi play an important role in aquatic food webs by
breaking down complex plant materials into more digestible components that can
then be used by aquatic invertebrates and bacteria as a food source. Despite
evidence of the ecological role of freshwater ascomycetes as decomposers in
water, there is a lack of knowledge of their identities, geographical
distributions, species diversity patterns, and evolutionary relationships. The
continued degradation and loss of aquatic habitats due to anthropogenic
activities make it imperative to study these fungi now from undisturbed habitats
that still exist. Drs. Carol Shearer and Andrew Miller and their students will
collect, identify, and isolate freshwater ascomycetes along an altitudinal
gradient from the tropical Andes to the Amazonian Basin in southeastern Peru.
This region, currently nearly unstudied for freshwater ascomycetes, is a global
conservation priority area and one of the few remaining large tracts of forests
extending from the tree line to the lowlands. The ecological habitats from tree
line to lowlands lie along a climate gradient that will allow the investigators
to determine how climate influences species composition. &lt;br/&gt;The health
and sustainability of freshwater ecosystems are relevant to a broad scope of
political, economic, societal and public health interests. For aquatic
ecosystems which are vital to humankind biologically, commercially and
aesthetically, but which suffer from numerous anthropogenic activities, there an
urgent need to understand the species responsible for ecological function and
ecosystem health. This project will provide student training in the collection,
identification and isolation of freshwater ascomycetes, which perform the vital
function of decomposing dead matter in freshwater ecosystems. The researchers
will establish cultures of these fungi that will constitute a diverse source of
new genetic living stocks. These cultures will provide material for systematic,
developmental, physiological, molecular, and ecological studies. The researchers
will contribute voucher specimens, cultures and molecular sequences to
established repositories, thereby providing material and data for future
studies, including molecular assessment of biodiversity by ecologists. In
addition to publishing the results of their study in scientific journals, the
scientists will place descriptions of new and unusual species on the Freshwater
Ascomycetes Web Site (http://fungi.life.uiuc.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;