* 0844775
* CAREER: Linear Matrix Inequality Representations in Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Jiawang Nie, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,445.00

This proposal investigates the linear matrix inequality representations of
convex sets and their applications in optimization problems. The work involves
different kinds of mathematical tools like algebraic geometry, convex analysis,
differential geometry, numerical analysis, optimization theory, and real
algebra. The investigator not only studies the fundamental mathematics on the
scope and depth of linear matrix inequality representability, but also work on
designing new algorithms and software solving hard optimization
problems.&lt;br/&gt;The following five main topics will be focused in this
project: linear matrix inequality representations of rigid convex sets,
semidefinite programming representations of convex semialgebraic sets, second
order cone programming representations of convex semialgebraic sets,
semidefinite programming representations of nonnegative multivariate
polynomials, and linear matrix inequality methods for solving nonconvex
optimization problems and polynomial systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A basic problem of science and engineering is finding a global
minimum of a function of many variables. As a metaphor one might think of a
complicated terrain of mountains and valleys which stretches for hundreds of
miles and one must find the lowest point in the lowest valley. The difficulty is
that one can not see the map and one only knows a mathematical formula for the
terrain and in most applications (like electronics, networks, biochemistry)
there are many variables instead of three. Many algorithms will find the lowest
point of a particular valley but none are known which effectively find the
lowest valley itself. This NSF research is to develop global optimization
algorithms for various situations. One is the class of problems where the data
is given by polynomials. Another is to determine and parameterize convex
problems very efficiently; in convex situations one has only one valley. These
pursuits require integration of techniques from numerical mathematics, real and
complex algebraic geometry, convex analysis, differential geometry, numerical
analysis, and optimization theory, a wide range of mathematics. Jiawang Nie has
personal experience with several areas of applications including sensor networks
and systems control and this informs his mathematics and techniques. Other
important features of this proposal are integrating research and education,
developing new mathematical courses, training undergraduate and graduate
students on using the latest mathematical tools, advising postdoctoral scholars
on how to create novel research results.&lt;br/&gt;