* 0844785
* RUI-The ecophysiological basis of the response of coral larvae and early life history stages to global climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2013
* USD 626,658.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical coral reefs face a suite of
environmental assaults ranging from anchor damage to the effects of global
climate change (GCC). The consequences are evident throughout the tropics, where
many coral reefs have lost a substantial fraction of their coral cover in a few
decades. Notwithstanding the importance of reducing the impacts of environmental
stresses, the only means by which these ecosystems can recover (or simply
persist) is through the recruitment of scleractinians, which is a function of
successful larval development, delivery, settlement, metamorphosis, and post-
settlement events. Despite wide recognition of the importance of these
processes, there are few pertinent empirical data, and virtually none that
address the mechanisms mediating the success of early coral life stages in a
physical environmental varying at multiple spatio-temporal scales. The objective
of this research is to complete one of the first comprehensive ecophysiological
analyses of the early life stages of corals through a description of: (1) their
functionality under 'normal' conditions, and (2) their response to the main
drivers of GCC. These analyses will be completed for 2 species representative of
a brooding life history strategy, and the experiments will be completed in two
locations, one (Taiwan) that provides unrivalled experience in coral
reproductive biology, and superb microcosm facilities, and the other (Moorea),
with access to a relatively pristine environment, a well described ecological
and oceanographic context (through the MCR-LTER), and the capacity to bring a
strong biogeographic contrast to the project. The results of the study will be
integrated through modeling to explore the effects of GCC on coral community
structure over the next century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
include training and research opportunities to teachers, undergraduates, and
high school students in a diverse community, international training and
activities for students in Taiwan and Moorea, and involvement in the Three Seas
Marine Biology Program. The Three Seas Marine Biology Program provides a channel
for the rapid incorporation of results in the curriculum for advanced
undergraduates, opportunities for teaching and student advising by project
personnel, and the potential to recruit top students into the CSUN graduate
program.