* 0844293
* Geomorphic influence of beaver on fluvial systems in the greater Yellowstone ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Grant Meyer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2013
* USD 184,986.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

It has been assumed that when beavers build their dams across small stream
systems it causes long-term filling of valleys with sediment and creates broad,
flat "beaver meadows". Thus beaver activity is thought to promote both a
persistent reduction in sediment flux and greater groundwater storage capacity
in the accumulated deposits. By reducing flow velocities, individual beaver
ponds clearly trap sediment, but the depth and spatial distribution of sediment
deposition caused by beaver dams have never been quantified over timescales
longer than the lifetime of a single beaver pond. The goal of this project is to
document the effects of beaver dams in floodplains of small streams in the
greater Yellowstone area, in deposits dating from the present back to the end of
the last glaciation about 12,000 years ago (the Holocene epoch). By detailing
the texture, mineral and organic composition, chemistry, and sedimentary
structures of modern beaver-pond deposits and their associated landforms, this
work will define diagnostic characteristics essential to identifying these
deposits in older floodplain sequences and abandoned channels. Radiocarbon
dating will put the timing of beaver-pond deposits in the context of long-term
environmental change in the Yellowstone region.

Knowledge gained in this study about the long-term effects of beaver damming is
of significance in understanding the long-term evolution of stream valleys. It
also has relevance to improving the overall health of small stream systems, such
as those where a decline in beaver populations has caused a notable increase in
channel incision. It will thus help to focus available resources for restoring
and protecting stream habitat and water quality on those waterways that are most
in need. Such information is particularly relevant to management in northern
Yellowstone National Park, where a lack of beaver damming is thought to have
caused downcutting of many streams, with consequent lowering of water tables and
reduction of wetlands habitat. The study will involve independent research
projects and advanced scientific training for two graduate students. In
addition, undergraduate students from the predominantly Native American
population at the UNM-Gallup campus will be involved in both field and
laboratory research that will assist in movement of these students into
scientific degree programs and careers.