* 0844557
* CAREER:  Analog Computation Based Real-Time Global Power Management: from Devices to Multi-Core Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Glenn Schrader, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,448.00

Proposal ID: 0844557&lt;br/&gt;Title: Analog Computation Based Real-Time Global
Power Management: from Devices to Multi-Core Systems&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dongsheng
Ma&lt;br/&gt;Institute: University of Arizona
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As semiconductor
technology enters the nanometer regime, modern VLSI systems face an
unprecedented power crisis. Although existing power management methods have
proven to be successful in many IC modules, as structural and algorithmic
complexity keep increasing, these methods expose the limitations in the aspects
of speed, power consumption and complexity. This project is to conduct a
comprehensive study on power computing, modeling, management and optimization.
By developing a generic physical model for multi-core systems, the project
introduces a concept of using analog computation to solve multi-variable global
power optimization problems. Analog computation provides a much faster, more
accurate, real-time solution than the digital counterparts. A hardware-based
approach, through a multiple-output converter design, is proposed, which works
harmoniously with the power optimizer to incorporate converter-consciousness
into voltage/frequency scheduling. Further extension of global and converter-
conscious concepts leads to a leakage-aware universal power management solution
on a single hardware platform. This project is an assimilation of multiple
domains, which achieves power management from the device, to the circuit level,
eventually leading to system-level power optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes will benefit all power-related industries including packaging, cooling,
and battery manufacture, and will lead to a series of new inventions of power-
efficient electronic devices. The PI proposes a concurrent and integrated
educational program that includes an improved VLSI design and power management
curriculum, the introduction of an industrial tutoring program, the inclusion of
undergraduate and graduate student involvement and the outreach to under-
represented groups. The educational plan emphasizes diversity and will result in
tremendous social benefits.