* 0844249
* SGER:  Midwest Topology Network
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Michael Mandell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The midwest contains a large network of active researchers in algebraic topology
spread out through dozens of universities and colleges. Regular conferences
continually spark new ideas and potential new research directions. The purpose
of this grant is to provide the means to foster the new collaborations and new
research projects among midwest topologists at different universities that would
otherwise go unpursued. This grant would support three key types of activity:
Travel for research collaboration, travel for beginning researchers, and
exchange with other networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic topology attempts
to reduce questions about space and geometry to questions in algebra. Often this
involves assigning some kind of algebraic object like a vector space or
numerical invariant to a geometric object or space to capture or measure some
intrinsic feature. These invariants can then potentially be used to distinguish
between different spaces. The invariants studied are typically discrete, and so
they do not change under continuous deformation or "homotopy". This freedom
often allows topologists to deform complicated problems into simpler ones that
have the same invariants, which are then easier to compute. Since the simpler
problems often retain important information about the original mathematical
objects, algebraic topology provides effective tools for a wide range of
mathematical problems.&lt;br/&gt;