* 0844174
* Collaborative Research:   Calcium Entry and Transmitter Release at the Frog NMJ
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Markus Dittrich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 01/31/2013
* USD 154,692.00

Cells in the nervous system communicate at specialized regions called synapses.
When a nerve fires, calcium ions enter synapses from the surrounding
extracellular fluid and cause neurotransmitter molecules to be released into the
synaptic cleft between the communicating cells. However, the sequence of
molecular events leading from calcium entry to transmitter release remains
unknown. To better understand this important process, this research will combine
laboratory experiments and large-scale computer simulations to build detailed
3-D models of calcium-triggered neurotransmitter release at the synapse between
a nerve and muscle cell in the frog. In many respects, the frog synapse is quite
similar to many mammalian synapses (including human), and yet it presents unique
opportunities for combined laboratory and computational studies. This makes it
an ideal choice for creation of highly realistic and accurate models. Using
these models, hypotheses will be developed and tested to explain how synapses
use calcium to trigger neurotransmitter release, and how repeated nerve firing
changes release, as occurs at all synapses as they respond to changing
behavioral conditions. Development of realistic 3-D computer models also
presents unique opportunities for transformational training and education.
Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral trainees will participate directly in
these studies, and high quality animations of the models will be adapted for use
in the classroom. The project co-directors (S. Meriney, Univ. of Pittsburgh, and
J. Stiles, Carnegie Mellon Univ.) and faculty colleagues will use the new
teaching material at the University of Pittsburgh, the Pittsburgh Supercomputing
Center, and Carnegie Mellon University, in undergraduate and graduate
Neuroscience, Biology, and Computational Biology courses, a multi-institutional
summer institute (www.ccbb.pitt.edu/bbsi), workshops, and web-based tutorials
(www.mcell.psc.edu/tutorials/tlist.htm). New teaching material will also be
featured in the CMIST program, an undergraduate and K-12 outreach program at the
National Resource for Biomedical Supercomputing, directed by Dr. Stiles
(www.nrbsc.org/cmist).