* 0844364
* The speciation and behavior of sulfur gases in biogeochemical processes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Josef Hormes, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2013
* USD 278,154.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award supports a project to identify and resolve the
speciation of inorganic and organic sulfur species, including gases, which link
geological and geochemical processes to biological processes. Our ability to
reconstruct the past sulfur cycle is hampered by our limited understanding of
the nature and behavior of sulfur gases, primarily because it is difficult to
measure gas movement into, out of, or through sedimentary systems. To overcome
this problem, we recently produced the first sulfur K-edge X-ray Absorption
Near-Edge Structure (XANES) spectra for gases that were evacuated and evolved
from simple sulfur-bearing solids that were incrementally heated to ~400 oC.
XANES is one of the most efficient tools to study sulfur speciation in
biogeochemical systems. Previously, there were few examples of sulfur gas XANES
spectra; compounds were gases at room temperature or liquids under high vapor
pressure. Therefore, the application of this new gas-phase XANES technique
expands our ability to evaluate sulfur speciation in all phases in order to
address three main research questions: (1) What sulfur speciation changes occur
when sulfur-bearing inorganic and organic solids are heated? (2) Does the
composition of the precursor sulfur-phase (e.g., mineralogy, organic matter
sulfur content) influence the type of condensed sulfur phase(s) in a system? (3)
Can the signature of microbial processes (e.g., isotopic) be differentiated from
low-temperature geological (e.g., diagenetic) processes? Changes in sulfur
species and the classification of reaction byproducts from different
experiments, during heating to temperatures &lt;200 oC, will be examined by
using XANES. Simultaneous collection of gas-phase XANES spectra and masses (i.e.
isotopic compositions) using quadrupole mass spectrometry will identify novel
gases. The research promises to reveal a unique depiction of the types of sulfur
species associated with diagenetic reactions and of the connection between
volatile and condensed sulfur species in biogeochemical systems. The work will
increase our understanding of how possible geochemical and metabolic processes
related to the sulfur cycle have been recorded, and even altered, throughout
Earth's history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The work is
being done at the Louisiana State University synchrotron radiation source, the
J. Bennett Johnston, Sr., Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD)
in Baton Rouge. This is the only synchrotron in the southern US, and the only
state-funded facility. Our team includes academic and industry geochemists at
the Technical University in Berlin, Germany, and Shell International in Hague,
The Netherlands. These collaborations will demonstrate to the students engaged
on the project the rewards and challenges of international collaboration in
today's global political and economic climate. Currently, the research
technicians and graduate and undergraduate students represent underrepresented
minorities and women. The project will continue to provide unique educational
opportunities to increase participation and success of STEM students, at all
levels and backgrounds, through involvement in the ongoing REU program at CAMD
and the Marathon Geoscience Diversity Enrichment Program (GeoDE) program in LSU
Geology &amp; Geophysics. In addition to interviews with media and website
maintenance, the PIs actively disseminate results to the scientific community
and to the public through events at CAMD like "Day of Discovery".