* 0844301
* Collaborative Research:  Lake Matano, Indonesia:  A modern observatory of ancient ocean biogeochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* David Fowle, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2011
* USD 102,325.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archean and Proterozoic oceans have no
known analogues in modern aquatic environments, and their biogeochemistry and
microbiology remain enigmatic. Lake Matano's physical structure, abundance of Fe
and dearth of sulfate mirror the stratified ferruginous conditions thought to
prevail in these early oceans. Preliminary results indicate proliferation of
anoxygenic photoferrotrophs, and support the significance of these organisms for
the primary production in the early ocean. The active methane cycle in Lake
Matano demonstrates that methanogenesis and methanotrophy could have also been
important components of the Earth?s early marine C cycle. The methane cycle
appears coupled to the iron cycle through anaerobic oxidation of methane with
Fe(III) as an electron acceptor, a novel biogeochemical pathway. Given that the
deep waters of Lake Matano may be the best available modern analogue for the
anoxic, ferrugenous, and organic-poor early waters, investigators seek to
further elucidate the extent, mechanisms and the microbial communities
responsible for these processes. The specific objectives of this project are:
&lt;br/&gt;1) to generate high resolution profiles of the geochemistry of iron,
methane, and organic carbon in the deep waters and sediments of Lake Matano
using field and laboratory measurements; &lt;br/&gt;2) to characterize the water
column stratification, hydrodynamics, and the rates of physical substance
transport using direct measurements and modeling; &lt;br/&gt;3) characterize the
community structure and biogeochemical reactions associated with the microbial
communities in the lake and investigate their metabolisms in pure and mixed
cultures; &lt;br/&gt;4) simulate the biogeochemical cycling of iron, carbon, and
methane in the lake using reaction-transport models and calculate the in-situ
reaction rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results from Lake Matano, Indonesia,
will provide the first glimpse at the microbial ecosystems that can develop in a
stable, ferruginous aquatic environment. They can confirm the discoveries of two
novel biogeochemical pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Phylogenetic data will place extant organisms into an evolutionary framework.
Generated reactive transport models will be transferable to biogeochemical
processes in other tropical stratified lakes. These models and ecology data will
help examine biogeochemical processes in paleo-environments. Physical data will
help understand mixing in weakly stratified deep lacustrine and marine
environments. Additionally, a novel internationalized educational plan will
bring faculty and students from the USA and Indonesia together in the field and
in the laboratory.