* 0844501
* SGER: Fundamental studies on manipulation of red and white blood cells by electric field
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Asghar Esmaeeli, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 02/28/2010
* USD 55,685.00

0844501 &lt;br/&gt;Esmaeeli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
investigate the behavior of red and white blood cells in electric field using a
front tracking/finite difference technique in conjunction with a one-field
formulation to solve the governing equations of fluid flow and electric field.
The one-field equations are valid for the entire domain and account for the
momentum and electric field jump conditions at the interface. The fluid cell and
the plasma are considered incompressible and Newtonian. The interface separating
the cell from the plasma is modeled as an elastic membrane and the interfacial
forces are found using appropriate constitutive laws that relate the strain
energies of interface elements to their principal stretches. The deformation and
possible transport and rotation of a single cell, as well as fusion and
separation of binary cells driven by electric field will be explored and the
observations will be quantified. The proposed research will shed some light on
some aspects of the problem that have not been explored before, such as sickle
cell anemia studies using electric field. Fundamental studies involving
manipulation of biological cells with electric field is currently mostly
qualitative in nature, relying on photographic studies or observations of the
bulk behavior. While the focus of this study is on the behavior of a single cell
or interactions of a few of them, the method is well-suited for simulations
involving a large number of cells. The methodology builds on a successful
numerical method that has had impact on the state of the understanding of
buoyancy-driven bubbly flows. The results of this study will be also brought to
the classroom by incorporating the results into the course materials for the
newly established M.Sc. degree in biomedical engineering at SIUC for which the
PI is an adjunct faculty.