* 0844670
* Evolution of Translation: Structure, Function, and Folding of RNA/Protein Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 740,871.00

Evolution has given rise to all the biological processes. While its traces can
be glimpsed throughout the fabric of the cell, some of its clearest markings are
seen in the translation machinery (the ribosome and its associated
macromolecules) that controls the critical process of protein synthesis. This
machinery is present in thousands of copies in every cell and is composed of a
number of RNA/protein complexes that ensure the proper production of proteins
from DNA. While the individual components have been identified and
characterized, an integrated picture of the process as a whole, resolved both
spatially and temporally over an entire cell, is still missing. Developing such
a picture is key to understanding the evolutionary history of this complex
process. To extend knowledge of the function and evolution of translation to
higher levels of organization and scale, this project will focus on three
projects. Firstly, protein and RNA molecules form many transient complexes
during the process of protein synthesis which will be studied to examine the
physical nature of the binding and unbinding of these complexes. Specifically,
it is not known if each binding/unbinding event is independent or if the entire
chain of events is coupled. To investigate this issue, the direct migration or
handoff of a tRNA molecule from the enzyme that charges it with an amino acid to
the elongation factor that takes it to the ribosome will be modeled. The
simulation results will be compared to studies carried out in collaboration with
experimental groups. Secondly, the role of ribosomal signatures in the folding
and binding of ribosomal proteins and RNA will be examined computationally with
a variety of methods. An understanding of how signatures unique to a domain of
life affect ribosome assembly will provide insight into how the assembly process
has evolved since the divergence of the three primary organismal lineages.
Thirdly, a new computational approach will be developed to study the kinetics of
the translation process in the crowded environment of the cell. These 3D lattice
simulations take advantage of recent advances in GPU computing to enable
simulations of the translation process in a coarse grained bacterial cell under
in vivo conditions on the time scale of the cell cycle. Hypotheses about how the
process of translation occurs at a cellular scale will be tested.

All of the visualization, simulation, and analysis tools developed to study
macromolecular RNA/protein assemblies involved in translation will be made
available through the MultiSeq extension to the popular visualization program
VMD that is freely distributed. These techniques will also be incorporated into
an existing series of tutorials used in teaching computational biology. The
tutorials are available online, through workshops periodically given across the
country, and in the CHEM/BIOP470 Computational Chemical Biology course taught at
the University of Illinois. The PI's research group will continue to participate
in the NSF sponsored Graduate Teaching Fellows program that helps high school
teachers prepare state-of-the-art scientific curricula for their classrooms.
This project is jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division.