* 0844902
* CAREER: Heat and Charge Transport in Metal-Molecule-Metal Junctions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Pramod Sangi Reddy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2014
* USD 403,138.00

0844902&lt;br/&gt;Sangi Reddy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inorganic-organic molecular
junctions formed by trapping organic molecules between inorganic electrodes are
expected to have novel transport properties that are unlike that of organic
materials or inorganic materials. Using inorganic-organic hybrid materials made
of such junctions, it may be possible to develop cost-efficient thermoelectric
and photovoltaic devices. However, to create these revolutionary technologies,
it is essential to first understand the dependence of heat and charge transport
properties of molecular junctions on: 1) the molecular structure of the organic
molecule trapped between the electrodes, and 2) the chemical composition and
resulting crystal structure of the electrodes. This proposal aims to understand
this structure-property relationship by experimentally studying heat and charge
transport in molecular junctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
program will provide new insights into the nature of heat and charge transport
phenomena that occur in nanometer-sized molecular junctions due to the
confinement of phonons and electrons in them. A novel technique that will enable
the study of both heat and charge transport in molecular junctions will be
developed in the proposed research program. Using this technique, experiments
will be conducted on a variety of single molecule and multiple molecule
junctions to elucidate, for the first time, the relationship between structure
of the molecular junctions and its thermal conductance. Further, the effect of
structure on the electrical conductance and thermopower of molecular junctions
will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This program includes
the exploration of thermal transport in nanometer-sized molecular junctions
potentially leading to the creation a new research area. The proposed work may
impact the field of energy conversion; once the dependence of transport
properties on structure is understood, it may be possible to tune the heat and
charge transport in molecular junctions to create inexpensive and efficient
thermoelectric materials using metal-molecule heterostructures. The educational
and outreach activities of the proposed program will target students from
diverse backgrounds at various educational levels. Underrepresented students
from the African-American and Latino communities in the Ypsilanti public school
district will be encouraged to study science and engineering by using
educational modules designed to illustrate the exciting possibilities of
nanoscience. As part of this program, a new two-semester graduate sequence will
be introduced to teach engineers advanced concepts from quantum mechanics,
solid-state physics, and statistical mechanics. This will enable them to pursue
research in a variety of multi-disciplinary areas to solve important problems
like renewable energy generation and efficient energy conversion and storage.
This course will also be made available to the national and international
community by collaborating with the NSF supported Nanohub, an online repository
of coursework materials.