* 0844111
* CAREER: Securing Channel Access in Multi-Channel Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Loukas Lazos, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Securing Channel Access in
Multi-Channel Ad Hoc Networks&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 0844111&lt;br/&gt;PI?s
Name: Loukas Lazos&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Award
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An increasing number of mobile users rely on
wireless technologies to gain secure and uninterrupted access to network
services. As the volume of data disseminated via the wireless medium rapidly
expands, provision of performance, reliability, and security become challenging
problems. These problems can be alleviated by the use of multiple orthogonal
frequency bands (channels) that has been demonstrated to substantially reduce
contention and interference. However, for systems with poor physical security
and lack of centralized resource allocation such as ad hoc, sensor, and
cognitive radio networks, a multitude of internal and external attacks against
the medium channel access mechanisms can negate any gains due to channelization.
&lt;br/&gt;Most previous adversary models and protection methods are limited to
single-channel networks thus ignoring the additional vulnerabilities and
complexities of channelization. This project aims to advance our understanding
regarding the feasible space of attacks against channel access. We design secure
multi-channel access techniques, focusing on the protection of control traffic,
collaborative attack detection, and uncoordinated medium sharing. Moreover, for
networks with dynamic spectrum such as cognitive radio networks, we develop
verifiable channel sensing methods. Central to this effort is our definition of
quantitative security metrics under well defined adversarial models. Conducted
research is expected to enforce wireless networks with the very much needed
guarantees in security and performance.&lt;br/&gt;In the educational domain,
this project seeks to expose undergraduate and graduate students to fundamental
problems from interdisciplinary fields in computer engineering, information
science, and mathematics.