* 0844085
* Choice as an Engine of Individualism: When and Why is Choice Beneficial or Detrimental in Three Cultural Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Hazel Markus, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 09/30/2015
* USD 500,130.00

This research project aims to provide a better understanding of the human
motivational system, and particularly the role of choice in organizing and
guiding behavior. While choice is generally seen as universally impactful,
recent cross-cultural comparisons reveal that the powerful motivational effects
of choice may be limited to middle class European American groups of people. In
other words, choice and its effects on behavior are intimately tied to an
individualistic cultural perspective. This research project explores the role of
choice in self processes, especially with respect to a sense of agency, and the
nature and consequences of choice in three cultural contexts -- middle class
European American, middle class Indian and working class European American.
Fourteen studies will examine several key ideas. First, in middle class European
American contexts, choice impacts self expression and feelings of agency, which
benefits performance on cognitive and physical tasks but negatively affects
interpersonal relations. Second, in middle class Indian contexts, self restraint
rather than self expression via choice is associated with agency and benefits
individual performance. And third, in working class European American contexts,
social solidarity rather than self expression (again, via choice) is related to
agency and benefits performance. Thus, choice is not equally powerful for
everyone and has some negative consequences even for those who are most likely
to reap its rewards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical significance of this
project rests, in part, on refining and enriching previous understandings of
sociocultural effects and not, as is often the case, on introducing a novel
dimension of cultural variation. Moreover, of both theoretical and practical
significance is that the research seeks to show that while choice can be
effective in motivating behavior, its impact depends on the specific
sociocultural contexts with which people engage. That is, effectively motivating
people to stop smoking, to vote, or to save energy resources depends on invoking
socioculturally matched models of agency. Overall, then, this research promises
to more fully explicate the choice by embedding it in sociocultural contexts and
thereby contribute to policy makers' efforts in designing interventions that
benefit communities.