* 0844585
* CAREER: Towards Autonomous Wheelchair Systems in Urban Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* John Spletzer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 480,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aging U.S. population is expected
to place unprecedented strains on the country?s health care system. To mitigate
this, there is growing industry interest towards home-centered approaches to
health care. Leveraging technology advances is seen as one of the primary
enablers of the home-care paradigm. To this end, this project is investigating
the development of smart wheelchair technologies. There are three significant
technical components. The first is&lt;br/&gt;the use of large-scale, three-
dimensional maps to support accurate wheelchair localization in outdoor, urban
environments even in the absence of reliable GPS measurements. This is
accomplished through automated synthesis of map models a priori to locate
stable, robust landmark features that the wheelchair can use at runtime. The
motivation is that by leveraging maps generated from high fidelity/cost sensor
systems, lower-cost service robots gain many of the benefits of these sensors
but without the cost. This is critical for the technology to be commercially
viable in the future. The second is an optimization-based framework for motion
planning in crowds that will enable the smart wheelchair to maneuver safely in
the presence of large numbers of pedestrians and static/dynamic obstacles. This
approach builds upon recent advances in convex optimization theory, and
explicitly integrates higher-level models of wheelchair-pedestrian dynamics
through interactive control functions to improve navigation performance.
Finally, there is a significant development and test component planned through a
collaboration with Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Hospital in Allentown, PA. This
will provide critical service provider and end user input into system
development.