* 0844873
* Computerization of Orphaned Aquatic Collections -- North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wayne Starnes, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 285,048.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Carolina State Museum of
Natural Sciences (NCSM), in a major part with prior NSF support, has
accomplished the curation, geo-referencing, and data basing of over 50,000 lots
of fishes and 21,800 lots of aquatic invertebrates (see:
http://collections.naturalsciences.org and the Global Biodiversity Information
Facility site). Given further NSF support, the experienced staffs of the NCSM
fishes and mollusks units will build on these accomplishments to attempt full
assimilation of several orphaned collections adopted by NCSM that are of
considerable regional and historic importance (ca. 55,000 lots of fishes, 60,000
lots of mollusks). The major regional scope of these is the Mid-Atlantic States,
Southeast, and South Atlantic Bight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond facilitating
primary researchers, benefits to conservation planners will be greatly increased
by rapid electronic access to biotic occurrence data from across the broad and
rapidly developing region served. Education of the public is equally critical to
conservation of biodiversity and electronic collections data and mapping
capabilities are integral to a new NCSM facility that features near and distant
learning experiences on current biodiversity research. Thus empowered, these
innovations should better serve to enhance the public's appreciation for this
diversity and instill the will to protect it. Five technicians, well schooled in
best practices during the project, will facilitate the field of biodiversity
research well into the future.