* 0844014
* International Materials Institute for New Functionality in Glass (IMI-NFG) - Phase II
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Carlo Pantano, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,750,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award will continue support for the International Materials Institute (IMI)
on New Functionality in Glass at Lehigh University in close collaboration with
Pennsylvania State University, which was established four years ago. This IMI
combines fundamental research with technological applications and focuses on
studies of optically active glasses for light production, photo-responsive
glasses for a variety of sensors and detectors, and glasses for biomedical
applications. The Institute will continue to promote research and educational
activities related to glass science on a global scale through its partnership
with many US universities, national laboratories, international institutions,
and industries. Researchers from eight foreign countries (Brazil, China, Egypt,
France, India, Japan, Portugal and UK) are involved in research collaborations
and as advisory board members. Activities of the IMI include international
exchange programs for faculty, postdoctoral scholars and students, internet-
based lectures and courses by senior researchers, domestic and international
research experience for undergraduate students and secondary school teachers,
development of multi-media education modules, demonstration experiments in
science museums, annual international schools and workshops. Participating
students and faculty gain valuable international research and educational
experience to be globally competitive in their careers. Minority student
recruitment is targeted through proactive interactions with Tuskegee University
faculty and students. Furthermore, in partnership with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, this IMI plans to work with glass companies in PA to meet the
needs of solar industries. Three advisory boards with representation from
several US universities and national laboratories, glass industries, and
international institutions will provide annual evaluation of the IMI activities
and guidance on emerging areas of focus. In addition to the peer evaluation by
the advisors, the IMI activities will be evaluated by independent experts.