* 0844989
* Growth, Form and Intercellular Interactions.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Boris Shraiman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2012
* USD 452,373.00

In this project the PI will develop theoretical models that explain existing
experimental observations and generate falsifiable quantitative hypotheses that
could guide new experiments with the long term goal of defining the mechanisms
of size and shape determination in specific model systems. Although the ideas
and methods will be general, the project will focus on the development of
Drosophila imaginal discs - the larval precursors of adult limbs and organs -
where extensive experimentally acquired knowledge is available. Specifically,
the proposed project will: 1) Develop a model of mechanical interactions between
cells in growing tissue and explore quantitative consequences of non-uniformity
and anisotropy in cell growth and of variation in cell properties. 2) Define and
solve the inverse problem for mechanical parameter determination for a
disordered two-dimensional array of cells. 3) Develop a model of cell contact
signaling mediated by proto-cadherins (cell-adhesion molecules) which have been
implicated in cell polarity and regulation of growth in Drosophila imaginal
discs. The project will involve collaborations with several experimental groups.
The PI will use the infrastructure of the existing KITP sponsored local K-12
outreach program to organize science presentations by the graduate research
assistants supported by the present application. These presentations for High
School student audiences will focus on the exciting opportunities of
interdisciplinary research, extending the existing physics-based program. The PI
will also establish a cooperative internship that will bring students (working
towards their MS-degree equivalent) from Latin America to KITP for six months of
research on interdisciplinary problems under his mentorship.