* 0844556
* CAREER: A Study of Strategies and Social Processes that Facilitate the Participation of Latino English Language Learners in Elementary Mathematics Classroom Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2016
* Kathryn Chval, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 06/30/2016
* USD 786,897.00

The proposed project aims to: (1) study resources and strategies for teachers
that will facilitate participation of 3rd grade Latino English Language Learners
(ELLs) in the mathematics classrooms; (2) develop related teacher professional
development (PD) materials; and (3) integrate research and teaching activities.
The basic research question is: How can 3rd grade teachers facilitate better
mathematics instruction for ELLs? The PI will conduct a longitudinal study with
teachers over three years in nine third-grade classrooms involving 20 Latino
ELLs in each classroom. Data (district-administered assessments, one-on-one
formal interviews, classroom artifacts, brief conversations with children
following the videotaped lessons) will be collected from multiple sources
including the use of head-mounted cameras to videotape classroom social
processes. Also, existing research base and data from the nine classrooms will
be used to develop, test, and publish PD materials for pre-service and
practicing elementary teachers. The integrated education activities will have a
direct impact on the design of University of Missouri Teacher Development
Program, Masters Programs, TESOL Certification Program, and Mathematics
Education Doctoral Program as well as local schools. The proposed project is
qualitative. Teachers will also participate in a three-year professional
development on ELL strategies and use classroom activities in the fall semester
that are designed to assist 3rd grade Latinos acquire mathematical competence on
various aspects of the number sense strand of the mathematics curriculum. All
the relevant instruments will be collected and analyzed. Findings from the
proposed research and integrated research/education activities will expand the
knowledge base in the fields of elementary mathematics education and
multilingual education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and
education activities will inform our understanding of effective strategies in
mathematics classrooms that will influence learning processes and ultimately
student outcomes relevant to Latino ELLs and potentially other groups of
underrepresented students. Findings from the project will promote effective
teaching and learning of mathematics at the elementary level and will be broadly
disseminated to students, teachers, teacher educators, and education researchers
throughout the U.S. The PI will create a vehicle (i.e., PD materials) for U.S.
elementary teachers to discuss critical issues related to engaging a group of
students that have typically been non-participants in mathematics classrooms and
potentially facilitate more effective participation for this growing population.