* 0844960
* Bridge Monitoring and Prognostication Workshop; Minneapolis, MN; September 2008
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Catherine French, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2009
* USD 50,002.00

ABSTRACT (250 words):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Long-Term Bridge Monitoring and
Prognostication Workshop&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As the nation's infrastructure
ages and as demands on the infrastructure intensify, it has become increasingly
evident that there is an urgent need to be able to accurately assess the health
and safety of bridge systems to ensure life safety and to prioritize the
allocation of limited resources to retrofit and replace systems. There is
increasing interest in incorporation of smart bridge technology within bridge
systems to flag abnormalities that require immediate attention. Current systems
have severe limitations associated with limited knowledge obtained from discrete
sensors, transmission and storage of large amounts of information,
interpretation of the data, and prioritization of decisions to be made based on
the results. This workshop will bring together 20 participants and up to 20
observers from a broad range of disciplines with individual expertise in one or
more of the following areas: sensors, networking/communication, data
interpretation/decision making, with the purpose of identifying technical
challenges and research needs regarding integration issues across these fields
as well as research needs within the individual topic areas. The workshop will
result in a document which will provide a clear list of priorities which can be
used as a resource to inform the associated programs at NSF and broader research
community of the short and long-term research needs and grand challenges to be
addressed associated with bridge sensing and prognostication which might guide
the cross-disciplinary resources required to support the effort. Particular
emphasis will be placed on the research needs associated with the integration
across the major topic areas.