* 0844151
* An isochron method for burial dating with cosmogenic nuclides: Application to river incision in southern Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Darryl Granger, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2012
* USD 301,935.00

The age of river terrace sediments can provide important information about river
incision, tectonic uplift rates, and how rivers respond to climate change.
However, the age of terrace gravels is usually difficult to determine in the
absence of datable volcanic rocks. One method that has been used to date terrace
gravels is cosmogenic nuclide burial dating, in which the rare nuclides
aluminum-26 and beryllium-10 are measured in the mineral quartz by accelerator
mass spectrometry. These two nuclides are produced by cosmic rays that originate
in space and travel through the atmosphere, but are blocked as they travel
through rock. If quartz grains are first exposed to cosmic rays near the ground
surface, but are then buried within a deposit that is at least 10 meters deep,
then the gradual radioactive decay of aluminum-26 and beryllium-10 offers a
means to date deposition over the past 3-5 million years. HOwever, this
technique requires great burial depths in order to minimize post-burial
production by deeply penetrating cosmic rays. This project introduces and tests
a new method that circumvents the problem of post-burial production by analyzing
several individual pebbles from a shallower depth. Each pebble will have exactly
the same post-burial production. This allows the use of an isochron method, in
which a plot of aluminum-26 versus beryllium-10 concentrations yields a line
whose slope depends on age. This study will test the isochron burial dating
method at sites of known age, and by analyzing samples in stratigraphic
sequence. The dating method will then be applied to a terrace sequence on the
Sundays River in southern Africa, to determine uplift rates over the past 3
million years. Uplift rates in southern Africa remain very poorly constrained,
and can provide important information on the interactions between erosion and
uplift, as well as the role of Earth's mantle in supporting African topography.

The development of a new dating method for gravels over the past 5 million years
will open opportunities for determining erosion and uplift rates, and can be
used for dating gravel deposits that contain stone tools or fossils. Results of
the field investigations in souther Africa will help show when the climate
became drier, and how rivers responded by changing their load or their incision
rate. The results will also provide, for the first time, a dated record of river
incision and tectonic uplift on the southern coast of South Africa, where rates
and patterns of uplift have been debated for over 50 years. This work will also
provide dates for terrace gravels that contain important assemblages of stone
tools, and will provide a timescale for technological developments in the
Earlier Stone Age. It is anticipated that the isochron method of cosmogenic
nuclide burial dating developed in this study will receive wide applications in
many fields studying earth and human history over the past 5 million years.