* 0844241
* Decadal-scale channel evolution at Mount Pinatubo, Philippines
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Karen Gran, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/29/2012
* USD 124,091.00

Rivers draining the flanks of Mount Pinatubo, Philippines, were blanketed in
pyroclastic flow and ash deposits during the 1991 eruption, which was the second
largest of the twentieth century. These deposits erode easily in the tropical
climate and upland vegetation recovers quickly, making landscape recovery both
dramatic and fast. As sand-rich pyroclastic flow deposits are stabilized or
removed, rivers are evolving back into gravel-bedded channels, leading to bed
coarsening and decreased sediment mobility. This research will investigate
coupling and feedbacks between decreasing sand supply, bed development, and
sediment transport during the last two decades at Mount Pinatubo, by continuing
monitoring conducted from 1996 through 2003. River cross-sections will be
reoccupied, long profiles will be resurveyed, and bedload and suspended load
transport on the Pasig-Potrero River will be measured again. Monitoring will be
extended to include lateral migration rates of braid channels and vegetation
density in the braidplain to assess the current role of riparian vegetation on
channel dynamics. As riparian vegetation density increases, it may become a
primary driver of channel planform and dynamics.

Sand loading is not unique to volcanically-impacted channels. Understanding how
excess sand is stabilized or removed from a watershed and how the channel bed
and sediment transport regime respond are also important in tectonically-active
areas with episodic landsliding or highly-modified channels in the wake of dam
removals. Being able to predict the time-scale for fluvial recovery could help
with planning for long-term disaster relief efforts in the wake of events like
the 1991 eruption. Persistent high sediment yields contribute to increased flood
hazards and water quality concerns and may displace communities for years.
Beyond volcanic environments, understanding how sediment transport evolves in
systems experiencing sand-loading could help determine the effectiveness of
future dam removals and stream restoration efforts to restore aquatic ecosystems
in severely-impacted watersheds.