* 0844336
* OPUS:    Synthesis of long-term research on hot spring microbial mats into a monograph on principles of microbial community ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* David Ward, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2013
* USD 130,000.00

Biologists trained to recognize plant and animal species can understand the
composition and structure of a community and obtain insight into its
functioning. The same cannot be said for understanding communities constructed
by microscopic organisms, as microbiologists have been "blindfolded" by
limitations of traditional methods. Microscopy cannot be used to identify
microorganisms, which are small and nondescript, and laboratory cultivation
cannot be used to describe microbial communities because it selects for
microbial species that are more fit in laboratory environments than nature.
Genetic approaches developed in recent years have circumvented these
limitations, but have left microbiologists with the challenge of understanding
how genetic differences equate to differences among microbial species. NSF has
funded long-term research on microbial mat communities inhabiting hot springs,
rationalizing that intensive study of relatively simple, stable and totally
microbial communities would yield insight into fundamental principles governing
how individual microorganisms organize themselves to coordinate the function of
a community. This award sponsors the development of a book that will detail
studies of hot spring microbial mat communities over a &gt;30 year period of
transition from traditional to contemporary genetic approaches. Importantly, it
will describe the maturation of a natural way to interpret genetic diversity in
terms of species and their unique ecological contributions to community
structure and function. The book will integrate principles of community ecology
learned by studying plants and animals, in an attempt to provide all ecologists
with a more principled view of microbial communities. The book's broader impact
is that it will help scientists better understand (i) how to predict the
response of microorganisms to changing environmental conditions, extremely
important given impending global climate change and the central role
microorganisms play in maintaining Earth's habitability for all life forms, and
(ii) how to control microorganisms in order to facilitate processes useful to
mankind.