* 0844565
* CAREER: Dynamic and Autonomous Software-to-Hardware Translation for High-Performance and Low-Power Embedded Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Roman Lysecky, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2015
* USD 447,874.00

CAREER: Dynamic and Autonomous Software-to-Hardware Translation for High-
Performance and Low-Power Embedded Computing&lt;br/&gt;Circuits implemented
using field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) share many of the same advantages
of software solutions and provide a complimentary technology for increasing
system performance of reducing power. Implementing critical kernels of a
software application within an FPGA can provide substantial speedups in
application execution time. However, traditional hardware/software partitioning
approaches either require extensive manual efforts or rely on automated
partitioning compilers that significantly depart from mainstream software
development tools and practices. This CAREER project seeks to overcome these
challenges by investigating and developing new methods for dynamically
translating kernels within an executing application binary into circuits
executing on an FPGA ? a process referred to as warp processing. Warp processing
provides an innovative technology that allows FPGAs to be readily integrated
into computing systems without requiring hardware design expertise, specialized
tools, or even knowledge of the FPGA. This CAREER project will investigate
several interrelated research problems, including: 1) dynamic application
profiling, 2) dynamic optimization of multitasked applications, 3) adaptable
fixed point representations for efficient support of floating point arithmetic
in hardware circuits, and 4) low-power warp processing. This CAREER project also
seeks to significantly improve embedded systems education through several
concerted efforts aimed at training engineers to understand the fundamental
similarities and differences between software and hardware implementations and
enable those engineers to apply that knowledge to evaluate the tradeoffs between
alternative design solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;