* 0844274
* SGER: Reactive Solar Concentrators
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Joseph Ford, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/2010
* USD 75,000.00

Proposal Number: ECCS-0844274&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: SGER: Reactive Solar
Concentrators&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Ford, Joseph E. &lt;br/&gt;PI Institution:
University of California-San Diego &lt;br/&gt;Objective: The PI has developed a
new approach to concentrating solar light, by using fixed sheets of material
which could be put up on a rooftop, and which send light to the edges of the
material, where high efficiency solar cells can be used to convert the light to
electricity. The "material" is really a solid state structure made up of
microlenses which can track the angle of the sun by use of optical effects
instead of the more cumbersome physical tracking systems used today in
conventional concentrating solar power. Preliminary calculations look favorable.
The task now is to begin validating the concept, by evaluating and implementing
alternative ways of realizing it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: From
an engineering viewpoint, developing a new family of technology is a fundamental
achievement of great merit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The primary
benefit of this project, if successful, would be to rooftop solar power. Studies
of rooftop solar power claim that the roofs in the US could supply about 60% of
peak electricity demand, and about 25% of total 24-hour demand, assuming today?s
10-15% efficient solar cells. Multilayer or "tandem" solar cells have gotten to
efficiencies in the 35-50% range, but are expensive to make and to install over
large areas. Flexible thin film solar cells are much more affordable a key
factor driving their deployment in the market but are struggling to get to 10%
in the future. If this new type of technology leads to flexible, affordable
easily-deployed sheets which double the electricity one can get from rooftops,
the benefits could be enormous. At best, it could let us meet half the nation?s
needs in a carbon-free manner, at a price that would support its actual
deployment. Considerable R&amp;D will be needed to evaluate this important but
risky hope.