* 0844550
* CAREER:   Pama-Nyungan Reconstruction and the Prehistory of Australia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Claire Bowern, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2014
* USD 407,272.00

The earliest detailed records of Australia's indigenous languages date from
approximately two hundred years ago, and therefore our only access to the
prehistory of Australia's indigenous past is through reconstruction in
archeology and linguistics. While we know that humans have lived in Australia
for more than 40,000 years, we do not know how speakers of the 250 currently
attested languages came to live where they do today. This project uses
linguistic evidence to trace the history of Aboriginal people in prehistoric
times. Systematic similarities between words in these languages can be used to
reconstruct various properties of prehistoric languages. These techniques will
be used to determine the structure of the Pama-Nyungan language family, which
will shed light on prehistoric population
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Australia's linguistic prehistory is important
for several reasons. It has been claimed that methods developed for Europe and
the Americas do not work in Australia. If true, such a finding would be highly
important, since these methods are based on properties of language change which
until now have been assumed to be universal. However, preliminary work indicates
that Australian languages show the same characteristics that we find elsewhere.
Small speech community size, widespread multilingualism, and other factors have
obscured relationships between these languages. These languages are an excellent
laboratory for modeling what language change might have been like before the
spread of agricultural communities. If we are ever going to be able to model
accurately what prehistoric global language spread might have looked like, we
need to understand how it operated in Australia.&lt;br/&gt;