* 0844807
* CAREER: Nanoscale Magnetic Phenomena and Coercivity Mechanism in Layered Magnets with Extremely Large Anisotropy
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Weida Wu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 525,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award funds a
project integrating research and education to explore and understand nanometer
scale magnetic phenomena in complex materials, such as layered uniaxial magnets.
State-of-the-art low temperature magnetic imaging techniques will be used.
Nanoscale magnetic imaging provides irreplaceable visual information of novel
magnetic materials, which is crucial for scientific understanding and
technological application. New materials with enhanced/emergent properties are
critical for the advances of modern technology, such as ultra-high density
magnetic recording devices, magnetoelectronics and high-efficiency motors and
generators. Training of future material scientists is naturally integrated with
the proposed research activities. Undergraduate and high school students will be
involved in the proposed research via various summer programs at Rutgers. The
education component of this proposal will explore a novel feedback mechanism
developed at Rutgers to enhance effective teaching of physics to non-science
majors. Future and current high school teachers will be exposed to contemporary
material research activities proposed in this project via the Teacher Education
Program at Rutgers University so that modern material science and technology can
reach out to high school education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to explore and
understand novel nanoscale magnetic phenomena in complex materials, such as
layered uniaxial magnets. Low temperature nanoscale magnetic imaging techniques,
including both magnetic force microscopy and spin polarized-scanning tunneling
microscopy/spectroscopy will be used to investigate magnetic domain structure,
domain irreversibility and atomic scale domain walls. The research is expected
to establish a microscopic understanding of magnetic hysteresis phenomena in
layered materials with a large uniaxial anisotropy. Nanoscale magnetic imaging
provides irreplaceable real space information of novel magnetic materials, which
is crucial for scientific understanding and technological applications of
nanoscale magnetism. New materials with enhanced/emergent properties are
critical for the advances of modern technology. Training of future material
scientists is naturally integrated to the proposed research activities.
Undergraduate and high school students will be involved in the proposed research
via various existing summer programs at Rutgers. The education component of this
proposal will explore a novel feedback mechanism developed at Rutgers to enhance
effective teaching of physics to non-science majors. Future and current high
school teachers will be exposed to contemporary material research activities via
the Teacher Education Program at Rutgers University so that modern material
science and technology can reach out to high school education.&lt;br/&gt;