* 0844131
* CAREER: Atom Transfer Radical Addition and Cyclization Reactions in the Presence of Catalytic Amounts of Copper Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Tomislav Pintauer, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In this CAREER project funded by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Tomislav Pintauer of Duquesne University will carry out research to develop new
catalysts for organic transformations involving free radical intermediates.
Pintauer will study how to couple metal complexes that are highly active for
halogen atom transfer with reducing agents that can regenerate the starting
complex. In this manner a single metal complex can potentially catalyze hundreds
of thousands of addition or cyclization reactions per use. The educational plan
focuses on a few important items including broadening the undergraduate and
graduate curriculum at Duquesne University to include information about
catalysis science, developing summer minicourses on x-ray crystallography and
NMR methods for metal complexes (available to the Pittsburgh higher education
community), and mentoring minority high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides developing new methodologies, the
proposed research will transform catalytic atom transfer reactions from ones
that generate large amounts of metal waste and impurities into ones that can
function effectively at parts per million levels of metal catalysts.
Additionally, the proposed research could take its field to the next level of
study, where more advanced methods such as chemoselective and stereoselective
catalytic atom transfer radical additions and cyclizations could be discovered.
This work has the potential for high impact and should provide significant
benefits for the medicinal chemistry field and for the pharmaceutical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;