* 0844626
* CAREER: Efficient Computation in the Physical World
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Scott Aaronson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 05/31/2014
* USD 578,660.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computing is a scientific field
that combines some of the deepest intellectual concerns of computer science and
physics. Ultimately, we want to know: what is and is not feasibly computable in
the physical universe? After fifteen years of effort, quantum computing theory
seems to have reached a point where further progress will necessarily entail
progress in classical computing theory. The proposed research embraces this with
concrete ideas for advancing both fields and will deepen the connections between
quantum computing and frontier topics in classical complexity
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tackles some of the
hardest "barrier problems" about the power of classical and quantum computers.
Examples of such problems include: how large is the class of problems that admit
efficient quantum algorithms? Can we obtain evidence that this class lies
outside the entire "polynomial hierarchy" of classical computation---which,
loosely speaking, would imply that quantum computers could solve certain
problems much faster than classical computers could even check the answers? Are
there "unstructured" problems that quantum computers can solve exponentially
faster than classical computers, in addition to "structured" problems such as
finding the period of a periodic function (the heart of Shor's factoring
algorithm)? Can we go beyond the idealized "black-box model" that encompasses
almost everything complexity theorists currently know about the power of quantum
computers, to obtain "non-relativizing results" that exploit the structure of
quantum circuits? Can we better understand the obstacles to progress on P versus
NP and related questions?