* 0844574
* Supporting Efficient Fuzzy Queries on Large Text Repositories Using Hadoop
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Chen Li, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 01/31/2012
* USD 221,730.00

This project is studying research challenges to support efficient fuzzy queries
on large text repositories using the MapReduce/Hadoop parallel computing
paradigm. Supporting fuzzy queries is becoming increasingly more important in
applications that need to deal with a variety of data inconsistencies in
structures, representations, or semantics. Many existing algorithms require an
offline analysis of data sets to construct an efficient index structure to
support online query processing. Fuzzy join queries of data sets are more time
consuming due to the computational complexity. The PI is studying three research
problems: (1) constructing high-quality inverted lists for fuzzy search queries
using Hadoop; (2) supporting fuzzy joins of large data sets using Hadoop; and
(3) using the developed techniques to improve data quality of large collections
of documents. The PI is collaborating with industrial partners on these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed in this project will have
a broad impact on many information systems that need to support approximate
query processing on large data sets. The specific areas where the project is
likely to have the most direct impact are Web search, enterprise search, data
integration, data cleaning, and query relaxation. These areas have many data-
intensive applications in scientific research, commercial systems, and Web-data
management. The PI is also using the results of this research to provide
teaching materials for students to learn the MapReduce/Hadoop computing paradigm
to process large amounts of information.