* 0844961
* CAREER:  Cortical Processing of Auditory Spatial Information
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Edward Golob, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 768,443.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The ability to use spatial information is crucial to survival because space is
such a basic feature of the world. Our brains are endowed with circuits that
represent spatial information, which can then be used to guide intelligent
behavior. The auditory system is particularly important for spatial cognition
because our ears can detect sounds coming from any direction, which affords
panoramic sensitivity to events happening in the environment. We take the
ability to use spatial information for granted because everyday activities, such
as hearing a friend call our name and turning in their direction to wave in
response, seem so automatic. However, this sense of automaticity is the product
of delicate interactions between representions of spatial information and their
application by other cognitive systems. With support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Edward Golob and colleagues at Tulane University will study how
auditory spatial information is used by higher-level cognitive processes in the
brain. The experiments focus on the interface between representing sound
location and two cognitive functions that prioritize subregions of space:
spatial attention and motor responses. In a series of studies, human subjects
will perform various auditory spatial tasks. During performance, sensors will
monitor electrical brain activity, and brief magnetic pulses will be applied to
influence brain activity. These experiments will identify properties of spatial
attention gradients, and relate the findings to auditory cortical processing and
the role of posterior parietal cortex. Studies examining interactions between
the auditory and motor systems will determine if auditory processing is
influenced by location of the hands and, conversely, whether sound location
influences motor cortex activity.

This project will help provide a deeper understanding of how spatial information
is used by other cognitive systems and the neural networks that support these
interactions. The results may also be applied to improving human-machine
interfaces and to improving rehabilitation techniques for patients with brain
damage. This research and integrated education plan will promote undergraduate
and graduate education in New Orleans. A collaboration between Tulane and Xavier
will offer research opportunities to undergraduates that will culminate in a
Masters degree, with a focus on minority participation and infrastructure
enhancement.

