* 0844342
* SGER:  Detecting and Maintaining Evolving Regions from Spatially and Temporally Varying Observations for Monitoring and Alerting
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Yan Huang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 90,000.00

With the proliferation of wireless sensor networks and mobile devices enabled by
global positioning systems (GPSs), the volume of real-time geo-referenced
streams being collected is large and continues to increase. Individual readings
from sensors represent discrete sampling points, whereas the phenomena that
sensor networks monitor (e.g., floods, fires, and ocean currents) are often
spatially and temporally continuous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
bridging the impedance mismatch of discrete sensor readings and the continuous
phenomena. Specifically, we will explore incremental methods to detect and
maintain evolving regions from discrete sensor readings in real time. This task
is challenging and risky because (1) human intervention, which is important for
region detection, needs to be minimal for the targeted monitoring applications;
and (2) the alerting nature requires real-time responses, especially in
disastrous situations when volumes of data are often high. The quality of
service (QoS) requirement in terms of response time and accuracy of the regions
detected needs to be balanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel idea of virtual
sensor insertion will be explored to improve the accuracy of region detection.
To reduce human intervention, the system will be equipped with a learning
ability by using and maintaining statistics needed for incremental
polygonization. Measurements in information retrieval will be explored
creatively for identifying qualitative region evolvements and creating region
evolvement graph, which will result in a reduced number of alerts sent to
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected results will bridge the semantic gap of
discrete readings and natural phenomena as well as provide a foundation for
future work in geo-stream processing. Once the results are integrated into a
geo-stream processing system, users can monitor evolving regions without being
confined to querying discrete readings. The work will help sustain the growth of
and support important time-critical applications such as disaster response and
surveillance. Graduate students will be trained on various aspects of geo-stream
processing. The project Web site (http://www.cse.unt.edu/~huangyan/eRegion) will
be used for results dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;