* 0844456
* CAREER: Distributed Control and Constraints Satisfaction in Complex Networked Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Francesco Borrelli, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2014
* USD 430,002.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project is to study the systematic analysis and design of
distributed controllers that guarantee constraint satisfaction in large scale
networked dynamical systems. The project will focus on networked systems where
constraints have a fundamental role: their local violation can lead to a global
network failure. For such class of systems the project will deliver a theory and
algorithms for analyzing and designing in a systematic way distributed
controllers which are predictive, model-based and explicitly take into account
systems constraints. The concepts of ?model-based predictions?, ?communication
of intent? and ?coordination rules?, widely used in social and biological
networks, will be the three key elements in the overall research project
development which will be used to guarantee global feasibility, stability and
robustness of the network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will provide a set of tools for the systematic analysis and design
of distributed controllers with guarantees on performance and constraint
satisfaction. This will eliminate the need of a lengthy and expensive trial and
error design procedure required for achieving satisfactory performance and
minimum constraint violation. Possible pplication areas include power networks,
building management, homeland security, defense, transportation and
environmental monitoring. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will
benefit through classroom instruction, involvement in the research and the
design of an experiment in the PI?s laboratory.