* 0844297
* SGER:  Integrating Distributed Energy Resources into Electricity Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Judith Cardell, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 07/31/2010
* USD 69,865.00

The objective of the project is to advance the evolution of the electric power
system to a distributed utility architecture by developing a pricing mechanism
that will demonstrate the effectiveness of distributed energy resources in
meeting the growing demand for electricity while decreasing the production of
greenhouse gases and maintaining system reliability. The research project will
develop and demonstrate a market signal drawing upon the concepts of frequency
droop and own price elasticity in order to create a "price droop" signal.
Simulations using this signal will demonstrate the ability of distributed energy
resources, organized into microgrids and coordinated to act as a unified entity,
to participate in electricity markets. The project will demonstrate the open-
loop, multi-agent price droop signal through computer simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
advances the knowledge and understanding in the area of power engineering and
economic theory. The contribution of this research will be (i) to expand the
concept and design of a microgrid to include active demand response
technologies, (ii) to develop the new price droop signal that allows customers
and suppliers within a microgrid to participate in electricity markets, both
locally and at the high voltage level, and (iii) to demonstrate the ability of
distributed energy resources to help reduce overall power system greenhouse gas
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project will promote the increased use of microgrids by demonstrating
the effectiveness of distributed energy resources (including renewable energy
and demand response) in meeting the demand for clean and reliable electricity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being based at Smith College, a women's undergraduate
institution with an economically diverse student body, the project will involve
underrepresented minorities in all aspects of the educational and research
activities - the research project is designed to be accessible, yet also
challenging, for participation by undergraduate students. In addition, the PI
will develop and pilot course modules on renewable energy and customer demand
response at the Smith College Campus School, an experimental K-6 school, located
adjacent to Smith College, with strong ties to the engineering program.