* 0844523
* RUI:  REVSYS:  Integrative Systematics of Gekkotan Lizards - Phylogenetic Resolution, Taxonomic Revision, and Comparative Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Aaron Bauer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 650,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Geckos are a species-rich and diverse (1200+ species, 108 genera)
group of lizards with a worldwide distribution and a long evolutionary history
(~200 million years). In order to provide a framework for evolutionary and
comparative biological questions, the researchers will analyze gecko
phylogenetic relationships using molecular and morphological data for 900
species of geckos, adding 300 additional species to their existing DNA sequence
dataset and scoring 700 morphological characters for use in phylogenetic
analyses. The researchers will study the evolution of vision, reproduction,
locomotor ecomorphology, and thermal physiology in light of the relationships
uncovered. Phylogenetic information will be used in conjunction with traditional
museum studies to prepare taxonomic revisions and monographic treatments of
major groups of geckos including the most successful and species-rich genera.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field and museum components of the research will provide
opportunities for students to participate in research in regions of global
biodiversity conservation priority and will add to existing biodiversity
collections and databases. Students from underrepresented groups will be
actively recruited for the project. This study will promote interactions between
primarily undergraduate institutions and larger research institutions, helping
to broaden training in molecular phylogenetics and comparative biology for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;