* 0844082
* International Institute for Multifunctional Materials for Energy Conversion (IIMEC)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,900,000.00

This award establishes an International Materials Institute for Multifunctional
Materials for Energy Conversion (IIMEC) at the Texas Engineering Experiment
Station in partnership with Georgia Institute of Technology, the University of
Houston and international collaborations at universities in North Africa
(Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt), the Middle East (Saudi Arabia, Qatar,
Kuwait) and Mediterranean countries (Turkey, Cyprus, Greece, France). The
international collaborations of IIMEC builds on connections facilitated by a
Texas A&amp;M branch campus in Qatar opened in 2003, a newly established
Institute for Applied Mathematics and Computational Science in Saudi Arabia
funded by King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, The Georgia Tech
campus in Lorraine, France and an exchange program between University of Houston
and Tunisia. The research thrust is on computational modeling and experiments to
study the cross-coupling of multiple functionalities, for example,
thermal,/magnetic and mechanical coupling in shape memory alloys and polymers;
coupling of electrical and mechanical properties in electroactive polymers,
ceramics and composite materials; thermal/optical and electrical coupling for
photovolatics, thermoelectrics, and fuel cell applications. IIMEC would
establish a high performance computational infrastructure and high speed
communications protocols to facilitate research and educational collaboration on
multifunctional materials among its partners while expanding the global network.
The Institute offers opportunities for undergraduate, graduate students as well
as junior and established scientists to engage in international research,
exchange visits among partners, seed programs to promote new collaborations and
members, and instrumentation development for remote use among partnering
international institutions. The Institute's management leadership is provided by
its Directors and an Executive Committee, with guidance from an Advisory Board
and an International Leadership Team. &lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by
the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate and the Africa, Near East &amp; South Asia group of the Office of
the International Science and Engineering.