* 0844413
* Mechanisms underlying arsenic tolerance and hyperaccumulation in the fern Pteris vittata
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* David Salt, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2013
* USD 418,000.00

Arsenic is a naturally occurring, toxic metalloid that is known to cause cancers
if consumed. Arsenic contamination of soils and water is an environmental
problem in many regions of the world, including the US. This research focuses on
the fern Pteris vittata, which is remarkable because it and its close relatives
are the only known multicellular organisms that are able to tolerate and
accumulate very high levels of arsenic. The goals of this research are to
understand how this plant is able to take up and store this toxin without
succumbing to its deadly effects. Two genes isolated from this plant are
hypothesized to be involved in this process. One is an arsenate reductase, which
reduces the arsenate, which is taken up from the soil by the root, to arsenite.
The other is an arsenite effluxer that is hypothesized to move arsenite into the
vacuole of the cell where it is safely sequestered. One goal of this research is
to express these genes in another arsenic-sensitive plant (Arabidopsis thaliana)
to see if they are able to confer arsenic tolerance to other plants. A second
goal is to localize the proteins produced by these genes at the tissue, cellular
and subcellular levels in P. vittata. The final goal is to develop basic genomic
tools for P. vittata that ultimately will allow us to identify other genes that
are involved in arsenic tolerance and hyperaccumulation in this plant. This
research has broader impacts in that it will identify a mechanism of arsenic
tolerance and accumulation that may be of practical value in the remediation of
arsenic contaminated soils. This research also will provide undergraduate and
graduate students, including underrepresented minorities, interdisciplinary
training in biochemistry, microscopy, genetics and molecular biology.