* 0844737
* CAREER: Investigation of Mechanical Properties of Carbon Nanotube Macro-Films in Integrated Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Hanqing Jiang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 02/28/2015
* USD 400,235.00

CAREER: Investigation of Mechanical Properties of Carbon Nanotube Macro-Films in
Integrated Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is
to fundamentally understand the mechanical properties of carbon nanotube macro-
films in integrated systems. The primary research tasks of this project are (1)
to investigate the mechanical properties of stand alone carbon nanotube macro-
films; (2) to identify interfacial strength between carbon nanotube macro-films
and substrates; and (3) to achieve deformability of carbon nanotube macro-films
in integrated systems. A multiscale approach will be employed to capture the
intrinsic multiscale nature of carbon nanotube macro-films, namely macroscopic
features with nanoscale details, such as morphologies of inter-bundle junctions.
A buckling method that involves buckled thin films on compliant substrates will
be used to measure the interfacial strength, and to enable fully deformable
carbon nanotube macro-films without sacrificing their electrical properties upon
deformation. The deformable energy storage devices made from buckled carbon
nanotube macro-films and solid electrolyte will be fabricated as a testing
platform to examine the mechanical performance of the integrated
system.&lt;br/&gt;The combined experimental and theoretical studies will carry
significant potential in the development of a design guideline for the assembly
of macroscopic carbon nanotube networks with desired mechanics properties that
can significantly impact nanoscience and nanoengineering fields. Integrated
research and education will focus on increasing enrollment and retention of
underrepresented students and engaging the public through unique outreach
programs in partnership with the Arizona Science Center, and Phoenix Elementary
School District. A new senior/graduate level course will be developed based on
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;