* 0844213
* Direct Re-Os Dating of Ordovician Graptolite Biozones:  Refining Global Correlations and Earth Time
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Holly Stein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2012
* USD 454,993.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Collaborative Research: Direct Re-Os dating of Ordovician graptolite biozones:
Refining global correlations and Earth Time

Judith Hannah and J. Maletz Colorado State University EAR-0844213

Abstract Absolute ages for the deposition of sedimentary rocks can be determined
by radiometric dating of organic material in carbon-rich shales, using the decay
of rhenium (Re) to osmium (Os). In particular, fossils of organic-walled
graptolites are commonly found in sufficient abundance for direct dating by Re-
Os. Historically, correlation of sedimentary units across broad geographic space
has relied on comparison of fossil assemblages to establish relative age
(biostratigraphy). Most ages based on radiometric dating could only bracket the
time of deposition by dating older or younger units. PIs propose that Re-Os
dating of graptolites will provide accurate and precise ages at a resolution
equal to biostratigraphy, but with the untapped advantage of pinning absolute
time.

Absolute ages for fossils in the geologic record will fix the time of geologic
stage boundaries and graptolite biozones. In addition, increased resolution in
the time scale greatly improves the definition of rates for a host of processes,
including sedimentation, sea-level change, biologic evolution, and vertical and
horizontal motion of lithospheric plates. PIs have assembled a diverse, cross-
disciplinary team with expertise in Re-Os geochronology, sedimentology and
stratigraphy of mud-rich systems, graptolite taxonomy and paleoecology, and
tectonics. PIs will place time pins in the graptolite-rich Early and Middle
Ordovician sedimentary sequence in western Newfoundland to provide solid age
control in a critical interval of the Ordovician system with few currently
available absolute ages. Moreover, these same graptolite assemblages are found
on several other continents, opening the potential for defining temporal
variations in the rate of biologic evolution in different geographic realms.

Further development of this geochronologic tool and demonstration of its
applicability under varied conditions is of immediate interest to the petroleum
industry. Re-Os geochemistry shows promise as a tracer to link migrated oil with
its source rocks, and simultaneously define the time of migration - information
highly sought by the industry to refine basin-scale models.