* 0844948
* Evolution of Gene Regulatory Networks for Development of Novel Structures in Echinoderm Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Veronica Hinman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2014
* USD 555,262.00

The great diversity of animal morphology is due to genomic changes that alter
the programming of development; however, the exact nature of such changes is
poorly understood. For many technical reasons the genetic basis of development
is extraordinarily well understood in sea urchin embryos, especially that of a
cell lineage that will form the skeleton of the larva. This cell lineage is an
evolutionary novelty as it is not found in the embryos of the other groups of
animals related to the sea urchin (e.g. sea stars and sea cucumbers). This
provides the exceptional opportunity to understand how regulatory changes have
occurred during evolution to allow the development of an entirely novel
morphology. All of the same (orthologous) genes, with the exception of just one,
that are needed to make the sea urchin skeleton lineage are also expressed in
the sea star embryo. This preliminary data demonstrates that this developmental
novelty, therefore, is not due to the acquisition of new genes, but rather a
change in the way in which these same genes function. This project will
determine the regulatory interactions between these orthologous genes in sea
star embryos in order to understand how their function has evolved in the sea
urchin. Gene products will be perturbed using various molecular approaches and
the effect on development and expression of other genes will be determined. A
series of cross-species experiments will also be undertaken, where gene products
from sea stars will be injected into the embryo of the sea urchin and vice
versa. These experiments will directly determine whether there has been an
evolutionary change in gene function and how any such changes alter development.
This project will provide a highly mechanistic understanding of how evolutionary
changes in gene function can lead to the development of novel structures and
will provide intensive research experiences for several undergraduates and a
woman graduate student.