* 0844389
* Revealing the Nature of Contemporary Uplift and Collapse in the Sierra Nevada - Great Basin System
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Geoffrey Blewitt, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2012
* USD 474,930.00

How tectonically active is the Sierra Nevada today? To what extent is Great
Basin extension driven internally by gravitational collapse? How do the Sierra
Nevada and Great Basin interact? What is the role of the Sierra Nevada in
controlling collapse and extension of the Great Basin? These questions are
central to the mission of the EarthScope Program, as they represent key parts to
the puzzle of how the Pacific-North America plate boundary is evolving, and what
processes are responsible. Yet, despite recent advances in geodesy, we still do
not have answers to simple questions that any schoolchild might ask: "How fast
is the Sierra Nevada going up today?"; "Is the Great Basin going up or
down?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, this 3-year project will
accurately characterize uplift and collapse in the Sierra Nevada - Great Basin
region by exploiting high precision GPS data from EarthScope's Plate Boundary
Observatory to measure vertical motion of the Earth's crust. These measurements
will provide crucial first-order evidence on the underlying processes. Measuring
vertical motion is important because it indicates the flux of potential energy,
a fundamental characteristic of tectonic/mantle dynamic processes, including
isostasy, orogeny (mountain building), gravitational collapse, and mantle
upwelling. &lt;br/&gt;To make the vertical GPS data physically meaningful,
methods are being implemented that will accurately reference the changes in
surface height to the center of the Earth (the Earth center of mass). In order
to reduce the errors in vertical rates to a useful level (sub-millimeter per
year), the investigators are making use of several recent advances in GPS
observable modeling, including global-scale ambiguity resolution, absolute
antenna calibrations, satellite transmitter phase center variations, the
modeling of non-gravitational forces on the GPS satellites, and atmospheric
refraction. Once an accurate time series of vertical position is derived for
each GPS station, the spatial and temporal patterns of vertical variations are
then interpreted in terms of both the tectonic processes of interest, as well as
non-tectonic effects (such as atmospheric pressure loading and hydrological
effects).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary data set for this project is being
acquired by the specially designed "PBO Transect" of densely-spaced GPS
stations, spanning east-west the entire Great Basin and Sierra Nevada range at
latitude 39ยบ-40ยบ, together with the more broadly spaced PBO network covering the
Pacific-North American plate boundary and beyond. In addition, the University of
Nevada, Reno, has since 2004 built and operated the ~300-station "MAGNET" semi-
continuous GPS network, which provides data for this project. Although the
measurements from MAGNET are not continuous all of the time, pilot studies show
that they can accurately track seasonal and secular change in GPS station
height; thus MAGNET complements the continuous PBO measurements by providing
much more spatial detail to the complex patterns of vertical motions. By the end
of this project (mid-2012), pilot studies predict that vertical velocities for
most GPS stations have an accuracy of &lt;0.5 mm/yr, at a level that is useful
for scientific interpretation, and toward answering the project's research
questions.