* 0844780
* Individual function and community processes in desert annuals
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Amy Angert, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2013
* USD 575,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
physiology of Sonoran Desert winter annual plants in order to provide insights
into their population and community dynamics and the mechanisms that allow
species to coexist at high diversity. Annual plants are a major component of
arid land, where precipitation is both low and highly variable. Plants respond
differently to this variability in a manner that contributes to species
coexistence. Species trade off maximal growth rate for efficient water use in
different ways, resulting in distinct population dynamics. It has been shown
that the species of this community that efficiently use water have lower
temperature optima for photosynthesis. The goal for this proposal is to
determine how variation in temperature optima and water use efficiency results
in differences in population dynamics. A combination of natural observations,
field and lab experiments and models of population dynamics will be used to
determine if species are specializing to photosynthesize during different parts
of the daily, storm front or seasonal cycle. Field experiments will manipulate
precipitation pulse sizes and seasonal timing and the differential responses of
species will be measured. The data will be used to forecast species-specific
responses to changes in temperature and precipitation. This work will provide a
unique framework for understanding how differences in physiology lead to
important community properties: species coexistence and diversity. A more
mechanistic community ecology and more ecologically grounded physiology will
increase our understanding of how natural systems adapt to changing
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will combine research and
education in ways that train the ecological scientist of tomorrow.
Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students will gain hands-on scientific
training. A graduate student will develop an educational kiosk that the hundreds
of thousands of visitors to the University of Arizona's Biosphere 2 will
interact with. Women and underrepresented ethnic and cultural groups will be
encouraged to participate in this research in various ways including working
with minority access programs on campus. The understanding gained from this work
will have applications for resource management of desert systems in response to
a changing climate.