* 0844994
* CAREER: Circuit and System Techniques for High-Throughput, Energy-efficient Silicon-Photonic Interconnects in Advanced VLSI Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2015
* Vladimir Stojanovic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
overcome the limited bandwidth density and energy scaling of electrical
interconnects, which have caused a slow-down in performance scaling of advanced
integrated systems like manycore processors. The approach is to create scalable
and robust transceiver circuits with integrated monolithic silicon photonics to
provide seamless optical on-chip and off-chip communication with extremely high
energy-efficiency and bandwidth density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This research transforms the traditional research and design approaches
by developing novel communication and circuit techniques through tight
interaction with photonic device properties. Proposed solutions include robust,
highly-digital circuits and system techniques for energy efficient nonlinear
equalization and modulation as well as high-sensitivity optical data and clock
receivers, and circuits for temperature control, testing and characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research will enable continued
performance scaling of data centers and internet routers, and bring significant
benefits to the national economy by preserving the massive investments and
introducing the photonic technology into advanced CMOS foundries. Through MIT
programs like Interphase Pre-UROP, Women Technology Program, and K-12
Educational Outreach Summer Program the project will engage women and minority
undergraduate and high-school students and teachers in multi-disciplinary
aspects of experimental research and design in engineering. A newly developed
graduate course in communication circuit and system design will be adapted for
senior-level undergraduates and co-development of entry-level undergraduate
class. These courses, design tools and projects will be available on the
internet through MIT Open Course Ware initiative.