* 0844286
* Genetic Analysis of the Role of Pro-opiomelanocortin Peptides in Mouse Adrenal Maintenance and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/03/2008,06/30/2010
* Ute Hochgeschwender, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 06/30/2010
* USD 109,831.00

Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) is a gene highly conserved in vertebrates. It
encodes for a pro-hormone from which a number of small peptides with a diverse
array of functions is produced, including adrenocorticotropin, melanocyte
stimulating hormone, and -endorphin. The investigators generated a mouse mutant
which completely lacks all POMC peptides. While POMC null mutants are born with
morphologically normal adrenal glands, their adrenals exhibit two defects:
First, they do not release glucocorticoids, and they produce reduced levels of
mineralocorticoids; and second, they regress with age and are eventually lacking
in the adult. In this project the investigators will utilize their mouse model
in a whole animal, combined pharmacological and genetic approach a) to identify
the specific POMC peptide or peptide combination required for maintenance and
function of the adrenals, and b) to identify the molecular processes in the
adrenal mediating its maintenance and function that are dependent on POMC-
derived signals. This project will integrate research and education by advancing
discovery and understanding while at the same time training, both conceptually
and practically, students at different levels in their scientific careers. The
proposed research will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups,
specifically of geographically underrepresented groups in the State of Oklahoma.
The benefit of the proposed research to science lies in illuminating general
principles of organ maintenance and function in vertebrate organisms, lessons
which will be applicable to many other biological systems. The benefit of the
proposed research to society lies in advancing knowledge and promoting
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;