* 0844999
* CAREER: Advancing Electronic Structure Theories for Properties and Dynamics of Large Scale Systems:  Developments and Applications Integrated with Educational Efforts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2014
* USD 710,819.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER project supported by
the Theoretical &amp; Computational Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Xiasong Li of the University of Washington will carry out research to develop
computational methodologies for the study of reaction properties and dynamics of
large scale systems, such as nanostructures, biomolecules and polymers. In
particular, Li will address non-adiabatic effects in molecular dynamics,
coupling of single and double excitations in excited state electronic structure,
and simultaneous optimization of the electronic ground state and molecular
geometry. The educational plan focuses on involving high-school and
undergraduate students in summer research programs, collaborating with community
colleges, and promoting the inclusion of computational science in the
undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides creating new
methodologies, the proposed research will help interpret experimental data in
terms of the molecular-dynamic theory it develops. This work addresses very
important and challenging problems with the potential for high impact. A
physical chemistry course will be developed that relies on new insights rather
than mathematical derivations, an approach that is also helpful in engineering
and industrial applications. &lt;br/&gt;