* 0844112
* SGER: The Impact of Extreme Flooding on Mussel and Microbial Nutrient Dynamics at the Water-Sediment Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Gene Parkin, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 75,613.00

Introduction: This proposal is prepared in response to the devastating floods in
Eastern Iowa and nearly&lt;br/&gt;the entire Upper Mississippi River (UMR) basin
during May-July 2008. In UMR Pool 16, above Lock and&lt;br/&gt;Dam 16 at
Muscatine, Iowa, waters abruptly rose from a highly managed stage of
approximately 10 feet&lt;br/&gt;to 20 feet and then to nearly 24 feet from May-
June 2008. This historic flood event coincided with&lt;br/&gt;intense spring
cultivation and nutrient application activities in the heavily farmed landscape
of the&lt;br/&gt;Upper Midwest resulting in a significant pulse of agricultural
contaminants to the UMR system. This has&lt;br/&gt;led scientists to predict an
almost unprecedented delivery of sediment and nutrients to Pool 16,
the&lt;br/&gt;broader Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;This
event presents a unique, and short-lived, opportunity to test scientific
hypotheses related to a&lt;br/&gt;highly perturbed, large river ecosystem. This
ecosystem of braided channels and natural backwaters is&lt;br/&gt;already known
to inadequately process nutrients such as nitrate to the degree required to
protect the&lt;br/&gt;Gulf from hypoxic episodes. Extreme, flood-related
sediment deposition almost certainly impacts the&lt;br/&gt;nutrient processing
cycle in the short and long term. It is also known that mussels and bacteria
play a&lt;br/&gt;major role in nutrient cycling in the broad food web containing
phytoplankton, zooplankton, microzooplankton,&lt;br/&gt;dissolved &amp;
particulate organic matter, and benthos. Given this confluence of events,
and&lt;br/&gt;the importance of understanding nutrient cycling, we wish to test
the following hypothesis:&lt;br/&gt;Intense deposition of particulate organic
matter from extreme flooding alters the freshwater mussel
and&lt;br/&gt;microbial food webs through physical and chemical
means.&lt;br/&gt;Immediate Need: The principal investigators feel this
hypothesis can only be tested via the quickresponse&lt;br/&gt;Small Grants for
Exploratory Research (SGER) funding mechanism since the highly
perturbed&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem in question is actively returning to more steady-
state conditions. The research team must be&lt;br/&gt;deployed very soon to
study the perturbed nitrogen cycling rates such that comparisons with
baseline&lt;br/&gt;nitrogen processing rates can be made in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Floods occur around the world on a regular
basis, but the frequency and extremity of&lt;br/&gt;these events will increase
given the influence of global climate change. This research will contribute
to&lt;br/&gt;the development of a ?theory of floods? that is proposed by
colleagues at the University of Iowa. This&lt;br/&gt;theory will seek to unify
research related to hydrology, ecology, socio-economic, environmental
and&lt;br/&gt;human consequences and influences on flooding. The impact of such
research can be expressed in&lt;br/&gt;billions of dollars, millions of acres of
habitat, thousands of species, and centuries of human
enjoyment.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will expand our knowledge
of large river nutrient processing dynamics&lt;br/&gt;resulting from extreme
flooding events and during baseline moments. Abrupt changes in
nutrient&lt;br/&gt;loading and extreme shifts in algal compositions can
influence food quality which may adversely affect&lt;br/&gt;desirable and
invasive freshwater mussels. This work will further characterize the relation
between&lt;br/&gt;nutrient conditions and food quality for mussels and other
biota in an important reach of the Upper&lt;br/&gt;Mississippi River. Water
quality, nutrients, and their effects of biological processes are key
management&lt;br/&gt;concerns in the Upper Mississippi River.