* 0844845
* The Effects of Life Settlement on the Primary Life Insurance Market:  Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2015
* Hanming Fang, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 03/31/2015
* USD 299,500.00

The life settlement industry is quite recent, growing from just a few billion
dollars in late 1990s to about $12-$15 billion in 2007, and according to some
projections, is expected to grow to more than $150 billion in the next decade. A
life settlement is a financial transaction in which a life insurance
policyholder sells the policy to a third party (a life settlement firm) for more
than the cash surrender value offered by the life insurance company, thereby the
third-party purchaser assumes responsibility for all subsequent premium payments
to the life insurance company and becomes the new beneficiary of the life
insurance policy at maturation (i.e., the time of the original policyholder's
death).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The life settlement industry results from two key
features of the primary life insurance market. The first feature is that the
premium for life insurance is typically front-loaded in the sense that the
premium exceeds the actuarially fair premium in early years, while it is lower
than the actuarially fair premium in latter years especially when the
policyholder has impaired health. The second feature is that the cash surrender
value (CSV) for life insurance contracts is either zero for Term insurance, or
at a level that is low and does not depend on the health status of the
policyholder. Because the present actuarial value of a life insurance policy is
much higher for individuals with impaired health, the fact that the CSV does not
respond to the health status provides an opening for the gains of trade between
policyholders with impaired health and the life settlement
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emerging secondary market for life insurance
has triggered controversies between life insurance companies and the life
settlement industry. Life insurers are opposed to life settlements. Given the
importance of&lt;br/&gt;life insurance market in the economy, it is important to
rigorously study, both theoretically and empirically, how the emerging life
settlement may affect the primary life insurance market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two goals. First, the researcher is
using economic theory to analyze the effect of the secondary market for life
insurance on primary market insurance contracts and on consumer welfare. Second,
he conducts empirical tests of the theoretical predictions about how the primary
life insurance market may respond to the threat from the settlement industry.
Finally, he uses the results of these tests to ultimately calibrate the models
and quantify the welfare effects of the life settlement industry. In particular,
to the extent that the answer to the first question, particularly the consumer
welfare question, depends on why policyholders lapse, i.e., whether it is due to
loss of bequest motives or due to liquidity shocks, he also examines why
policyholders lapse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will provide the
intellectual knowledge for more informed government regulation regarding the
life settlement industry. Because life insurance is one special type of dynamic
contracts, the research can also potentially shed light on the secondary market
involving dynamic contracts in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;