* 0844772
* CAREER: Stable Isotope Insights into Large-Volume Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Ilya Bindeman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2016
* USD 533,606.00

Large volume volcanism represents a significant hazard to mankind that crosses
political and state boundaries. Isotopic studies provide important insights into
the causes of volcanism and its aftermaths. Collaboration with scientists and
students from different disciplines and in different countries is required.
Volcanism is truly an inspirational topic in Geoscience education and outreach
activities. This proposal uses microanalytical stable isotope techniques to
study volcanic processes. The first two planned research activities address the
origin of large-volume eruption of silicic and basaltic magmas with emphasis on
Yellowstone and Iceland using oxygen isotope analysis to unravel the genesis and
assembly of magma bodies that contain significant proportion of oxygen derived
from meteoric waters. The research plan incorporates the novel approach of
examining single-crystal oxygen isotopic heterogeneity and zoning of crystals in
products of large-volume volcanic eruptions to infer the origin of crystals and
magmas. The third research topic to be pursued deals with the climatic impacts
of these eruptions by using rare isotopes of oxygen and sulfur in sulfate from
volcanic eruptions. The research will be conducted in the newly constructed
state-of-the-art stable isotope laboratory built by the PI at the University of
Oregon that serves as a center for intellectual exchange and discovery between
graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral students, as well as international
visitors.

The education components are closely intertwined with the research goals above
and include training of graduate and undergraduate students in the course of
lab-based learning, participation of summer research undergraduates and
community college students, development of new courses, and promotion of
exchanges and collaboration among graduate and undergraduate students and
scientists in the USA, Russia, France, and Iceland. International exchange will
involve collaborative lab visits, joint fieldwork, and international student
hiring. The PI has assembled a diverse research group consisting of graduate and
undergraduate students, a postdoctoral fellow, a lab technician, and has
developed a network of domestic and international collaborators. This proposal
will provide long-term support to maintain analytical infrastructure of the lab
and its members, contribute to education and mentoring of undergraduate and
graduate students, support women in geosciences, foster meaningful international
collaborations. Additionally the proposal will serve as a firm foundation for
the PI's development as scientist and educator, involve geoscientists from
regional teaching colleges into research, support ongoing outreach activities of
the PI, and will lead to new publications and discoveries on several key
unanswered questions about volcanism, its origin, and impact on the environment.