* 0844466
* CAREER: Organization and Force Production in Bacteria
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Joshua Shaevitz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2015
* USD 943,275.00

In this CAREER proposal the PI proposes to study a fundamental question in
biology: How do nanometer-scale proteins give rise to micron-scale forces at the
cellular level? Specifically, the PI will determine the mechanisms of chromosome
segregation and cell division in bacteria. The proposed experiments will
investigate intracellular organization and force generation in bacteria through
(i) imaging, (ii) mechanical perturbation and (iii) force measurement. Super-
resolution, three-dimensional imaging will be used to quantify the geometric
conformations of cytoskeletal proteins inside cells and how they respond to
externally applied forces. The three-dimensional trajectories of actively
segregated regions of DNA will be revealed using single particle tracking. In
addition, the role of local cell curvature in the placement of the cell division
plane and the ability of the contractile ring to generate mechanical force
during cell division will be probed with atomic force microscopy. The proposed
education plan provides learning opportunities for future biophysical scientists
through combined (i) course development, (ii) hands-on observations and (iii) a
multimedia cellular environment. The PI will develop and teach two new courses
on Biological Physics that integrate research results in a broader biophysical
context through his joint appointment in the Department of Physics and the
Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics at Princeton University. To
motivate the next generation of scientists, the PI will work with local middle
school students as part of Princeton Universitys Science and Engineering Expo,
introducing them firsthand to the physics of cellular locomotion through
microscopy and modeling activities. An interactive software program, partly
based on imaging data from this proposal, will be created that allows students
to explore the crowded and fascinating three-dimensional world that exists
inside cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of the proposal is to
develop novel methods for studying single molecule dynamics in living systems
and to understand how different length and time scales are integrated for a
living bacteria or cell to emerge. This project encompasses aspects of cell
biology, molecular biophysics, physics, and computational biology. The students
working on the project will be trained at the interface of several fields of
science. The proposed research has all ingredients to be truly transformational.
This project is jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems Program
Molecular in the Division of Physics at the Physical Sciences Directorate and by
the the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.