* 0844750
* SGER: Hydroclimatic History of the Northeastern Pacific Using the DELTA18O from Tree Cellulose
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Lowell Stott, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2009
* USD 55,583.00

This award uses funds, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory
Research (SGER) program, to conduct an exploratory investigation of the oxygen
isotopic composition of cellulose extracted from annual tree rings from long-
lived trees that grow along western margin of North America. This exploratory
investigation is intended to determine if there is a coherent oxygen isotope
record of oxygen-18 change recorded in the cellulose of trees distributed on the
western U.S. margin. Specifically, the researcher will measure oxygen isotopes
on the cellulose extracted from the annual rings of four trees at different
locations in California.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Initial oxygen isotopic work on
Bristlecone Pine cellulose, that covers the past two centuries, have concluded
that the oxygen-18 signal of cellulose extracted from annual Bristlecone Pine
samples indicates there was a large (10 per mil) negative shift in the oxygen-18
of precipitation falling on the site at the end of the 19th century and the
early 20th century. The timing of this oxygen isotopic shift corresponds with
the end of the Little Ice Age, a period of lower atmospheric temperatures across
much of the northern hemisphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher suggests
that the oxygen isotopic shift recorded in the cellulose is related to the
climatic changes and suggests that this involved a shift in the source of
atmospheric moisture. Yet, he and his colleagues modeled the physiologic and the
environmental parameters that influence the fractionation of oxygen isotopes in
the cellulose and found that a 10 per mil shift would not be explained by either
a change in temperature or a change in humidity at the tree site. The researcher
hypothesizes that the isotopic shift would appear to require that prior to the
20th century the primary source of moisture to the Bristlecone Pine site in the
White Mountains of California was from subtropical latitudes whereas during the
20th century the primary source has been from higher northerly latitudes. It is
this hypothesis, among others, that the research will
address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research could have broad impact on the wider
science community and catalyze new thinking in issues surrounding climate by
offering a new perspective on old and knotty scientific problems. The activities
fit well into the potentially transformative, high risk, and exploratory nature
of the SGER program.