* 0844383
* Testing for Climate-Induced Marine Community Change and Ecological Disruption at Mid-Latitudes during the Late Paleozoic Ice Age
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Matthew Clapham, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2013
* USD 130,308.00

Testing for Climate-Induced Marine Community Change and Ecological disruption at
Mid-Latitudes during the Late Paleozoic Ice Age

Matthew Clapham, University of California-Santa Cruz EAR-0844383

ABSTRACT It is important to understand whether the biotic response to climate
change tends to be gradual and predictable, or if communities are disrupted and
undergo rapid, large-magnitude shifts between alternate states. The latter
scenario would result in greatly reduced diversity, dominance of a few
opportunistic taxa, and unstable ecosystems. There is mounting evidence from the
late Paleozoic ice age (about 300 million years ago) that terrestrial, and
possibly also marine communities, underwent rapid fluctuations during times of
climate change. A complete transition from glaciated icehouse to non-glaciated
greenhouse world is recorded in late Paleozoic sedimentary rocks exposed in
northern Bolivia, providing an ideal deep-time archive in which to test for
climate-induced disruption to marine ecosystems. In particular, the localities
in Bolivia were located in subtropical latitudes 300 million years ago, a
pivotal region where many species would have been especially sensitive to
changing conditions. Quantitative paleoecological analysis will compare the
relative abundance of each fossil type in more than 120 sedimentary layers
spanning the interval of deglaciation and postglacial climate warming.
Statistical tests using that dataset will enable recognition of both long-term
trends in community composition and, if present, short-term fluctuations
indicative of community disruption. The results from this research will help
constrain the general principles of climate-biosphere interactions.