* 0844097
* Crustal and Uppermost Mantle Anisotropy From Seismic Ambient Noise Data Observed on EarthScope/USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 234,830.00

Intellectual Content and Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop a new
method of seismic tomography called "Eikonal tomography" and apply it to ambient
noise and earthquake data recorded on EarthScope/USArray to infer the radial and
azimuthal anisotropy structure of the crust and uppermost mantle across the
western and central US. The method is based on treating the USArray, including
the Transportable Array, the Flexible Array, and the ANSS backbone, explicitly
as an array in order to track surface waves that propagate across it. The
resulting "phase travel time surfaces" place local constraints on the speed and
direction of travel of surface waves, directly revealing azimuthal anisotropy
with attendant uncertainties. Eikonal tomography represents a significant
improvement in surface wave tomography: it is free from ad-hoc regularization,
accurately tracks off-great-circle geometrical waves without iteration, provides
accurate error estimates, and presents direct local constraints on azimuthal
anisotropy. The method is being applied to ambient noise data observed on the
USArray from 2004 through 2010 to estimate isotropic and azimuthally anisotropic
phase speeds from 6 sec to 40 sec period. These observations are the basis for
the proposed radially and azimuthally anisotropic 3D Vs model of the crust and
uppermost mantle. The method is being generalized to Love waves and earthquake
data (to provide more information about the mantle). The final results encompass
the US from the Pacific in the west through the Great Plains in the
east.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to improve understanding
of crustal and uppermost mantle anisotropy, which holds a key to knowledge of
the deformation history of the crust and mantle. The development of the 3D model
of anisotropy would be impossible without the confluence of new methodology
(ambient noise tomography, Eikonal tomography) and a unique seismic
observational tool (USArray).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Educational. The data processing and inversion methodology
offers a unique educational experience for a graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual. The ability to resolve crustal from mantle anisotropy
provided by the research helps to clarify the interpretation of SKS-splitting.
Significant impacts also are anticipated on studies of regional-scale tectonics
as well as the deformational state beneath the western and central US and, by
extension, similar continental regions elsewhere in the world. Moreover, the
methods developed are applicable elsewhere in the world as other regional arrays
are installed; e.g., in Europe and China and for PASSCAL experiments. The
research team has a strong track record of making data products, models,
software, and training available to a wide community. &lt;br/&gt;EarthScope: The
research is helping to achieve the vision of the USArray -- modeling the Earth
beneath the US in unprecedented detail -- and aims to contribute to achieving
the US seismological community's vision for EarthScope/USArray.