* 0844720
* SGER: Chemical Frustration and the Design of New Hydrogen Storage Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Peihong Zhang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/28/2010
* USD 90,000.00

CBET-0844720 Zhang

The hydrogen storage challenge, and equally compelling issues in large-scale
hydrogen generation, impedes the broad commercialization of this otherwise
compelling energy carrier. Not only do existing storage technologies fail to
meet requirements in capacity, cost and reversibility, but there are no clear
optimization paths from known systems to fully practical on-board storage
systems. In this research, the PI will perform an intense two-year theoretical
materials design search, using powerful first-principles methods and exploiting
several new concepts in hydrogen-substrate interaction, with the goal of
discovering one or more new families of hydrogen sorbents. It will exploit the
concept of electronic frustration, wherein intrinsic or geometrically-induced
electron deficiency generates novel multi-center electronic configurations,
unusual charge-transfer states, or anomalously large local fields that enhance
hydrogen binding. Over the course of the two-year research effort, these
calculations will identify targets for further investigation and optimization of
hydrogen capacity and synthesizability, through studies of convex-hull phase
stability and kinetic barriers.

Boron-hydrogen molecules have a surprisingly rich and highly unconventional
chemistry arising from an intrinsic electronic frustration associated with
having just three valence electrons in the s-p shell. The PI will investigate
several novel boron-based frameworks with build-in sites for multicenter
hydrogen binding and will use doping to modulate the overall charge state of the
framework to attain maximal framework stability, optimal hydrogen binding
energetics, kinetics and reversibility within thermodynamic constraints on
relative phase stability. Electronic frustration will also be induced
geometrically, by means of topological and topographical constraints that
prevent systems with well-known atomic constituents from attaining their
traditional ground state structures. Topological barriers and topographical
constraints will help induce novel electronic states with prospects to
demonstrate new modes of binding to close-shell species such as molecular
hydrogen.

A solution to the hydrogen storage challenge would have a transformative impact
throughout society, from environment issues to energy security, national
security and transportation. The proposed research will educate one graduate
student in interdisciplinary computational materials research. Student training
in electronic structure theory relies upon a solid grounding in condensed matter
theory, yet also requires important concepts from chemistry and materials
science and naturally develops in students a strong familiarity with large-scale
high-performance computation on massively parallel computers. This integrated
multidisciplinary training on an application-oriented project will broaden the
student's knowledge and experience and thereby prepare them for careers that
span disciplines. Students will have opportunity to communicate their results
both at research venues and to the general public.