* 0844004
* Workshop on the Structure and Constituency of the Languages of the Americas
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Elena Benedicto, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 19,180.00

This project seeks to facilitate the participation of students and
underrepresented groups in the Workshop on the Structure and Constituency of the
Languages of the Americas, to be held at Purdue University, April 3-5 2009. The
meeting's general goal is to bring together linguists who are engaged in
research on the formal study of the languages of the Americas, to exchange ideas
across theories, language families, generations of scholars, and importantly,
across the academic and non-academic communities who are involved in language
maintenance and revitalization. In particular, this conference will instantiate
a Participatory Action Research approach to the articulation of the activities
of the conference. This methodological approach is designed to bridge the
academic and non-academic communities and to balance out the interests of both
communities and the benefits to both out of results obtained. This event will
articulate three components: (a) a component devoted to the development of a
theoretically mature topic (modality and evidentiality); (b) a component devoted
to data gathering designed to foster new theoretical venues of research; and (c)
a component designed to showcase the use of linguistic knowledge by tribal
centers of knowledge and its integration in the sciences and education
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the biggest challenges in our current
system of research is to, at the same time, produce research of the highest
quality and be able to return the results of our research (that is, to make it
relevant) to the community at large, and especially to the community where the
research originated. Using a participatory approach in the organization of this
event (in addition to using it in the specific research studies of the languages
of the Americas) addresses this point directly: not only in facilitating the
active participation of a wide range of participants (from students to members
of the community) and promoting networking and partnerships with academics, but
also in addressing concrete issues of interest to the population where the data
come from. In doing this, we strive to slow down the rate of language loss among
native communities, to increase the efficiency of language revitalization, and
to advance the depth and width of the knowledge on the languages of the
Americas.&lt;br/&gt;