* 0844662
* CAREER: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications of Cyclic Polymer "Nanoloops"
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Scott Grayson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 474,996.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: By using a highly
efficient reaction to couple a polymer chain?s head and tail, this research
project provides a versatile route for preparing cyclic polymers. Because of a
variety of synthetic and technical limitations of previous synthetic routes,
many fundamental properties of cyclic polymers remain debated, and their
potential applications remain under-explored. The developed cyclization approach
is powerful in that it can afford high purity cyclic polymers, while also
providing access to linear analogs with identical molecular weight
distributions. As a result, the effect of the cyclic topology on the polymers
physical properties will be probed in a variety of studies, including thermal
behavior, rheometry, degradation behavior, small angle x-ray scattering, and
antimicrobial activity. In addition, the functional group tolerance of the
polymerization and cyclization chemistries enables access to a range of
functional cyclic backbones which can be further modified by the attachment of
linear or dendritic polymer side-chains. These hybrid structures are of
particular interest because the modular synthesis enables control over the size,
rigidity, and functionality of the cyclic polymers. Their physical properties
and their ability to encapsulate nanomaterials such as buckballs, quantum dots,
and single walled nanotubes will be probed as a function of these variables. The
overarching goal of this research is to obtain a better fundamental
understanding of how the cyclic polymer architecture effects the interactions
and physical properties of this family of
macromolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: Cyclic
macromolecules, including plasmid DNA and many biologically relevant peptides,
are well known in nature and exhibit unique properties and interactions as a
result of their circular topology. However, the ability to efficiently prepare
synthetic polymer ?nanoloops? has lagged significantly relative to the advanced
synthetic control demonstrate for linear polymers. Using an efficient ?head-to-
tail? coupling technique, high purity cyclic polymers can be obtained to probe
the fundamental nature and potentially useful properties of these synthetic
macromolecules. Of particular interest, cyclic molecules have been known to
efficiently encapsulate smaller guest molecules, and these interactions will be
explored for eventual materials and drug delivery applications. The technical
nature of the described project will provide an exceptional, interdisciplinary
training experience in both polymer synthesis and characterization for a diverse
set of undergraduate and graduate students to help provide a well-trained body
of researchers to address future materials needs. A very successful polymer-
themed outreach program between Tulane researchers and predominantly
underprivileged students at local New Orleans public schools will be continued
under this award, to infuse the next generation of scientists with access to,
interaction with, and inspiration from modern materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;