* 0844355
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the basis of interactions between adaptive mutations and their environment
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Timothy Cooper, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2012
* USD 411,050.00

The fitness effects of genetic mutations can differ depending on the external
and genetic environments in which they occur. These interactions of mutations
with the external and genetic environments determine the generality with which a
potentially adaptive mutation will actually confer a benefit. This research will
study experimentally how the effects of adaptive mutations are influenced by the
external environment, which will be manipulated by altering the identity of the
growth-limiting resource, and the genetic environment, which will be manipulated
by introducing identical mutations into distinct genetic backgrounds, here,
different strains of a single bacterial species. Results will integrate
ecological, genetic, and biochemical data to determine the influence of the two
types of environmental conditions on the effect of new beneficial mutations.
&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between mutations and their environment influence the
spread of ecologically and medically important traits, such as the ability of
bacteria to degrade synthetic compounds or cause disease. An understanding of
the factors underlying these interactions is essential to predict the spread of
mutations to new species and across different environments; these interactions
are fundamental to the vulnerability or robustness of adaptation in a world of
changing climate. This project will provide interdisciplinary research-based
training for students from the high school to post-doctoral levels, including
those from groups traditionally underrepresented in science. The project also
will promote transfer of experimental science to undergraduate and high school
curricula. &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;