* 0844017
* Climatic and Geomorphic Triggering Mechanisms of Cascadian Periglacial Debris Flows
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Anne Nolin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 350,960.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debris flows initiating in the upper
reaches of glaciated valleys of the Cascade stratovolcanoes are typically
associated with intense, multi-day rain events being brought in by the
subtropical jet stream. Recent investigations suggest that the number and size
of such rain-induced debris flows may be on the increase, which indicates that
they may be affected by climate change. The overall goal of the research is to
characterize the triggering mechanisms of these periglacial debris flows in the
Pacific Northwest using both climate and geomorphic perspectives. The targeted
study areas are Mount Hood, Oregon and Mount Rainier, Washington but the
research is broadly applicable to debris flows on other composite volcanoes in
the Pacific Northwest. The specific objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Map and
characterize the initiation sites of rain-induced periglacial debris
flows;&lt;br/&gt;2. Map and quantify annual changes in glacier area on Mount
Rainier and Mount Hood over the past several decades;&lt;br/&gt;3. Characterize
and classify the storms that have caused recent periglacial debris flows over
the past several decades;&lt;br/&gt;4. Quantify antecedent conditions for debris
flows including rainfall and snow cover;&lt;br/&gt;5. Understand recent debris
flows in the context of debris flows over the historic record;&lt;br/&gt;6.
Develop and evaluate prognostic schemes for rain-induced periglacial debris
flows. &lt;br/&gt;This research employs an empirical approach based on a wide
range of observational evidence. The initiation sites will be mapped and
characterized using field surveys, airborne LiDAR imagery, and aerial photos.
Annual changes in glacier extent and area will be mapped using 30-m Landsat
satellite imagery (1984-present) and previously published glacier maps. The
inventory of debris flows will be used to match with specific storm events and
antecedent conditions. Meteorological data from various sources will be used to
characterize storm direction, integrated water vapor transport, rainfall
intensity, storm freezing altitude, snow cover, and previous rainfall amounts.
Historic context of debris flows will be explored using chronologies developed
from aerial photos and geomorphic and dendrochronologic data from field surveys.
Using our quantitative characterizations of storms and initiation sites we will
then develop a typology of sites and circumstances that are important in
triggering rain-induced debris flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such periglacial
debris flows ("landslides") are devastating to infrastructure in the region as
they wipe out roads, bridges, buildings, campgrounds, trails, and irrigation
facilities. After a particularly large number of these in November 2006 event,
Mount Rainier National Park had to be closed for an unprecedented six months;
the park alone suffered nearly $30M in damage. At Mount Hood, debris flows from
this storm destroyed a major bridge and road in the White River drainage causing
a multi-week delay in opening one of the premier ski areas in the region; in the
Eliot drainage, the Middle Fork Irrigation District is no longer able to insure
their water diversion structures because of the high risk of debris flows. Of
longer-term concern, the sediment carried by these debris flows and floods is
deposited in the streambed, which raisies the streambed elevation and subsequent
flows will more readily result in major flooding. In addition, the receding
glaciers on expose more sediment capable of erosion. This raises such questions
as: will debris flows become more common and will they carry larger volumes of
sediment longer distances? Characterizing both the storm type and the initiation
sites will aid decision makers by providing a scientific basis for risk
assessment.