* 0844880
* CAREER: Internet Measurement in the Cat's Cradle of Global Internet Censorship
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Jedidiah Crandall, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2015
* USD 439,760.00

The Internet will shape the history of the 21st century. Governments around the
world realize this, which is why, out of 40 countries studied by the Open Net
Initiative, Internet censorship increased from 3 of 40 in 2002 to 26 of 40 in
2007. The U.S. must set effective policy regarding this, but the inherently
computational issues lead to a great deal of uncertainty. We are studying the
dynamics of modern Internet censorship implementations to understand how their
low-level mechanisms (for example, at the level of individual Internet packets)
affects the application-level behavior of censorship that web users actually
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internet censorship implementations are
inherently computational, thus whether or not content is available to a user can
depend on key issues such as routing and protocol dynamics. Current
characterizations of censorship are incomplete, not founded on quantitative
measurements, and cite experiments that cannot be reproduced. We are addressing
this by laying a solid computational foundation for Internet censorship
research. Central to this effort is Internet measurement of existing censorship
implementations to understand and compare their dynamics at the packet- and
application-level. This will impact both policy development and the future
design of computer networks to address Internet censorship, a critical issue
that directly harms U.S. interests by hindering the ability of human rights
organizations and U.S. government agencies to disseminate information.
Understanding the connections between Internet censorship and computational
issues will also enable the integration of this research throughout the computer
science curriculum at UNM and other institutions.