* 0844110
* RUI: Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Reactive Intermediates in Solution and Confined Environments.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Peter de Lijser, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 258,500.00

With support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Peter de Lijser's proposed research will provide kinetic and
mechanistic information on structure and reactivity of high-energy intermediates
formed in the photooxidation of oximes and related compounds. These reactive
intermediates, oxime radical cations, and other reactive oxygen or nitrogen
species derived from these, such as iminoxyl and iminoyl radicals, will be
studied in solution as well as in a confined environment (zeolites) in order to
provide extra stabilization for the reactive intermediates. The proposal's
primary research goals are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1)To investigate the
structure-reactivity relationships of oxime radical cations. This will require
the PI and his research group to find conditions to observe these reactive
intermediates directly. Both aldoxime and ketoximes will be studied and the
formation of nitriles from aldoximes is of specific interest.&lt;br/&gt; 2)To
probe the structure-reactivity relationships of oxime ethers, specifically the
hypothesis that these species undergo nucleophilic addition or substitution at
nitrogen. The PI's efforts will be focused on intramolecular
reactions.&lt;br/&gt; 3)To selectively generate and study iminoxyl and iminoyl
radicals, which are the proposed intermediates in the photooxidation of
ketoximes and aldoximes, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oximes and related
compounds have found use as pesticides and drugs. Release of these chemicals
into the environment (including cells and tissue of plants and higher animals)
may result in photochemical (sensitized or direct) or enzymatic oxidations
leading to the formation of reactive intermediates such as radical ions and
radicals. The chemistry and potential dangers of these types of species are
virtually unknown, and there exists a need for accurate kinetic and other
reactivity data so that a general structure-reactivity pattern can be developed.
The knowledge gained from these fundamental mechanistic and kinetic studies will
establish a foundation for understanding experimental observations. The research
will also provide much-needed tools to successfully utilize radical ions and
other high-energy species for new chemical processes in synthesis and possibly
in materials applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will also
provide an outstanding educational experience for students. Students will learn
basic chemical laboratory principles such as how to synthesize, purify, and
characterize compounds by means of spectroscopic techniques. Additionally, they
will receive a solid education in learning mechanistic methodologies and
advanced problem skills. Students will also receive training in less traditional
techniques and areas such as electrochemistry, computational chemistry and
nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy; the last will be achieved by means
of the newly purchased laser flash photolysis instrumentation with funds from
this award. Professor de Lijser continues to build on his track record for
increasing involvement of undergraduate students in scientific activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at California
State University, Fullerton (CSUF) has long been recognized as offering a
rigorous and contemporary curriculum that is responsive to future developments,
reflects the interdisciplinary nature and diversity of the chemical science and
enables students to become successful professionals, scholars, and
scientifically literate citizens. Because the CSU provides a substantial
percentage of the technical workforce, teachers and graduate student applicants
in California, exposing students to modern research methods and environments
will sustain regional, state-wide and national capabilities for education and
training of undergraduates and Masters' students in the chemical sciences.