* 0844103
* Bimaterial Interfaces, Damage Zones, Earthquake Directivities and Signatures of Rupture Opening in the Parkfield Section of the San Andreas Fault
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Yehuda Ben-Zion, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 192,837.00

The studies focus on systematic high-resolution imaging of bimaterial
interfaces, low velocity fault zone layers, rupture directivities of
earthquakes, and seismic signatures of opening rupture mode along various fault
segments of the San Andreas Fault system in the Parkfield area. The overall goal
is to provide multi-signal tests, based on large seismic waveform and catalog
data sets, for the hypothesis that earthquakes on large strike-slip faults have
preferred propagation directions that are controlled by the velocity contrasts
across the faults, and for the possibility that earthquake ruptures on such
faults have tensile component of faulting. The imaging of bimaterial interfaces
employ fault zone head waves that refract along bimaterial faults and direct P
waves. The fault zone head waves provide the most diagnostic signal for the
existence of sharp bimaterial interfaces and the highest-resolution tool for
imaging their seismic properties at depth. Fault zone trapped waves are used to
quantify symmetry properties with respect to the main rupture surface and other
characteristics of damaged fault zone layers at different locations. The
analysis of rupture directivities involves stacking aftershock rates at the
opposite along-strike directions of each event and observing symmetry properties
of dynamic triggering patterns of the stacked data at different space-time
scales. The examination for opening rupture mode utilizes several potential
seismic signals that are suggested by recent theoretical calculations. The
studies also focus on clarifying the structural and earthquake properties around
the SAFOD site, clarifying properties of the main SAF between the hypocenters of
the 1966 and 2004 M6 events, and clarifying the connectivity between the main
SAF and the Southwest Fracture zone at depth. The studies can have profound
implications for key aspects of earthquake and fault mechanics including
effective constitutive laws, earthquake source and rupture properties, generated
frictional heat, interaction between faults and more. The analyses can help
resolving existing controversies. Positive results on statistical preference of
earthquake propagation directions may lead to refined estimates of seismic
shaking hazard near major faults.