* 0844537
* CAREER: Dissecting the Biological Impact of Stem Cell Fusion; a Unified Plan for Stem Cell Discovery via Accessible Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Mary Meyerand, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0844537&lt;br/&gt;Ogle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project is built on the PI's ultimate research vision to develop
accessible technologies to address significant challenges limiting stem cell
discovery. The significant challenge addressed is unraveling the mechanism(s) by
which stem cells fuse with mature cells and the impact (beneficial or
detrimental) of such an event. Fusion of stem cells with mature cells is a
regulated process capable of promoting cell survival and differentiation and
thus could be of central importance for development, repair of tissues and even
the pathogenesis of disease. Given the potential impact, it is surprising that
basic aspects of stem cell fusion are unknown including the signals that trigger
fusion, the cell surface proteins responsible for mediating fusion, the
mechanism of reprogramming and the functional capacity of hybrid cells after
fusion. Hindering discovery in this area is lack of appropriate technology to 1)
identify fusion partners poised to fuse, 2) track fusion products (i.e., hybrid
cells) over time and 3) analyze and sort fusion products in a high-throughput
manner. The PI has recently developed technologies to accurately identify fusion
products immediately after cell fusion and to track fusion products over time
both in culture and in living organisms. Here the PI will develop and
characterize a new fluidics platform coupled to a multiphoton microscopy system
for high-throughput, flow cytometric analysis of large entities such as fusion
products (Objective 1). This system will be used together with previously
developed technologies to examine the impact of stem cell-mature cell fusion on
hybrid cell function (Objective 2). This novel work exemplifies how technology,
when appropriately coupled to basic and clinical science, will transform the way
stem cells are characterized, analyzed and stimulated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Execution of Objectives 1 and 2 will provide a template to
advance the discovery and understanding of stem cell technologies while
promoting teaching, training and learning of a wide range of audiences
(Objective 3). Despite widespread enthusiasm for stem cell discovery,
understanding of the basic mechanisms of the cellular processes of stem cells
(i.e., proliferation, adhesion, differentiation) has been limited by archaic
analysis methods. Graduate students have been identified as the ideal conduit
for merging technology with basic stem cell science and for conveying this
knowledge to academic and industrial communities nation-wide. Graduate students
will undergo multimodal training to foster an understanding of key engineering
concepts related to stem cell discovery and to promote effective teaching and
learning practices. Graduate students who undergo this training will have an
opportunity to disseminate their new knowledge by planning and executing an
outreach program (Summer Science Camp, WiCell Research Institute), to apply
their new knowledge in the context of a professional community workshop (UW Stem
Cell Technology Collaboratory, cofounded by the PI), and to disseminate and
apply their new knowledge via mentoring of underrepresented undergraduate
students.