* 0844719
* Expansion and Rehousing of the Vertebrate Collections of the Utah Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Eric Rickart, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2013
* USD 393,731.00

The Utah Museum of Natural History (UMNH) holds scientific research collections
of more than 71,000 specimens of vertebrate animals (mammals, birds, reptiles
and amphibians). There has been steady growth and expanding use of these
collections, and the present museum facility is no longer adequate. UMNH is
constructing a new $103M building that will include climate-controlled
collection storage and new research laboratories. This project will fund new
collection storage cabinets and shelving, a freezer for storing the vertebrate
tissue collection, and will support moving the vertebrate collections to the new
facility.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The UMNH vertebrate collections are
international in scope, but emphasize the biologically rich Intermountain Region
of the western USA. As a primary resource on regional biodiversity, they are
used by scientists, resource managers, educators and students at all levels.
They support scientific research on an expanding range of topics. Their
historical depth provides insight into how climate change and shifting land-use
practices have altered animal communities in this region. The collections form
the basis for museum exhibits and public programs on regional natural history
and scientific research, emphasizing the relevance of historical collections to
current resource management and conservation. This project will augment all of
these activities through improvements in collection storage, maintenance and
accessibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;