* 0844335
* Collaborative Research:  Determining the role of insolation in the mechanical breakdown of rock
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Martha Eppes, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/28/2015
* USD 166,837.00

The role of the sun in fracturing rocks has been debated by geomorphologists and
soil scientists for over 100 years without resolution. Recent work indicates
that diurnal heating and cooling are largely responsible for crack initiation in
exposed rocks. The majority of cracks in exposed boulders in both deserts and
more humid climates have preferential orientations centered on north-south,
independent of rock fabric and shape. Such a ubiquitous preferential orientation
is difficult to explain by any other mechanism other than directional solar
heating. Cracks caused by freeze-thaw or salt shattering, for example, should
exhibit random orientations. This project will examine and quantify the
fundamental physics and environmental conditions required for cracks to form in
rocks due to recurrent exposure to the sun. Methods include: 1) instrumenting a
boulder to measure surface strain and surface temperature, and to monitor
acoustic emission (cracking) events; 2) collecting field data of rock fractures
in desert and temperate sites; and 3) using the field measurements and
observations to model the process of crack growth with state-of-the-art
numerical techniques. The project will involve several undergraduate students in
the field data and analysis to provide a frim foundation for learning principles
of scientific research.

Physical weathering is the mechanical breakdown of rocks and bedrock into
smaller particles. It plays an elemental role in the rock cycle, through the
breakdown of rock into sediment and through the subsequent increased exposure of
rock surfaces to chemical weathering. Physical weathering also dictates the
production of sediment on hillslopes and the formation of desert pavements.
Physical weathering has also been linked by many workers to global phenomena
such as atmospheric dust production, carbon cycling, and climate change. In
addition, the physical degradation of natural and man-made materials has a
direct and persistent impact on human civilization; phenomena ranging from rock
fall to the deterioration of concrete bridges and archaeological treasures
continuously cost humans lives, dollars and time. Despite its broad and
significant role in surficial processes and societal infrastructure of our
planet, however, there has been a critical gap in our understanding of physical
weathering. The mechanical weathering of rock proceeds by a complicated suite of
surface processes, all of which depend in some way on the creation of cracks and
the exposure of fresh mineral surfaces. Surface crack initiation and propagation
will determinethe pace for subsequent fracture and transport of rock debris in
numerous environments. This research will build a foundation for significant
gains in documenting the role of physical weathering in shaping Earth's
landscapes.