* 0844829
* SGER: A New Framework for Energy-Efficient and Realtime Data Delivery in Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Yingshu Li, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 02/28/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Wireless sensor networks that have the capabilities of sensing, computation and
communication make&lt;br/&gt;an ideal solution for emergency warning systems.
Appropriate authorities expect immediate warnings&lt;br/&gt;predicted by such
systems. This research designs, implements, and evaluates an energy-efficient
and&lt;br/&gt;real-time data delivery model which can be employed in wireless-
sensor-network-based emergency&lt;br/&gt;warning systems. With the new data
delivery model being used in an emergency warning system,&lt;br/&gt;warnings can
be obtained in real time, and network lifetime can be
extended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different from the traditional 'data collection'
and 'data aggregation' methods, this research focuses on&lt;br/&gt;the stringent
requirement of delivering warnings in real-time. Instead of managing a large
amount of&lt;br/&gt;raw data, a simpler mechanism for event detection and
reporting that can reduce energy consumption as&lt;br/&gt;well as notification
delay is investigated. In addition to the impact on practice, the theoretical
analysis&lt;br/&gt;on the bounds of energy consumption and notification delay
has a strong impact on the theory aspect.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, this project is a
starting point to integrate research and education for the purpose
of&lt;br/&gt;attracting both undergraduate and graduate students to the area of
wireless sensor networks.