* 0844725
* CAREER: A Theoretical Framework for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2016
* Hossein Pishro-Nik, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2016
* USD 456,856.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transportation is a crucial component of every
society. However, today's transportation systems are facing significant
challenges. In terms of safety, traffic accidents are the most common cause of
death in the 15 to 34 age group by a wide margin. In terms of congestion, in the
past three decades, average delay has tripled. Today, congestion wastes about 40
percent of travel time on average, unnecessarily consumes about 2.3 billion
gallons of fuel annually, and adversely affects the envioronment. These critical
issues of transportation are not only collecting a high toll on the economy,
they are also changing the way that people live, travel, and work. Many
countries are planning the wide deployment of vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs)
that can dramatically improve safety and efficiency of transportation systems.
VANET is emerging as an exciting research field. Nevertheless, there is
currently no rigorous mathematical framework for vehicular ad hoc networks. This
research aims to develop a solid theoretical framework for wireless-enabled
transportation networks by combining communication theory and traffic flow
theory. &lt;br/&gt; This research aims to develop a new theory based on two
separately established fields: Communications and Information Theory and Traffic
Flow Theory. The research combines tools from Differential Geometry, Topology,
Probability Theory, and Graph theory to provide a holistic theoretical analysis
of wireless-enabled wireless communication systems. While this research
increases the understanding in communication and traffic flow theory, it
addresses important industrial needs. Although, the research is motivated by the
important application of vehicular ad hoc networks, it turns out the developed
theory is applicable to much broader scenarios, namely to the communication
scenarios that are limited by geometry, line-of-sight, or restricted mobility
pattern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Level of effort statement:&lt;br/&gt;At the
recommended level of support, the PI will make every attempt to meet the
original scope and level of effort of the project. Considering that the revised
budget is very close to the original requested budget, the PI expects that this
will be done with no problem.&lt;br/&gt;