* 0844187
* Collaborative Research: Deformation and Magmatic Modification of a Steep Continental Margin, Western Idaho-eastern Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Raymond Russo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 625,400.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act&lt;br/&gt;of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the land
area of Washington, Oregon, and California was added to continental North
America during the last 200 million years. Exactly how this dominantly oceanic
lithosphere accreted to the continent is not well understood, although it is
clear that the processes involved differed from north to south along North
America's former western margin. In the Idaho-Oregon border region, the boundary
between oceanic and continental lithospheres is well exposed in a very narrow
zone of high deformation known as the western Idaho shear zone. This project is
providing insight into how this sharp boundary formed, how it has controlled
subsequent deformation and magmatism regionally, and the role it has played in
the formation of North America. Because the Oregon-Idaho segment separates
distinct styles of mountain building in California and the southern Canadian
Cordillera, a better understanding of this complex region is critical for
developing a coherent model for the tectonic evolution of western North America
and ultimately helping us understand proceses by which continents are created
and evolve through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research scientists from the
University of Wisconsin, Virginia Tech, The University of Florida, and
Washington State University are integrating the results of seismological,
geochemical, geochronologic, and structural geologic studies in order to
investigate three major issues associated with the evolution of this continental
margin: 1) How do fundamental lithospheric structures, such as the continental-
oceanic lithosphere boundary exposed in the western Idaho shear zone, guide
subsequent deformation and magmatism?; 2) How do magmatism and extensional
deformation modify (destabilize) the continental lithosphere, and at what
lithospheric levels?; and 3) What are the tectonic implications of this
destabilization for evolving magmatism, deformation, and lithospheric strength?
A swath of broadband passive seismic instruments and a seismic refraction line
will delineate the current geometry of the major geologic units and their
boundaries to several hundred kilometers depth. Geochemistry and geochronology
will characterize post- western Idaho shear zone magmatism to provide the timing
of events and the tectonic context in which these processes occurred. Structural
geology will provide the kinematic and dynamic deformation path by which the
continent was modified, by defining the major tectonic boundaries and
establishing the kinematic history of the major
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research objectives of this
project, the award will support the education and training of four graduate
students and eight undergraduate students distributed between the four
universities, and supports an early career researcher at the University of
Florida.