* 0844235
* Collaborative Research: Stratigraphic, geochemical, and paleobiological tests of the co-evolution of multicellular life and environment in the late Ediacaran Period
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Shuhai Xiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 05/31/2013
* USD 94,001.00

Stratigraphic, Geochemical, and Paleobiological Tests of the Co-Evolution of
Multicellular Life and Environment in the Late Ediacaran Period
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alan J. Kaufman, University of Maryland &lt;br/&gt;Shuhai
Xiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University &lt;br/&gt;Dima
Grazhdankin, Russian Academy of Sciences &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
undertake a basin-wide stratigraphic, geochemical, and paleobiological study of
the carbonate-dominated Khatyspyt Formation in remote northern Siberia.
Ediacaran fossils in this unit are remarkably preserved in fine-grained
carbonates, promising a much enhanced anatomical and paleoecological view of
Earths earliest animals. Insofar as the Ediacaran biota may have required
abundant free oxygen to sustain metabolic activities, we hypothesize that their
distribution may track environmental conditions, and propose tests of this
linkage through high resolution time-series analyses of carbon and sulfur
isotopes in multiple equivalent sections across the Khatyspyt depositional basin
as well as other biological, elemental and isotopic indicators of redox
conditions. The Khatyspyt Formation contains a wide range of unique carbonate-
hosted Ediacaran organisms, as well as carbonaceous macrofossils, small shelly
fossils, trace fossils and planktonic microfossils all in a single, 450-m-thick
continuous succession cropping out along the Olenek, Khorbosuonka and Lena
rivers. Results of the study should provide insights to the phenomenon of soft
tissue preservation, increase the ecological resolution of the Ediacaran-
Cambrian transition, and provide important constraints on the history of Earths
earliest metazoans and the oceans in which they originated, diversified, and
ultimately perished. The primary aim of this field and laboratory based proposal
is to test whether the geologically brief Ediacaran experiment in complex
multicellular life was controlled by the oxidation state of shallow marine
environments. The proposed research will establish a new international
collaboration with colleagues in Russia, and require two month-long field
seasons above the Arctic Circle in northern Siberia. Graduate students from both
U.S. institutions will accompany the PIs in the field, providing them with an
enhanced learning experience that will promote both scientific and cultural
exchange. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;