* 0844527
* Improving Collection Conservation and Enriching Availability in Three Caribbean Herbaria
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Ackerman, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,949.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Islands of the Caribbean have a
remarkably rich flora internationally recognized as a biodiversity hotspot.
Herbarium collections of the region serve to document the flora providing a vast
resource for a broad spectrum of studies. All active herbaria in the region
occur in the Greater Antilles, and Puerto Rico is home to four of them housing
approximately 125,000 accessions with very little overlap among them. The
University of Puerto Rico Botanical Garden houses the most significant
historical collections, and their conservation will be improved by replacing old
cabinets and installing a track system to maximize floor space and allow for
future growth. The Botanical Garden and the Commonwealth Department of Natural
Resources and Environment will implement the botanical database, BRAHMS, which
is in use by the other herbaria on the island. The largest collection is at the
University of Puerto Rico-Río Piedras and they will augment existing database
and specimen scanning operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All four collections
will be accessible through the UPRRP portal (www.herbarium.uprr.pr) linking to
each institution and BRAHMS and Global Biodiversity Information Facility sites.
These herbaria will become the first major in situ collections of the Caribbean
to be well conserved, fully digital and accessible to the global community.