* 0844049
* A Planning Meeting on Capacity Building for International Social Science Research
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Seteney Shami, Social Science Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 03/31/2010
* USD 67,163.00

Institution: Social Science Research Council Principal Investigator: Adrian
DeWind Title: Capacity Building for International Social Science Research

With NSF support, the Social Science Research Council (SSRC) will broaden
participation and enhance the capacity of social scientists to contribute to
international research, particularly in countries with emerging and transitional
economies. SSRC will organize a meeting to build on earlier international
consultations of the SSRC, the International Social Science Council and its
Committee on Developing and Transition Economies that have linked social
scientists and national funding agencies in advancing the social sciences
internationally. The meeting will advance previous efforts by producing a report
that will: o Identify topics for international research o Clarify approaches to
capacity building; o Map successful programs; o Design programs and mobilize
resources.

Intellectual Merit Capacity building for international social science is an
important topic that addresses a critical issue in social science research.
Issues related to comparative and integrated modes of international social
science research are addressed.

Broader Impacts The proposed activity involves collaborations with emerging and
transitional economies to develop international research in social science.
Efforts to build capacity globally with regard to international research are
especially needed in today's complex society.

