* 0844080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Lexical/Segmental Influence on Tone Accuracy in Mandarin-speaking Children
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Barbara Davis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2012
* USD 10,087.00

Mandarin Chinese is a tone language, using tones in addition to segments (vowels
and consonants) to discriminate word meanings. Under the direction of Dr.
Barbara Davis, Ms. Jie Yang will conduct a longitudinal study of the acquisition
of tones by Mandarin-learning children between 12 and 24 months of age. The
relationships between tonal, segmental and lexical accuracy in spontaneously
produced words will be examined quantitatively over time in each individual
child and for the group of children. The studies are designed to test the
hypothesis that tone production accuracy is associated with vocabulary growth.
Phonological implementation of tone is one aspect of a dynamic system that can
be observed emerging in the individual child, in which early motor, perceptual
and cognitive capacities interact with a growing lexicon. The three capacities
are considered as interacting aspects of a complex system, none of which is
responsible alone for emerging phonology in young children in the formative
stages of language development. The proposed research will fill a gap in the
knowledge of child language acquisition by providing a detailed, quantitative
study of the development of tone production in children learning a language that
requires lexical use of pitch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study
have the potential to inform clinical practices in dealing with developmental
speech disorders related to tone production or perception in children who speak
a tone language, as well as expressive prosody disorders in children who speak
intonation languages.