* 0844812
* CAREER: Efficient Image Sparsifying Operators: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Mathews Jacob, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2014
* USD 399,600.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many image processing
applications rely on a transform or an operator to eliminate the redundancies in
images, thus sparsifying the data. The need for multi-resolution makes it
difficult for wavelet-like transforms to sparsify local discontinuities, while
being invariant to rotations and translations without significant redundancy.
The limited ability of wavelet-based sparse reconstruction algorithms to account
for this redundancy limits their performance in challenging practical
applications. In this context, there is a strong motivation to develop
multidimensional image sparsifying operators that are invariant to translations
and rotations and is competent in representing edges. This research leads to
fundamental advances in several areas of multidimensional signal recovery.
Specifically, the investigators apply the framework to significantly accelerate
the acquisition of dynamic and spectroscopic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main highlight of this proposal is the
generalization of the gradient to obtain a new family of multidimensional
operators. The use of these operators results in higher degree total variation
(HD-TV) image recovery schemes that (a) are rotation and translation invariant,
(b) can represent polynomials of arbitrary degree, and (c) minimize ringing
artifacts. To fully exploit the power of this framework in MRI applications, the
investigators also develop stable and efficient optimization algorithms and a
computational scheme to derive robust sampling patterns. The proposed research
projects involves a mix of theory and computation, focused on solving
challenging practical problems. The research modules are tuned to provide
direct, hands-on experience for graduate and undergraduate students in the
processing of multidimensional image data.