* 0844612
* SGER: Optimizing the Hygrothermal Performance of Earth Bricks in Hot and Humid Climates
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Esther Obonyo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* lawrence bank
* 01/31/2010
* USD 29,781.00

This is a SGER proposal to complement the PI's NSF-funded International Research
Experiences (NSF-IRES) program in the East African region. The overarching aim
of the proposed research is investigating adaptations that can be made to
existing earth bricks to improve their hygrothermal performance in hot and humid
climates such as Dar es Salaam. This will be achieved through a series of
laboratory testing complemented with advanced computer modeling. The specific
research objectives focus on assessing how wall made out of earth bricks can be
engineered for optimal performance with respect to: 1) Water vapor permeability;
2) Hygroscopicity, and; 3) Capillarity. The findings will be used to develop a
computer-based model for predicting the performance of earth bricks.

It is now universally acknowledged that organic building materials such as earth
bricks are more sustainable. However, there are still doubts with respect to
their adequacy as far as mechanical properties are concerned. The proposed SGER
research will contribute to credibility of the properties of the existing earth
bricks. A key outcome of the proposed SGER research will be a hygrothermal
material property database for earth bricks which will be published on the Web.
The research will also bring together a team of foreign experts who are
currently working in silos. The PI will provide research training for a female,
graduate student through the SGER.

