* 0844640
* The Development of a Collaborative Research Plan for NIST and the Semiconductor Industry for Nanoelectronics Research in the Bio-Sciences
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Ralph Cavin, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 49,900.00

Objective: A research plan will be developed to directly couple the
semiconductor industry and NIST in the support of bio-sciences research through
the application of the industries' technological capabilities to pressing bio-
science needs. This will be accomplished via a two-step process, i.e., a grant
will be issued by SRC to university researchers in bio-sciences to develop a
five-year research plan and they will be aided by a leading university
researcher in bio-electronics on a consulting basis. Secondly, when the draft
plan is complete, it will be presented at a roundtable meeting of personnel from
NIST, NIH, NSF, the semiconductor industry, SRC, and universities for review and
comment. The feedback from this roundtable will be integrated into the final
research plan that will then be presented to NIST and to the semiconductor
industry for possible implementation. The completed plan will be made widely
available to interested agencies and
foundations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The merger of the
capabilities of these two fields offers exciting opportunities to improve the
quality of life for humankind. The following is not intended to be prescriptive
nor complete for the proposed study but, for example, we believe that new
electronic technologies can be developed for rapid DNA sequencing, to identify
and quantify proteins, to detect toxins, and for molecular mass spectroscopy. As
a specific example, nano-pores may have application for rapid DNA sequencing,
for protein denaturation detection, for anthrax detection, for understanding how
cells respond to proteins, and possibly for total cell analysis for system
biology and for future medical applications. The proposed planning process will
define potential technology application areas, identify specific technology
needs and their associated time horizons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The impact of the successful conduct of the research identified by the proposed
plan would likely first be felt in the research community if its implementation
resulted in programs to address needs that are identified. Commensurate with the
research ideas and conceptsthat would result is the training of outstanding
graduate students in the cross-disciplinary field of nano-electronics and bio-
sciences. Further downstream, we there would result better understanding of
biological systems that could be translated into improved methods and tools used
in medical instrumentation, testing and therapy. Finally, large scale
applications of this research could promote the growth of industry and thereby
provide for economic growth for the nation.