* 0844652
* Collaborative Research:   Resolving old questions in Mollusc phylogenetics with new EST data and developing general phylogenomic tools
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Nerida Wilson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/29/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Molluscs are megadiverse animals, and the roughly 200,000 species are
economically and culturally important. Discerning the evolutionary relationships
within this group has been particularly difficult using traditional approaches,
but a detailed understanding of such relationships would facilitate studies of
all aspects of their biology and provide insight into general evolutionary
principles. This project will resolve molluscan evolutionary relationships with
new gene sequence data collected with high-throughput DNA sequencing technology.
The research will resolve important evolutionary questions, such as the
selective factors leading to the evolution of wildly disparate body plans,
ranging from worm-like mollusks to shelled forms to the highly modified jet-
propulsion body plan of cephalopods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, new analytical tools will be developed that will improve the
efficiency of research across the emerging field of phylogenomics (the use of
genome-wide information for studying organismal evolutionary relationships).
These tools will be made freely available to the scientific community. The
project will also include outreach components that will integrate research and
education through a series of lectures at the Harvard Museum of Natural History
and a regular podcast series. The podcasts will be designed for use within high
school biology classes, and understandable and informative to a general
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;