* 0844530
*  Performance Evaluation of On-Demand Provisioning of Data Intensive Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Chaitanya Baru, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 01/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This project is studying the effectiveness of dynamic strategies for
provisioning data intensive applications by conducting a thorough performance
evaluation of alternative provisioning strategies using the NSF CluE facility
and the Apache Hadoop programming environment. Current systems adopt a "one size
fits all" and relatively static solution approach even as they serve
applications with a wide range of access and processing needs. The reference
data sets in the study are high-resolution topographic data sets from airborne
LiDAR surveys. The performance of alternative solutions using parallel database
technology versus the Hadoop environment is being evaluated. Hybrid strategies,
which blend the parallel database approach with the Hadoop-based approach?based,
for example, on user directives and/or workload analysis?are also being tested
and evaluated. The research will contribute to an understanding of the
performance tradeoffs in dynamic provisioning strategies for data intensive
applications. The potential impact is a reassessment of how data archives are
implemented and data sets served to a broad user community based on on-demand
and dynamic approaches to provisioning data sets, as opposed to the current
static approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this study will
include a thorough performance evaluation and recommendations on the best use of
large cluster computing environments for supporting data intensive applications,
and an evaluation of a dynamic, blended approach to data management. Results
will be disseminated via professional conferences and journals. The recommended
approaches will be implemented in real data intensive environments, such as the
OpenTopography.org portal.