* 0844995
* CAREER: Novel Techniques for Detecting and Localizing Hardware Trojans in Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Mark Tehranipoor, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 05/31/2015
* USD 415,995.00

Proposal ID: 0844995, PI Name: Mohammad Tehranipoor, PI Institution: University
of Connecticut, Title: CAREER: Novel Techniques for Detecting and Localizing
Hardware Trojans in Integrated Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design and fabrication of integrated circuits (ICs) are
becoming increasingly vulnerable to malicious activities and alterations with
globalization. These vulnerabilities have raised serious concerns regarding
possible threats to many critical applications. An adversary can introduce a
Trojan designed to disable and/or destroy a system at some future time or the
Trojan may serve to leak confidential information covertly to the adversary.
This research develops efficient procedures for detection of malicious
alterations and subtle modifications in integrated circuits. Side-channel signal
analysis methods as well on-chip measurement structures are developed to detect
and localize the inserted Trojans in very deep submicron ICs. Novel design-for-
hardware-trust techniques are developed in this project to increase the
capabilities and effectiveness of the detection and isolation strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the research is the development
of techniques optimized to improve the level of confidence that an IC will carry
out its intended function and nothing more. The broader impact is (i) the
development of techniques for hardware authentication that would be of interests
to US government, agencies and many fab-less semiconductor companies, (ii) the
societal benefits that include trustworthy electronics for healthcare, defense
weapons and dependable computing platforms for intelligence, weather
forecasting, and transportation, (iii) the education of undergraduate and
graduate students, (iv) the development of new courses, and (v) the
dissemination of data and methodologies to researchers in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;