* 0844212
* What controls the isotopic signature of terrestrial organic carbon? A biomarker study of the Paleocene and Eocene section in the Bighorn Basin (WY, USA)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2011
* USD 96,744.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act&lt;br/&gt;of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Earth's climate is warming at a pace
and &lt;br/&gt;magnitude unprecedented in recent times, with profound (but not
easily&lt;br/&gt;predicted) consequences for terrestrial ecology and hydrology.
Carbon&lt;br/&gt;isotopic signatures are an important tool for geologists
studying&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial environmental change on long time scales.
However, carbon&lt;br/&gt;isotopic signatures can vary widely and work on modern
plants reveals &lt;br/&gt;both environment and community composition can be
equally significant&lt;br/&gt;influences. Although secular carbon isotope
variations of atmospheric &lt;br/&gt;carbon dioxide are certainly transferred
into ancient plant carbon, &lt;br/&gt;and thus soil carbon, so also are
ecophysiological differences (e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;phylogeny, leaf habit, water
use)that modulate carbon isotope &lt;br/&gt;fractionation between plant biomass
and carbon dioxide and as well &lt;br/&gt;as carbon from other inputs such as
microbes or weathered carbon. Work&lt;br/&gt;supported by this grant will
evaluate the relative importance of &lt;br/&gt;environment versus community
composition as major mechanisms controlling &lt;br/&gt;carbon isotope values and
molecular signatures of terrestrial plant &lt;br/&gt;inputs in the ancient soils
and terrestrial sediments in the Paleocene&lt;br/&gt;and Eocene of the Bighorn
Basin (WY, USA) across both short term (PETM) &lt;br/&gt;and more protracted
(Eocene) global warming.