* 0844667
* CAREER: Theoretical Interpretation of the Large Hadron Collider Data
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Maxim Perelstein, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 01/31/2015
* USD 401,071.00

In the next few years, the experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
CERN will for the first time probe the electroweak scale directly. The LHC data
will certainly trigger dramatic progress in our understanding of physics at this
scale. The main goal of the PI?s research in the LHC era will be to contribute
to this progress by providing theoretical interpretation of the data. His
research will be data-driven. The projects include understanding the ?space of
possibilities? for new physics. Some of his immediate efforts will be focused on
building and analyzing candidate models. His research will be involves in
understanding which observables can be used to discriminate between various
proposed models, and, once the correct model is established, to determine its
parameters. The PI has investigated collider phenomenology related to a variety
of new physics scenarios, including supersymmetry, models with extra dimensions,
Little Higgs models, and Higgs-less models. His present proposal includes
several new projects in this area, including a study of new observables that can
provide unique measurements of s-top-sector parameters in supersymmetric models;
a novel phenomenological framework for describing the Regge states in Randall-
Sundrum models and analyzing their LHC signatures; and a test-case analysis of
the power of the LHC to discriminate between models with similar signatures,
such as supersymmetry and the Little Higgs with T parity. As far as broader
impacts and outreach, the PI proposes to organize professional development
workshops for science teachers in rural upstate New York areas which are
adversely affected by economic and geographic factors. In collaboration with
Lora Hine, the full-time outreach coordinator at the Cornell Laboratory for
Elementary Particle Physics (LEPP), the PI intends to organize one-day
professional development workshops that would bring K-12 science teachers from
such districts to the Cornell campus. The workshops would include tours of CESR
or other scientific facilities, presentations by Cornell scientists including
the PI as well as sessions to help teachers develop lesson plans. This project
would use the extensive outreach infrastructure that already exists at LEPP. In
addition, the PI will perform follow-up visits to schools to observe and
evaluate the use of the materials and lesson plans in the classroom, and to
provide additional support for the teachers as necessary. The second area, which
the PI is involved in is educating the public about the impact that particle
physics is making on society through transfer of technologies originally
developed for particle physics. The PI hopes to document the history of the
known examples of technology transfer and hopes to explain how the unique
environment of particle physics research made these advances possible The PI
also participates in the Research Experience for undergraduates (REU) program at
LEPP both as a mentor and as a lecturer. A significant fraction of the students
in this program come from small liberal-arts colleges and other institutions
with few research opportunities.

