* 0844143
* The Role of Phenotypic Plasticity in the Interpretation of Stratophenetic Patterns in the Paleozoic
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Andrew Webber, Cincinnati Museum Center
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 03/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The Role of Phenotypic Plasticity in the Interpretation of Stratophenetic
Patterns in the Paleozoic&lt;br/&gt;Brenda R. Hanke and Andrew J.
Webber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many evolutionary studies focus on how populations
of organisms adapt and change in the face of environmental changes. The raw
material upon which natural selection acts is plasticity, or variability, in an
organism?s phenotypes (the physical expression, such as body size, shape, and
others, of the genetic make-up of an organism). Nearly all phenotypes will show
some plasticity because traits that are expressed result from the interaction of
genetics with environment. The relationship between the plasticity of phenotypes
and variable environmental conditions, however, still requires further
understanding. While numerous biological studies have addressed this
relationship with modern organisms, even extending into the young fossil record,
this area of research has been lacking in settings that are much older. The
power of the fossil record is that it allows us to measure changes within a
species over longer time scales; but can paleontology?s contribution to
evolutionary biology improve our understanding of the relationship between
phenotype and environment over time? There are two primary steps in achieving
this goal: 1. the geographic distribution of phenotypic variability within a
species and how it corresponds to spatial environmental gradients (known as a
reaction norm) must be accurately documented. 2. The reaction norm for a species
must then be evaluated over time.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
describe the relationship between paleoenvironmental conditions and variability
in the shape of two trilobite species within rocks of the Kope Formation
(Ordovician Period, around 450 million years old). In this study, morphology is
measured using geometric morphometrics, which quantifies shape change at high
resolution. Paleoenvironmental change is measured through gradient analysis,
which uses the distribution and abundance of fossil remains to characterize
environment. Preliminary research shows a statistically significant portion of
shape variability in the cranidium (head) of the trilobite Flexicalymene
granulosa is related to the environment in which this species is preserved. This
relationship between shape and environment lead us to propose that patterns of
change through time in this trilobite species is the result of populations
following their preferred environments (also known as environmental tracking).
To test our hypothesis, the next step is to systematically track this
established relationship through time. To this end, we will compare cranidial
shape to general geological interpretations, such as rock type, of environment,
and to a quantified measure of environment acquired through gradient analysis in
the Kope Formation. Intensive field work conducted over the next three years
will provide a comprehensive dataset of trilobite cranidial shape and
environment through time and space from which to test our
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;This study has direct implications for understanding how
variation within a trilobite species contributes to evolution within trilobites
as a group. It compares morphological change to a high-resolution measure of
environmental change using a novel approach, which can be used on many organisms
in many geological settings. An important component of this study will be the
integration of scientific research with science education through a workshop
developed at Cincinnati Museum Center designed to provide training for regional
science teachers in geology and paleontology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;