* 0844409
* CAREER:  Vibrio vulnificus an emerging hybrid species with high genome plasticity that facilitates interactions with its environment
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2015
* Fidelma Boyd, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2015
* USD 800,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the emergence of pathogenic
strains of microbes, using Vibrio vulnificus, which is an important bacterial
component of the aquatic coastal ecosystem that is abundant in summer months in
sea sediment, zooplankton, and molluscs. V. vulnificus is a fish pathogen that
causes the disease vibriosis and is an opportunistic pathogen of humans. Many
Vibrio species thrive in warmer waters and both their local abundance and their
geographic range have expanded in the last decade, as ocean temperatures have
increased. Some environmental isolates of V. vulnificus cause severe disease
with mortality rates over 50%, but how and why these strains develop is an
enigma. This project will apply an array of modern molecular genetic approaches,
ranging from phylogeographic analyses to ecological genomics, to advance
understanding of the genetic events that allow virulent isolates to emerge and
to evaluate the association of such events with climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will advance the still rudimentary
understanding of microbial evolution and adaptation to the changing aquatic
environment. It will develop V vulnificus as a model organism for understanding
the emergence of pathogenic microbes and the role of global environmental change
in this process. This CAREER project includes extensive outreach and educational
contributions, including the mentoring and research-based training of many high
school and undergraduate students, two PhD students, a post-doctoral researcher,
and K-12 teachers. Additionally, a public website will be developed to
disseminate research results and other information on Vibrio. &lt;br/&gt;