* 0844647
* CAREER: Simultaneous Measurement of Wall Deformation and 3-D Flow Structures for Flow-Structure Interaction Investigations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Jian Sheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 400,002.00

CBET-0748149&lt;br/&gt;Sheng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and modeling of
complex interactions at the interface between a flowing fluid and a highly
flexible solid boundary present major challenges with many applications in
engineering and biology. This problem is particularly difficult to model when
the bulk flow is time dependent or pulsatile. Flow control using biological
surfaces or noise cancellation with compliant surfaces has received considerable
attention from various research communities for studying cardiovascular
disorders and Alzheimer neurological degeneration. Despite rapid advances in
computational methods and theoretical development, complex interactions between
deformable surfaces and near-wall flow remain only partially understood,
hampering efforts to develop accurate models. Detailed experimental data are
essential for guiding and validating modeling efforts. The PI's goal is to
harness the momentum gathered during recent development of a cutting-edge 3-D
imaging technique, digital holographic microscopy (DHM), to develop a technique
to observe and quantify complex interactions at the interface directly. DHM will
measure the wall deformation and 3-D velocity field near it simultaneously. The
concurrent measurements are achieved by recording and tracking two groups of
particles, one embedded in the deforming wall and the other located in the flow
near it. DHM is uniquely capable of performing this task in 3-D. Subsequently,
the technique will be extended to measure the distributions of pressure and
stresses along the deforming wall. To provide unobstructed view on sample area,
measurements will be performed in a special optically index-matched facility.
This research includes development of instrumentation, an index-matched facility
and methodology for all interfaces. This measurement technique will be applied
to study three cases of interactions of a pulsating near wall flow with a
deformable surface: Pulsating flow over homogeneous compliant surface intended
to identify the similarities and differences in flow structure, wall stress and
pressure distributions between rigid and compliant walls; a surface with a
sudden change in compliance, intended to examine the role of compliance
inhomogeneity in the generation of near wall flow structures and their impact on
pressure and wall stress distribution; and motion of deformable droplets over a
compliant surface, intended to quantify interactions among droplets, surrounding
fluids and a deformable surface. Index-matched droplets with embedded particles
with be developed for this phase. Conditional sampling over wide range of fluid
features such as near wall coherent structure, wall stress distribution,
pressure conditioned on wall deformation will obtain deformation-induced changes
in flow characteristics. One can also assess the contribution of flow to wall
deformation by conditioning upon certain flow characteristics, and from directly
measuring surface forces. Analysis will provide two-way coupling mechanism
between hydrodynamic loading and surface deformation. This measurement is
expected to help understand this fundamental topic with wide range of
applications in both engineering and biology. It will provide benefits to
society, such as better healthcare through accurate decease diagnosis and
patient specific risk assessment. The impacts of the research are expected to be
broad. By extending DHM technique to fully quantify 3-D near wall flow and wall
deformation, especially instantaneous pressure and wall stress distributions,
the technique has a potential of changing the landscape of the research field
and may lead to groundbreaking discoveries. The combination of research and
educational activities will lay the foundations for a successful, well-rounded
academic career. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the
research, and the interdisciplinary nature of this work will be reflected in the
PI's approach to teaching and advising. The present educational plan is focused
on expanding the popularity of digital holography by developing a kit that can
record digital holograms using readily available cell-phone cameras. The
software will be available for download, and will be advertised through teen
popular websites like Facebook, MySpace, to reach a large audience and to
recruit new diverse engineering students.