* 0844825
* CAREER: Observational Signatures of Fundamental Physics in the Cosmos
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Rachel Bean, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* joan wrobel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 627,814.00

Arguably, both dark energy and inflation can currently be viewed more as
paradigms than theories, since a compelling, underlying mechanism for each is
still to be found. By contrast, the precision, angular coverage and depth of
astrophysical observations are increasing at an impressive rate. Crucially, a
number of multi-color imaging and spectroscopic large scale structure surveys
are taking observations, or are being actively developed. Dr. Rachel Bean
(Cornell University) will establish the required theoretical tools and
observational requirements to ensure that the large scale structure cosmological
surveys in progress, or being developed, in the coming five years will be
optimally applied to decipher and constrain the full array of signatures that
dark energy and inflation can leave. The work will also detail the observational
implications of tightly delineated theories of brane inflation and alternative
theories of gravity that promise distinctive properties, but which have not, as
yet, been studied in the necessary detail. In combination, these approaches will
yield an improved insight into the physical origins of these two, major,
outstanding questions in cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program to
be carried out under this award actively involves training of undergraduate and
graduate students. One emphasis is on increasing interaction between the Cornell
Physics and Astronomy students, giving each opportunities to develop both an
understanding of, and research experience in, the underlying theories and how
experimental data are used to judge a theory's merit. Dr. Bean will also develop
a middle-school "Afterschool Universe" program in astronomy and cosmology, in
collaboration with the Cornell Department of Astronomy education and public
outreach (EPO) coordinator. The joint goal of Dr. Bean and the EPO coordinator
is specifically to increase opportunities and involvement in physical sciences
for under-represented communities in the upstate New York region. In addition,
Dr. Bean will continue giving lectures on topics in fundamental physics and the
"cosmos as the ultimate laboratory" for New York State school teachers with the
Cornell Center for Nanoscale Science Institute for Physics Teachers. Dr. Bean
will also make a second online lecture for the Cornell Adult University "Cyber-
Tower". The materials associated with the lectures, and the online lectures
themselves, will be available online to educators and the public.