* 0844682
* CAREER:  Integrated Computational Optical Framework for Quantitative Space-Variant Imaging in Live-Cell Fluorescence Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Chrysanthe Preza, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2015
* USD 791,402.00

CAREER: Integrated computational optical framework for quantitative space-
variant imaging in live-cell fluorescence microscopy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is developing new computational methods to integrate with a novel
optical non-scanning imaging system design to enable fast live-cell fluorescence
microscopy imaging with high, isotropic 3D resolution. The PI has pioneered
computational methods for DIC microscopy. This work addresses a key challenge in
live-cell microscopy of accounting for aberrations due to ?thick? biological
specimens. Refractive index (RI) mismatch and heterogeneity within thick samples
produce image distortions that worsen with imaging depth in conventional
microscopes. Commercially available deconvolution methods do not account for
these distortions. To address this issue, the PI is utilizing computational
Differential Interference Contrast (DIC) microscopy to develop new corrective
methodologies and integrate computational development into a new system design
using a computational optical sensing and imaging (COSI) system approach. This
is a novel and innovative application of adaptive optics. Specific research is
developing mathematical models that can accurately predict data acquired with a
wide-field imaging system; using model-based data processing algorithms to
estimate accurate fluorescence concentration in 3D images and developing a
software package for the user community. Performance and utility of the new
methods is being tested on cytoskeletal proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact activities are diverse and innovative. The PI is developing
coursework that integrates imaging science and optical systems to complement
research in computational imaging for microscopy and COSI system design. The PI
is establishing cross-disciplinary participation in her courses, particularly
among engineering, biological sciences, and pre-medicine majors. A
interdisciplinary certificate program with concentration in Microscopy will
result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s commitment to multidisciplinary education
and outreach is preparing the next generation of biological researchers and
engineers for work at the intersection of biology, computational science and
engineering disciplines where significant advances are expected to further
revolutionize science.&lt;br/&gt;