* 0844569
* CAREER:  Exploiting Instruction-Based and User-Behavior-Based Prediction for Energy and Performance Management in Operating Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Christopher Gniady, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 463,912.00

Improving energy efficiency is critical since future users will demand mobile
devices with even longer battery life or higher performance stationary systems
that are cost effective to operate even when energy costs increase. The
challenge that efficient energy management faces is matching the power state of
the system resources to the application or user demand. The goal is to reduce
energy consumption by keeping the device in the low-power state when not used,
but at the same time provide high response when the demand for the device
arrives. Current solutions are either not transparent and require programmer
involvement, or are less effective in reducing energy consumption and can expose
significant delays to the application and the user. The goal of the proposed
work is to design a fully autonomous and unified system that will transparently
examine and adapt to application demands of both interactive as well as non-
interactive applications in the current and future systems. This goal will be
achieved through highly detailed user and application behavior monitoring in the
operating system for interactive system, and application monitoring for non-
interactive server type systems. Capturing and understanding such user and
application behavior is critical in meeting user demand for high performance
while saving energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve students in
designing and evaluating energy-efficient mechanisms for various system
components and device types through in-class assignments as well as independent
studies. The projects and assignments will provide students with better
understanding of the challenges that they will face in their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;