* 0844491
* CAREER:   Circadian Control of Cell Division and Homeostasis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Carla Finkielstein, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Suzanne Barbour
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,081,348.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; Circadian
rhythms are mechanisms that measure time on a scale of about 24 h and adjust
physiological processes to external environmental signals. Core circadian clock
genes are defined as genes whose protein products are necessary components for
the generation and regulation of circadian rhythms. Increasing evidence points
to functional links between these proteins and cell division. Like the cell
cycle network, circadian oscillation relies on autoregulatory loops generated by
sequential phases of transcription/translation, protein modification, and
degradation. Several studies have shown that approximately 7% of all known
circadian controlled genes regulate either cell division or apoptosis. Although
efforts have been made to identify circadian-controlled genes regulating cell-
cycle progression and cell death, little is known about the metabolic signals
modulating circadian regulation of gene expression. The primary goal of this
project is to address the fundamental problem of how circadian factors sense
metabolic changes and, consequently, act in cell-fate decisions. Here, a multi-
technique approach, spanning from the atomic to the cellular level, will be used
to elucidate the structural-functional properties of circadian transcription
factors. The objectives are to i) define crosstalk mechanisms among cell cycle,
circadian and metabolic components that influence cell cycle transitions ii)
study the significance of metabolic signals for circadian rhythmicity and in
cell death processes, and iii) determine the structural basis for sensing
metabolic changes by circadian proteins. This project will help advance various
areas of research by providing a mechanistic explanation for physiological
changes accompanying cell division and by elucidating more fully the interplay
among cellular mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; As
the world economic base shifts increasingly towards technology, student
participation and achievement in science is becoming increasingly important.
Students need to understand that early involvement in science can open gates
into all domains of academia and employment. In turn, professors must provide
quality education to prepare their students to live and work in a world
transformed by technological growth, international competitiveness, economic
globalization, and increasing demographic shifts. This research initiative
focuses on recruiting and training high school students and college
undergraduates through research internships, which will provide them one-on-one,
intensive experiences. These laboratory internships will permit students to
develop an understanding of science concepts and skills and will produce deeper,
more personal relationships with practicing scientists who can serve as role
models and mentors. Through this project, efforts will focus on recruiting K-12
students from rural and urban areas in southwest Virginia while fostering
undergraduate education. A second, and equally ambitious, goal of this
initiative is to help resolve the scientific needs and technological challenges
of our society and those in developing countries, specifically in Latin America.
Here, the program focuses on two areas: secondary school education and graduate
level training. The proposed research initiative includes components for
training high school and graduate students from both Virginia and Latin America
in advanced technologies in molecular biology while fostering social
interactions and promoting collaborations with international institutions.