* 0844715
* Cyclic nucleotide gated Ca channels and non-self perception in plant pathogen defense responses
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Gerald Berkowitz, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2013
* USD 576,712.00

A fundamental aspect of organism fitness involves the detection of a "non-self"
presence in the extracellular environment. In the case of a pathogenic microbe
invader, perception of non-self presence needs to be translated through a
cellular signal transduction cascade so that the cells of the organism under
attack can mount a defense or immune response. The aim of this project is to
provide new insights into the early events of pathogen perception in plant
cells. Prior research has shown that calcium (Ca) flow into the cytoplasm of
cells through a cyclic nucleotide gated cation channel (CNGC) protein, and
downstream nitric oxide (NO) generation were critical to the plant immune
response signaling cascades. The research focus of this project will take
advantage of our understanding of the molecular architecture related to CNGC
function and regulation to elucidate further steps in this signaling cascade.
Hypotheses will be tested regarding the signaling steps upstream from inward Ca
conduction by this CNGC; i.e. linking pathogen perception to channel activation.
Work will determine if and how cyclic nucleotide elevation occurs in plant cells
responding to pathogen recognition. One component of the project aims to examine
some plant cell membrane receptor proteins for possible ability to generate
cyclic nucleotide, the signaling molecule that activates Ca conduction through
CNGCs. Other studies will focus on identifying regulatory molecules that may
impact activation of the CNGC channels, and therefore modulate plant immune
response to pathogens.&lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts. Project activity includes use
of an innovative molecular genetics teacher-training program for outreach and
education efforts. This two-week full day program trains participants in
molecular genetics experimental methods and underlying principles in an
integrated fashion. Participants are trained, and provided with a package of
tools and resources (informational and biological) to allow them to present a
molecular biology experiential lab educational program in high school biology
classes. This program includes a package (developed for use as part of this
project) of PowerPoint presentations, protein modeling software, lab lesson
plans, teacher's guides, an 80-page molecular genetics lab manual, an annotated
catalog of web resources to assist high school teachers in obtaining biological
and informational resources, and more. As part of the proposed broader impacts
of the project, the two-week training program based on this material will be
delivered to five undergraduate School of Education students as well as five
current high school biology teachers each summer during the funding period.
Assistance will be provided to high school teachers as they implement the
program in schools throughout the State. All of the information in the teacher-
training program and high school lab curriculum will be posted on a URL and made
available to a wide audience of high school biology teachers through this and
other web sites. The educational component of the project includes continued
training of a current female African-American graduate student who will
undertake research objectives of the project as part of her Ph.D. degree.