* 0844765
* CAREER: Novel Geometric Techniques for Optimal Surface Detection in Medical Images
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Xiaodong Wu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 03/31/2015
* USD 420,898.00

CAREER: Novel Geometric Techniques for Optimal Surface Detection &lt;br/&gt;in
Medical Images&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Xiaodong Wu&lt;br/&gt;Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Department of Radiation
Oncology&lt;br/&gt;The University of Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automated
detection of globally optimal surfaces representing object boundaries in
volumetric images is fundamental and remains challenging in modern computer-
assisted medical diagnosis and treatment as well as other important medical
applications. The analyses of 3-D data are typically performed visually in
routine clinical practice, and are done in 2-D on a slice-by-slice basis.
Maximum intensity projections providing 2-D images of the 3-D data or
qualitative volume renderings are also common. However, reliable quantitative
volumetric 3-D and 4-D segmentation methods that are robust, user-friendly, and
applicable to clinical practice are not routinely available. As such, a
significant and possibly critical portion of the image information available in
the acquired data may unfortunately be never used for clinical diagnostic
purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves directly addressing the
needs of automated segmentation and will result in novel methodologies and
practical tools that greatly accelerate the pace of medical image analysis. The
investigator studies the specific problems of optimally detecting single and
multiple interacting surfaces in volumetric medical images. Surfaces with high-
order smoothness are of particular interest. The newly introduced edge-weighted
geometric graph representation for the surface detection problems allows
incorporating a wide spectrum of image features into the formulation, admitting
highly accurate segmentation results. However, it also brings tremendous
computational challenges. The target geometric problems include highly smooth
surface identification, geometric layer partitioning, surface reconstruction
from noisy data, digital rays, constrained k-means clustering, and geometric
multiple labeling. The application of computational geometry techniques to
medical imaging is intellectually deep and will result in advances in both
computational geometry and medicine. An important goal of this research is
dissemination of implemented algorithms in software to medical domains. In doing
this, it can help to further integrate computer science with medicine. Beyond
its research impact, the educational goal of this project is to facilitate the
institution-wide effort to foster and promote the extension of the strength of
biomedical research at the University of Iowa to successful interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;