* 0844593
* CAREER: The chemistry and biology of halogenated natural products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Scott Snyder, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 678,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in
the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Scott A.
Snyder of the Department of Chemistry at Columbia University will develop new
approaches for the asymmetric halogenation of alkenes by exploring novel classes
of electrophilic halogen reagents and surrogates. The success of these efforts
will provide the first way to achieve asymmetric halogenation of unactivated
olefins as well as direct and indirect halonium-induced cation-pi cyclizations.
The addition of these reactions to the synthetic chemistry toolbox would finally
make possible the synthesis of dozens of unsolved natural product architectures
that possess halogen atoms in combination with unique, and largely unexplored,
chemical biology profiles. It should also elucidate principles in reagent design
and synthetic strategy that may help to solve other significant challenges.

In addition, the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
will enable Professor Snyder to utilize the power of natural products synthesis
and reaction design to expand the number and diversity of students pursuing
STEM-based careers. These efforts will be focused on both the high school and
undergraduate levels. First, Professor Snyder will offer students and teachers
from local high schools in the New York City area, particularly public schools
with high socioeconomic diversity, an opportunity to participate in a specially
tailored experiential visit day at Columbia University, followed by a chance to
work in Professor Snyder's laboratory for eight weeks. In the laboratory, they
will work on a challenging chemical research problem and develop an experiment
that can be utilized in the school's laboratory program for years to come.
Second, Professor Snyder will create an inquiry-based laboratory program for
Columbia's introductory undergraduate organic chemistry program based on a
natural product total synthesis. This concept is meant to modernize the teaching
curriculum, better marry its objectives across lecture and laboratory settings,
and best illustrate to undergraduates the real nature and excitement of
synthetic organic chemistry.