* 0844957
* CAREER:   A Wireless Implantable Microsystem with Ultra Wideband Communication Capability for High-Density Brain Monitoring
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2015
* Pedram Mohseni, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2015
* USD 674,937.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Understanding the inner workings of the brain remains one of
the last frontiers in all of neurobiology. Large gaps in our knowledge exist,
because of the inherent difficulty in studying brain function. Indeed, this
organ, which contains trillions of neurons, intricately interconnected, is
decidedly complex. The brain also fundamentally works by a combination of fast
information- carrying electrical signals called action potentials, and chemical
neurotransmitters acting on fast time scales in microscopic conjunctions between
neurons called synapses. It is thus not surprising that the development of new
techniques for monitoring brain activity is critical to the continued success in
advancing the field of neurobiology. This CAREER project focuses on new
instrumentation supporting microsensor measurements for the study of the brain .
Great strides have been made over the last few years in developing multisite
microsensors for monitoring both the chemical and electrical signals in the
brain. In sharp contrast, development of instruments supporting these powerful
new microsensors has lagged behind considerably. The two main technical
limitations of existing devices are large size and high power needs.
Specifically in this CAREER project, a miniaturized low-power device will be
developed to support neurobiological experiments in small laboratory animals.
This new instrument will simultaneously record from multiple microsensors
measuring neurotransmitters and action potentials in real time, i.e., as these
signals happen, during behavior. A state-of-the-art engineering method called
very-large-scale-integration (VLSI) will be used to fabricate the device,
roughly the size of a common cold capsule. Because of its small size and low
power consumption, miniature batteries can serve as the power supply. To permit
natural behavior by the animal during experiments, this device will be safely
implanted under the skin and will transmit recorded brain signals wirelessly
using an ultra wideband (UWB) telemetry link. The new device will be further
tested in animal experiments investigating the role of dopamine in goal-directed
behavior. This important neurotransmitter is critically involved in the brain
functions of motivation and learning, yet its precise role has eluded definition
despite decades of extensive study. In the short-term, project information such
as system architecture, design schematics, performance assessment results, and
neurobiological findings will be disseminated through publications/presentations
in journals/conferences that target engineering and neuroscience communities. In
the long-term, the PI will seek to make the device available to qualified
researchers in the scientific community through commercialization. Such devices
should ultimately be commercially viable, due to the interest they will receive
from a broad base of investigators working in the neuroscience fields, but also
because they can evolve to accommodate additional sensor technologies that
emerge in the future. As part of the educational plan of this CAREER project,
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to conduct interdisciplinary
research in engineering and science. Moreover, this CAREER project recognizes
the importance of an integrated approach to value creation, spanning the
continuum of innovative ideas to start-up enterprise creation. Therefore, a
centerpiece of its educational effort is to provide engineering students with a
mechanism to learn the fundamentals of technology opportunity assessment. This
will provide an invaluable opportunity for the students to thoroughly assess
their research ideas from both the technological feasibility and
commercialization viability standpoints. They are expected to learn that there
are not many 'absolute truths', but numerous best practices and benchmarks that
can help the entrepreneurial engineer.