* 0844404
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Ecological and evolutionary responses to environmental change in Sierra Nevada populations of a montane willow beetle
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Nathan Rank, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2015
* USD 406,365.00

Last Modified Date: 12/31/08 Last Modified By: Pamela K. Diggle Abstract
Organisms in nature live in populations that may remain stable, grow, fluctuate
in size, or go extinct. The physical environment, the presence of natural
enemies, the genetic properties of a population and the abilities of individuals
to adapt to the environment all influence population size and persistence. As
ecosystems experience rapid climate change, it is imperative to understand how
environmental and genetic variation affects the persistence of vulnerable
populations. To focus on this critical problem, populations of a native willow
beetle experiencing extreme climatic conditions in the Sierra Nevada Mountains
of California will be investigated. Populations studied for over a decade will
be characterized using markers of genetic variation and environmental
adaptation. Changes in population size will be related to these markers, to
local topography, and to climatic conditions assessed by continuously recording
weather loggers. Historical samples from these populations, some of which are
now extinct, will be included in this analysis, offering a rare opportunity to
analyze changes in populations for which the past environment is characterized.
Experiments quantifying reproduction, larval survival, and adult over-wintering
survival will assess potential mechanisms contributing to population persistence
for beetles of differing genetic and environmental backgrounds.

Findings will provide unique insights into the ability of organisms to cope with
and adapt to a rapidly changing environment, and will enhance understanding of
the effects of genetic and environmental variation on ecological interactions
among species. This project continues a unique, long-term population and climate
dataset, and will thus provide a substantive contribution to knowledge of the
effects of global climate change on natural systems. Finally, this program will
support and mentor a large number of undergraduates, including groups
traditionally underrepresented in environmental biology, working in the
laboratory and field as a collaborative, interdisciplinary team.