* 0844968
* CAREER:   A Genomics Approach to Identifying the Factors Influencing Phylogenetic Accuracy
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Antonis Rokas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 688,129.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phylogenetic trees are the foundation
of all comparative biology. Because phylogenetic relationships among many groups
of organisms are still poorly understood, the identification of the factors
compromising accuracy in molecular phylogenies is critical for improving the
accuracy of the tree of life. The yeasts represent a superb model to address
this question, due to the abundance of genomic data for the group. This project
will analyze numerous yeast genomes to: identify the complete set of molecular
markers across yeasts; obtain an accurate phylogeny of yeasts; and to identify
the factors that negatively influence the phylogenetic utility of certain
molecular markers. The outcomes of the proposed research will aid the generation
of a more accurate tree of life, and the development of statistical methodology
for overcoming the effects of factors that compromise phylogenetic
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information conveyed by phylogenies is a
cornerstone of evolutionary theory, the central organizing principle of biology.
However, the meaning of phylogenies is frequently misinterpreted by students and
professionals alike. To promote understanding of phylogenetics across the
educational continuum, the project will involve (i) training of high school
teachers and students on the principles and concepts of phylogenetics, (ii)
development of an undergraduate course which will integrate research results
into the curriculum of the science classroom and laboratory, and (iii) training
of the next generation of scientists in the PI's laboratory.