* 0844478
* CAREER:   Bioorganic Research at USM. Development of Novel Somatostatin and Neurotensin Analogues
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,01/31/2016
* Douglas Masterson, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 01/31/2016
* USD 812,455.00

Amino acids are the building blocks of life and are used in biology to prepare
important materials of various types (i.e. proteins, peptides, hormones, etc).
Small peptides have shown to be biologically active and can be used in a variety
of situations. However, small peptides are frequently degraded by the presence
of endogenous enzymes ultimately reducing their ability to achieve their
biological function in an efficient manner. Unnatural amino acids, i.e. amino
acids that are either not found or only rarely found in nature, have shown an
ability to impart stability to small peptides towards enzymatic degradation. The
Masterson Research Group (MRG) is particularly interested in two small peptides
(Somatostatin and Neurotensin), which show a wide range of biological activity.
The MRG has developed techniques that allow for the preparation of a variety of
unnatural amino acids from a common synthetic intermediate. The synthetic
strategy developed by the MRG allows for the parallel preparation of a variety
of unnatural amino acids of importance to Somatostatin and Neurotensin. The
unnatural amino acids will be used to replace specific amino acids in
Somatostatin and Neurotensin. The peptide analogues will be tested for their
ability to resist degradation by enzymes and for their ability to carry out
their biological function. It is a key aim of this research to expand the scope
of the techniques developed by the MRG to prepare a wide variety of novel
unnatural amino acids and study their effect on peptide stability and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Project: The methods
developed in this research will have a broad impact to the scientific community
by providing efficient methods of preparing unnatural amino acids. The peptides
prepared in this project will also provide valuable information on the
structure-function relationships for Somatostatin and Neurotensin. The methods
and materials will find broad applicability in bioorganic and materials
sciences. The project is an interdisciplinary project that merges the areas of
enzymology, traditional organic synthesis, biological chemistry, and mass
spectrometry into a single project relevant to the biological sciences and
chemistry. The project will allow for the training of the next generation of
scientists in the state of Mississippi and will provide significant educational
opportunities for graduate research assistants, undergraduate students, and
economically disadvantaged high school student participants. The project will
use some of the developed methodology from the MRG to teach a class at the
graduate level. The class is titled "Mass Spectrometry: Useful for more than
m/z" and will train graduate students on the use of NSF-funded mass spectrometry
facilities at USM. The course will utilize an assay developed in the MRG to
determine enantioselectivity from an enzymatic hydrolysis reaction (a process
that is central to the synthetic methodology described above). The students will
learn how to use the facilities so that they can make use of them in their own
research endeavors and the MRG will be able to use the course to obtain the much
needed data from the assays that the students will perform during the course.
Mass spectrometry has become a routine method of analyzing a variety of
molecules and the students who successfully complete the course will have gained
skills that are transferable to a variety of job opportunities. The acquired
skills will make the students highly competitive in an ever changing global job
market.