* 0844749
* CAREER:   A Structure-Based Approach to Transcription Factor-Binding Site Prediction via Protein-DNA Docking
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Jun-tao Guo, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2015
* USD 765,392.00

(This award is funded through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009: Public Law 111-5).

This is a CAREER award to support the research of Dr. Juntao Guo in the College
of Computing and Informatics at the University of North Carolina - Charlotte.
Dr. Guo is a second-year, tenure-track Assistant Professor. Advancing our
knowledge of protein-DNA interaction mechanisms has implications for many
aspects of biology including systems biology and evolution. Structure-based
approaches will be used in the PI?s lab to investigate protein-DNA interactions,
with a focus on gaining insight into the control of gene regulatory networks.
This project is developing computational methods and the data and infrastructure
resources required for genomic scale prediction of transcription factor (TF)
binding sites by modeling protein-DNA interactions. A 3-dimensional structure of
a transcription factor and a DNA sequence will be used to predict a protein-DNA
complex model and the resulting binding model will then be used to predict the
binding sites of the transcription factor. Results of this research will be a
comprehensive protein-DNA complex structure database and benchmark sets for
testing the results, algorithms for protein-DNA docking at two levels of
resolution, structure-based methods for genome-scale TF-binding site prediction
and a fully automated prediction server. The database and webserver will be
available on the PI?s website: http://cciweb.uncc.edu/~jguo4/

As a part of his CAREER plan, Dr. Guo will develop free publicly accessible
infrastructure. Further, the PI is working closely with the Diversity in
Information Technology Institute (DITI) and the STARS Alliance at UNC Charlotte
to encourage participation of undergraduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, in bioinformatics research. The PI will also play an
active role in the Summer Institutes for Teaching Excellence (SITE) program
offered by the Center for Mathematics, Science, and Technology Education (CMSTE)
at UNC Charlotte to educate high school teachers. Finally, these research
activities will be integrated into the bioinformatics education efforts in the
newly established Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics at the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte.