* 0844512
* CAREER:   Understanding the Logic of Chaperone-Assisted Protein Folding in Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jason Gestwicki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 743,070.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. When new proteins
are synthesized, they emerge in an extended, linear conformation and must be
folded into their final, three-dimensional shapes before they acquire function.
The cellular network responsible for supervising this process includes a large
family of molecular chaperones. Chaperones bind to unfolded proteins and direct
them towards a folded state; however, these same chaperones can also direct
terminally misfolded proteins to the proteasome for degradation. This CAREER
proposal will explore how chaperones make this critical decision to fold or
degrade proteins. The specific approach is to acutely perturb this system with
new chemical probes to understand how specific chaperone components contribute.
This discovery process is expected to provide new insights into how chaperones
govern protein folding in the complex environment of the
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. A key educational goal of this CAREER
project is to illuminate the benefits that originate at the interface between
chemical methodologies, fundamental biological inquiries and enabling scientific
instrumentation. Towards this goal, chaperones will be distributed to groups of
young high school and undergraduate scientists-in-training for chemical
screening, in collaboration with the University of Michigan's Center for
Chemical Genomics. The goals of this effort are two-fold: (a) to broaden the
scientific impact of the CAREER project through expanded screening of potential
chaperone targets and (b) to mentor and educate young scientists about modern
discovery methods, using high-end equipment not typically available in the
average teaching laboratory. In this task, the teamwork and excitement required
to address important questions in modern chemical biology will be highlighted.