* 0845002
* CAREER:    Multiscale investigations of micromechanics of cytoskeletal protofilaments
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Ruxandra Dima, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 611,521.00

Research: Tension applied to cells during their interaction with other cells or
with their environment leads to their deformation and induces changes in protein
synthesis and membrane properties. Filaments in the cell such as actin and
microtubules mediate the action of force through their mechanical properties and
their extensive communications with cellular co-factors. Fast reorganization of
cytoskeletal filaments under applied forces is required during cell migration,
which is important for development and tissue repair and regeneration. Moreover,
muscle cells that exist primarily to generate force all use the molecular motor
comprised of actin filaments and a cellular co-factor (myosin) to produce active
contraction. Microtubules are responsible for the controlled directional
movement of chromosomes and other organelles within the cell, which is essential
for correct cell division. Understanding, at the molecular level, the complex
mechanisms whereby cytoskeletal filaments mediate force transmission and the
contribution of each type of filament to the structural stability of the cell is
still a challenge for modern biology. The goal of this research is to elucidate
the effect of forces on the internal organization of the filaments and its
connection with the large-scale mechanical behavior of filaments. Computational
studies of three types will be employed (1) determination of force regimes and
the resulting conformational changes that characterize the response of
cytoskeletal protofilaments to force; (2) elucidation of the force-structure
relationships involved in the severing of filaments by cellular factors;(3)
characterization of the contributions of the topology and the chemistry of
inter-chain bonds to the kinetics of polymerization and depolymerization of
filaments in the presence of tension. The results of these investigations will
be compared and contrasted to a wealth of experimental data on protofilaments.
The new knowledge gained in this project will help provide conceptual guidance
for future investigations into the identity and mechanisms of action of co-
factors with crucial roles in establishing the connection between the mechanics
and the chemistry of the cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Prof.
Dima's long-term career goal is to create a synergy between mentoring, teaching,
and research leading to the training of the future scientific workforce. The
integration of research and education will be accomplished in this project
through the teaching and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students in
multiscale computational approaches to investigate large cellular systems. These
activities, coupled with outreach initiatives aimed at the early introduction of
scientific inquiry to middle school girls from underrepresented minorities, will
prepare the next generation of diverse and broadly trained workforce. Prof.
Dima's work in this project will enhance the educational infrastructure at the
University of Cincinnati by improving undergraduate students' understanding of
Physical Chemistry through implementing cooperative learning and incorporating
research topics into lectures.&lt;br/&gt;