* 0845888
* CAREER: A Complete System for Protein Identification with Computational Approaches
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Chunmei Liu, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Protein identification is a major research perspective in proteomics
holding the promise of signaling and treating diseases. Several techniques have
been developed for protein identification. Among which, tandem mass spectrometry
(MS/MS) is currently the most popular technique used to identify proteins. The
process of identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry is analogous to
identifying a person using his/her fingerprints. Since a MS/MS spectrum usually
is incomplete and contains noise peaks due to contaminants, poor peptide
segmentation, and other technical or biological reasons, it is a challenging
problem to protein identification. The problem becomes more difficult when the
spectrum contains post-translational modifications (PTMs). The presence of PTMs
significantly increases the difficulty of both de novo sequencing and database
search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses this challenging problem of
protein identification with theoretical studies and computational approaches.
This work builds a complete system focusing on identifying proteins by
determining the amino acid sequences of the proteins from their MS/MS spectra.
In particular, for a given experimental tandem mass spectrum, the system
identifies its amino acid sequence and PTMs through a series of activities: (a)
separating different ion types and noises, (b) generating sequence tags, c)
identifying candidate peptide sequences, and (d) verifying the candidate peptide
sequences and identifying PTMs.