* 0845216
* CAREER - Flexibility vs. Preorganization: Atomistic Simulations of Partner Recognition by Natively Unfolded Peptides
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Lillian Chong, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2015
* USD 718,020.00

A substantial fraction of proteins are natively unfolded, or lack well-defined
structure. Many of these proteins fold only upon binding to their partner
proteins, suggesting a new paradigm for protein-protein recognition. This new
paradigm challenges the conventional assumption that proteins bind their
partners more quickly if they are preorganized, adopting structures in their
unbound states that are identical to structures in their bound states. This
CAREER project will reassess this assumption by comparing the rates of partner-
binding by natively unfolded peptides with their exact, preorganized analogues
using atomically detailed computer simulations. Such direct comparison is not
achievable by laboratory experiments. Novel aspects of this research are (a) the
use of the weighted ensemble approach to focus atomistic computer simulations on
the sampling of rare binding events that involve conformational changes, or
changes in the shapes of the binding partners, (b) its implementation within
distributed computing resources to dramatically increase the methodology's
computational reach, and (c) the intention to study realistic binding rates
without forcing the events to occur. Results from this project will advance the
understanding of fundamental principles governing molecular recognition and
could therefore improve strategies for designing highly specific inhibitors of
chosen protein-protein interactions, molecular sensors, and molecular
switches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. With the increasingly
interdisciplinary nature of modern research, it is essential for students to
learn how to give effective scientific presentations to broad audiences. Dr.
Chong has designed and taught an undergraduate course that helps students
develop effective scientific presentations through intensive practice and
feedback throughout the semester. Building on this experience, she will develop
additional approaches for helping students improve their speaking skills. These
approaches include training students to communicate specific concepts in science
within five minutes and packaging these presentations into podcasts and digital
videos. To broaden the outreach of this training, Dr. Chong will encourage
undergraduates from institutions all over the country to create such videos in a
contest that she will organize at a national conference. Goals of this contest
include: a) to help undergraduates develop effective communication skills and b)
to promote interest in the sciences among undergraduates, including minorities.
Finally, Dr. Chong will extend the training to graduate students by designing a
graduate course in giving effective scientific presentations.