* 0845455
* CAREER:   The integrative neurobiology of species recognition
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2015
* David Reed, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2015
* USD 700,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Species recognition is the process by which an animal distinguishes between
members of its own species, conspecifics, from other closely related species,
heterospecifics. Although species recognition has been well studied from
ecological and evolutionary perspectives, there has been little work on its
mechanisms. The investigators will study species recognition from these diverse
perspectives using a novel mammalian model, Alston's singing mouse. The research
aims in this project are 1) To examine interactions between two closely related
singing mice, testing how individual and population-level interactions between
species shape the responses of mice to heterospecific songs. 2) To examine the
neural circuitry underlying species recognition. The investigators will measure
whether Foxp2, a gene implicated in human language, is expressed in the same
neurons that are activated by conspecific song. In the final research aim (3),
the investigators will manipulate Foxp2 expression in both sensory and auditory
structures. This will enable the investigators to understand how (and if) Foxp2
contributes to sensory and motivational processing of mouse song in a way that
might inform our understanding of human speech. Because the mice are remarkably
charismatic, the investigators will use the resulting data in educational
materials targeting diverse groups of students. In the context of undergraduate
education the research findings in combination with several new technologies
(personal response systems based on text-messaging, online learning modules, and
peer-reviewed writing software) will be used to develop innovative new course
content. And lastly, the research data will be incorporated into a series of
learning modules we are developing for use in Science Partners in Inquiry-based
Collaborative Education, an outreach program that targets underperforming middle
schools with high minority enrollments. Together this project promises to
further our understanding of social behavior while streamlining the
incorporation of new findings into the education of the general public.