* 0845296
* CAREER: Non-equilibrium Dynamics in Cuprate Superconductors Studied by Coherent Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Ultrafast Electron Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Nuh Gedik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

Non-Technical abstract:

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This CAREER award funds a project to understand the
mechanism of superconductivity in cuprates by studying dynamics of ultrafast
events taking place at the atomic scale. Superconductivity is the total loss of
electrical resistance below a critical temperature. Currently, copper oxygen
based cuprate superconductors have the highest known transition temperatures.
Even in these materials, the transition temperatures are far below the room
temperature which hinders potential applications and the mechanism of
superconductivity is still not known. This project will use ultrashort laser
pulses to make atomic scale ?movies? of dynamics of electrons and the lattice
structure with both spatial and temporal resolutions. Information obtained from
these measurements will help to understand the complex interactions leading to
high temperature superconductivity in cuprates which may in turn enable
predicting superconductors with higher transition temperatures. A strong
emphasis will be placed on developing education and outreach programs integrated
to the research component of this project. The education component of this
project will enable training of graduate and undergraduate students capable of
applying these techniques to different fields. A graduate level course dedicated
to the application of ultrafast techniques to condensed matter physics will be
developed and its material will be made freely available through the internet.
The outreach part of this program will contribute improving the quality of K-12
math and science education especially in socio-economically impacted regions.
This will be achieved by working closely with math and science oriented charter
schools and education research institutions.

Technical abstract:

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The goal of this Early Faculty CAREER project is to
understand the mechanism of superconductivity in cuprates by studying the
dynamics of their low energy excitations and phase transitions. After
photoexcitation by ultrashort light pulses, the recovery of the resulting non-
equilibrium state will be probed in both space and time using either light or
electron pulses providing information about evolution of electronic and
structural degrees of freedoms. In the high excitation density limit, non-
equilibrium phase transitions will be induced into states that can be either
thermally accessible or completely novel. Studying the dynamics of these phase
changes will provide crucial information about the competing states of these
materials and yield clues about their complex phase diagram. By studying the
weak excitation limit, important insights will be obtained into the nature of
couplings between different internal degrees of freedoms. A strong emphasis will
be placed on developing education and outreach programs integrated to the
research component of this project. The education component of this project will
enable training of graduate and undergraduate students capable of applying these
techniques to different fields. A graduate level course dedicated to the
application of ultrafast techniques to condensed matter physics will be
developed and its material will be made freely available through the internet.
The outreach part of this program will contribute improving the quality of K-12
math and science education especially in socio-economically impacted regions.
This will be achieved by working closely with math and science oriented charter
schools and education research institutions.