* 0845702
* CAREER: Novel Sampling Approaches for Protein Modeling Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Yaohang Li, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Novel Sampling Approaches for Protein Modeling
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yaohang Li&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina A&amp;T
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately modeling protein or protein
complex structure is considered a significant grand challenge that has broad
economic and scientific impact. One of the key obstacles is the absence of a
reliable sampling method that can efficiently explore the tremendously large
protein conformation space. This CAREER project investigates efficient sampling
approaches that can lead to prediction of high resolution protein structures
with accuracy and reliability currently not achievable in computational protein
modeling. The rationale is to integrate various physics- and knowledge-based
scoring functions via multi-scoring functions sampling to explore the complex
protein conformation space. The research work includes 1) establishing
computational models for multi-scoring functions sampling in protein structure
modeling with theoretically and mathematically rigorous justification; 2)
designing novel sampling algorithms to efficiently explore large protein
conformation space; 3) applying the sampling algorithms to important protein
modeling applications including ab initio protein folding and protein-protein
docking; and 4) developing a resource-efficient protein modeling programming
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient sampling approaches developed in
this research can be applied to a variety of important computational biology
applications, which will provide a critical stepping stone toward reliable
resolution improvement in protein models for practical use. Success of high
resolution protein modeling will have significant impact on genomic study,
disease research, bio-energy development, and the drug-design industry. In
addition to its research impact, the educational goal of this CAREER project is
to attract excellent students, particularly the minorities, to participate in
computational biology research and pursue computational science
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;