* 0845472
* CAREER: Spatially Controlled Cellular Behavior in 3D Hydrogels: An Integrated Research, Teaching, and Outreach Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Jason Burdick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0845472&lt;br/&gt;Burdick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
project is to design and develop novel dynamic hydrogels that can be used to
control adult mesenchymal stem cell behavior in 3-dimensions, as well as to
integrate education into the research plan at the university, local, and
international levels. The premise of the work is that further fundamental
knowledge and subsequent control of the cell-environment interactions, gained
through the development of novel biomaterials, will help advance the field. With
this in mind, the governing hypothesis of the proposed work is that hydrogels
with spatially controlled properties can be used to direct and define cellular
spreading, migration, and phenotypes in 3-dimensions, towards the engineering of
complex tissues. The objectives of the research plan are: (1) to synthesize
novel multifunctional macromers that form networks with spatially controlled
properties using sequential crosslinking procedures, (2) to utilize the
synthesized hydrogels to control the spreading and migration of mesenchymal stem
cells and develop structure/outcome relationships, and (3) to assess control
over cellular differentiation in hydrogels through spatially controlled
crosslinking density. The proposed research is multidisciplinary and covers many
fields from polymer science to cellular biology. Limitations in available
materials may have stalled significant advances in the fields of mesenchymal
stem cell biology and tissue regeneration, and thus this work presents an
intellectual advance in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed educational
activities are integrated within this research and include education to graduate
students and undergraduate students in the laboratory and classroom, outreach to
a local high school, and international outreach to a university in Africa. The
specific components include: (1) continued involvement of students, emphasizing
women and minority students, in the principal investigator's laboratory and
integration of a laboratory component for "hands-on" learning into a course on
Biomaterials that is taught to upper-level undergraduate and graduate students;
(2) outreach to students in Philadelphia schools through the development of a
course on 'Materials in the World' that gives high school students exposure to
material science and biomaterials to encourage careers in these fields; and (3)
travel to Ghana, Africa to educate students in the area of biomedical
engineering, a topic that is not encompassed into any current curriculum, and
invitations to students from Africa to join the principal investigator's
laboratory at Penn during the summer months.