* 0845321
* Catalytic Properties and Coordination Chemistry of Heavier Group 11 and 12 Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rasika Dias, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 411,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports the
research efforts of Professor H. V. Rasika Dias of the University of Texas at
Arlington to obtain and study thermally-stable gold and mercury complexes of
carbon monoxide, ethylene, acetylene, and other small alkenes and alkynes.
Novel, metal-catalyzed, carbon-halogen bond activation processes are also under
investigation. Complexes with mercury(II) and gold(I) bonds to small carbon-
based, unsaturated molecules are difficult to isolate. Professor Dias uses
certain weakly coordinating anions as supporting ligands or counter anions for
the stabilization of such species. The crystalline solids of these complexes
display unusually high thermal and air stability. They serve as useful catalysts
for various transformations, including carbon-halogen bond activation chemistry.
Professor Dias and his group are involved in developing web-based methods for
the exchange and dissemination of research results and for the live-delivery of
online courses on various aspects of chemistry. The lecture materials are
especially intended for students in foreign academic institutions with faculty
shortages. Professor Dias is active in mentoring K-12 teachers, high school
students, and undergraduate researchers with diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;