* 0845270
* CAREER: Rotary Clock Technology Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Baris Taskin, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving high quality
synchronization with low power dissipation is a major objective in synchronous
VLSI circuit design at high frequency regimes. In order to meet this objective,
conventional clock design methodologies are constantly being improved. Also,
next-generation alternatives to conventional clocking have been emerging.
Resonant clocking technologies provide operating frequencies and power
dissipation levels that are unprecedented in the state-of-the-art, bulk-CMOS
VLSI IC implementations. These technologies must be characterized for on chip
variations, have robust simulation models and be supported by specific design
flows in order to be viable in high volume production. This project addresses
such challenges in the design and design automation of resonant rotary clocking
technology for high-volume IC production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With improved
nanoscale design characterization and design automation methodologies, rotary
clocking technology can be seamlessly integrated within the mainstream VLSI IC
design flow. The broader impacts of the proposed research are in revolutionizing
the clock synchronization methodology of digital VLSI synchronous circuits for
low-power, multi-GHz operation and providing its sustainability over
semiconductor technology scaling. Proposed low-power, multi-GHz high-performance
clocking operation will have a major impact on all microelectronic systems, from
field-deployable low power sensors to the world's fastest supercomputers. The
research accomplishments will be disseminated through a wiki site and a book.
Another important educational impact is on integrating nano-computing and
technology concepts into computer engineering curriculum. A workshop on
computing is planned for high school students as an integral part of the ongoing
outreach projects in urban Philadelphia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;