* 0845610
* CAREER: Design Principles for Cryptographic Hash Functions: Foundations, Primitives, and Transforms
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Thomas Shrimpton, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Cryptographic hash functions are ubiquitous in modern
cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;They are an integral part of digital signature and
public-key&lt;br/&gt;encryption schemes, access control mechanisms, digital
time-stamping&lt;br/&gt;routines, message authentication codes, and file
synchronization&lt;br/&gt;utilities. They are implemented in point-of-sale
terminals, ATM&lt;br/&gt;machines, operating systems, web browsers, routers, and
mobile phones,&lt;br/&gt;to name just a few. Yet the design and analysis of hash
functions has&lt;br/&gt;received relatively little attention from the
cryptographic community,&lt;br/&gt;a shortcoming underscored by recent high-
profile attacks on the&lt;br/&gt;often-used MD5 and SHA-1 hash
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to advance our understanding of
cryptographic hash&lt;br/&gt;functions in theory and practice by developing
three complementary&lt;br/&gt;themes. First, it further solidifies the formal
foundations of&lt;br/&gt;hashing. This means establishing new and meaningful
notions of what&lt;br/&gt;means for a hash function to be "good". Additionally
it explores the&lt;br/&gt;powers and limitations of new analytic frameworks (for
example,&lt;br/&gt;indifferentiability and human-ignorance), and search for a
sharper&lt;br/&gt;view of design heuristics (in particular the random-oracle
and&lt;br/&gt;ideal-cipher models.) Second, it investigates the design of
"small"&lt;br/&gt;hash functions, called compression functions, with small
domains and&lt;br/&gt;fixed ranges. Designs based on permutations, blockciphers
and&lt;br/&gt;tweakable blockciphers are especially interesting. Third, it
develops&lt;br/&gt;methods for transforming compression functions into "big"
hash&lt;br/&gt;functions with flexible domains and ranges; traditionally, the
range&lt;br/&gt;of a hash function is a string of a single fixed length.
Also&lt;br/&gt;targetted is the problem of combining the outputs of
multiple&lt;br/&gt;primitives for the purpose of security preservation in the
presence of&lt;br/&gt;faults.