* 0845851
* CAREER:   Quantifying pleiotropy by parallel experimental evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Vaughn Cooper, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Only a rare fraction of mutations is
beneficial in a given environment, and it is uncertain how mutations that are
beneficial in one environment will influence organismal performance in other
environments. The effect of a mutation could appear in a single environment or
could have widespread consequences in many environments. The breadth of benefits
of mutations is generally unknown, though is fundamental to understanding
adaptation to changing environments. This project will improve understanding of
the relationship between adaptation to one environment and ability to use other
environments through study of bacteria evolving in laboratory microcosms. This
project will collect many beneficial mutants from bacterial populations and
precisely quantify their adaptive value in a single selective environment. The
scope of indirect effects of these mutants then will be measured by evaluating
their effects on organismal performance in a range of different environmental
conditions. Contemporary techniques of molecular genetics and microbiology will
be used to characterize the biological networks that link genetics, physiology,
and ecology in the evolving populations of
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linkages between genetics, organismal function,
and ecology are underexplored, and most high school and college curricula teach
them as discrete subjects. However, research-based laboratory exercises that
allow students to study evolution in action and explore the widespread effects
of single mutations can promote interdisciplinary learning in which these fields
are integrated. This project will enable hundreds of such studies to be
conducted simultaneously, distributed among many laboratories and classrooms,
each depositing their findings to a central database. Mutants of key types will
be selected and their genetic bases identified using contemporary genomic
technology, which promises to inspire further research in the laboratory and
classroom alike.