* 0845669
* CAREER: Nanoelectronic Microfluidic Biochip for Ultrasensitive Detection of Selective Protein Biomarkers
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Samir Iqbal, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2014
* USD 468,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop new modalities for the isolation
and detection of selective proteins (biomarkers), by using aptamer-protein
interactions in nano/microfluidic channels/chambers with multiplexed nanoscale
electrodes and on-chip data processing. To accomplish the goals, a coherent
strategy of fabrication and modeling will be adopted: (1) Development of
functionalized membranes for isolation of low-abundant disease biomarkers, (2)
Design and development of a bio-chip with individually-addressable nano-
electrodes, made with high-throughput nanoimprint lithography and functionalized
with aptamers for multiplexed detection of biomarkers, (3) Development of novel
and rapid fabrication of nano/microfluidic channels, (4) Modeling, analysis and
characterization of the electronic properties of biomarker-aptamer interactions
measured between the nano-electrodes, and, (5) Real-time low-power noise-free
read-out circuit with sequential addressing, actuation, measurement &amp; data
analysis of the recognition sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERITS:
This proposal will transform and create a new area ?proteonics?, building up on
the advances in ?proteomics? and ?molecular electronics?. The activities
leverage from the molecular scale devices and the in vitro aptamer-protein
interactions, and are extendible to a host of other applications. The ideas will
overcome bottlenecks of expensive and serial fabrication in molecular
electronics and provide alternate to the labor-intensive, poorly-sensitive and
lengthy protocols of proteomics. The novel polymer nano/microfluidics will
provide proper conditions to retain protein expression and functionality. On-
chip circuit will lead the way to prototype point-of-care proteonic bio-chips.
The nano-electrodes will provide a 3-D interaction volume for aptamer-protein
binding, resulting in higher sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio than those
for planar morphologies. The approach will also overcome sensitivity limitations
by removing the effects of device doping, geometry, dimensions, and fluidic
environments. The proposed strategies will innovatively transform and
revolutionize a number of disciplines: (1) Rapid nano-manufacturing for bio-
sensing, (2) Multiplexed detection of disease markers using various aptamers,
(3) Ultrasensitive on-chip electrical detection of biomarkers and analysis for
early disease detection, (4) Mask-less production of novel nano/microfluidics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: The proposal has direct applications in
other biosensor domains, e.g. gene expression analysis, virus/pathogen detection
and whole blood analysis. The variations of the propose technology can transform
biomolecular sensing with better disease intervention strategies, improved
statistical confidence and real-time detection. The PI has engaged women
graduate students and minority undergraduate/high school students in his
research lab. Innovative educational endeavors will be pursued with this
proposal: (1) Development of a graduate course on nano-bio devices, (2)
Seminars/Demos/Lab-tours focused on research involvement and retention of
undergraduates, (3) One-week summer camp for high school students (primarily
African-American and Hispanic) from Arlington school district, integrating
MEMS/Nano research and biology concepts, (4) Interactive website/blog for the
projection/exposure/discussion of the state of the art in research, (5) Saturday
morning live-chat sessions to follow-up/engage K-12 students and teachers, (6)
Technology transfer studies to nurture entrepreneurship in students interested
in real-world problems, (7) Development of international research collaborations
for exchange of students from and to USA. The results of the proposed ideas will
be disseminated through peer-reviewed articles, conferences and public media.
&lt;br/&gt;