* 0845882
* CAREER: An Experimental Investigation of the Flow Fields over Bio-Inspired and Finite Span Wings Undergoing Dynamic Stall
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2016
* Douglas Bohl, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 04/30/2016
* USD 400,003.00

0845882 &lt;br/&gt;Bohl&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Airfoils are central components of
many important technologies, including wind turbines, turbomachinery and
aircraft, and better understanding of flows over airfoils is critical to their
continued development. When an airfoil is placed at a sufficiently high angle of
attack, the flow over the surface can separate causing loss of lift or stall.
Stall is usually detrimental to performance. Historically, the study of airfoil
dynamics has centered on airfoils placed at fixed angles of attack. This view is
insufficient to describe the physics of airfoils in motion, where the developed
lift and the stall angle are considerably higher. Under these conditions the
loss of lift can be abrupt causing rapid changes in the aerodynamic and loading
characteristics. This phenomenon is known as dynamic stall (DS). This
experimental study will develop a bio-inspired strategy to control or delay DS
and quantify the velocity and vorticity fields in the critical region near the
airfoil leading edge for finite aspect ratio
airfoils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic stall plays a key role in the development
of two transformational technologies: wind power generation and the development
of high-performance aircraft. It is widely anticipated that the Joint Strike
Fighter will be the last manned fighter developed for the US Department of
Defense. Removing the pilot increases the performance potential by increasing
the allowable forces experienced during extreme maneuvers for which dynamic
stall is central. Dynamic stall also results in high unsteady loads on wind
turbine blades which, if controlled, can increase their performance and
durability. The lack of experimental data for finite span wings undergoing DS
hinders the development of predictive models and represents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's educational objectives include the development of
new curricula for college and high school courses. Graduate students will gain
experience by acting as mentors to the undergraduates who will enhance their
educational experience through focused research. Students will be recruited from
primarily under-represented groups using Clarkson University's pipeline programs
such as the NSF sponsored S-STEM program. A senior-level problem-based
undergraduate course in bio-fluid mechanics will be developed addressing the
concept of biomimicry using the PI's research as a case example. A similar
collaborative effort will be undertaken with a local high school. Once
developed, these materials will be disseminated to other area teachers through
the Clarkson University Office of Educational Partnerships.