* 0845837
* CAREER:   The Role of the HrpR/S Proteins in the Regulation of Virulence in the Plant Pathogenic Bacterium Pseudomonas syringae.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Teresa Thiel, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2014
* USD 737,699.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Pseudomonas
syringae is an economically significant bacterial pathogen of many crop plants.
The disease is characterized by the appearance of necrotic lesions on the leaves
and fruits of infected plants. P. syringae expresses virulence genes, including
those encoding a multi-component Type III secretion system (T3SS) which is
necessary to colonize the plant host. The T3SS delivers bacterial effector
proteins directly into host cells. Effectors disrupt plant signaling pathways
and undermine plant defense responses. Other P. syringae virulence genes are
involved in the synthesis of phytotoxins, which are low molecular weight
compounds that damage plant cells or influence disease development. In most
bacteria, including P. syringae, virulence gene expression is tightly regulated
in response to environmental signals that exist in the host. This project
focuses on HrpR and HrpS, two regulators of P. syringae virulence gene
expression that function in a complex regulatory circuit. In this circuit, HrpR
and HrpS activate expression of the hrpL gene, which encodes a direct regulator
of T3SS, effector, and phytotoxin biosynthesis genes. Several aspects of the
HrpRS regulatory cascade are not well characterized. In particular, this project
will address the Hrp regulatory expression pattern in plants that are normally
infected by P. syringae. The specific objectives of the research are to: (i)
determine the DNA binding sites for HrpR and HrpS upstream of the hrpL gene,
(ii) identify genes in P. syringae other than hrpL that are directly regulated
by HrpR and HrpS, and (iii) examine the regulation of hrpRS by environmental
signals. This objective will also include expression studies in and on the
plant. Learning more about how HrpR and HrpS control virulence gene expression
will contribute to a better understanding of how P. syringae initiates plant
infection and manipulates plant physiology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated
Research/Teaching program: The project also includes efforts by the principal
investigator to develop an integrated teaching/research/outreach program. A
partnership will be developed with the Youth Exploring Science (YES) program,
which educates disadvantaged high school students from underrepresented
minorities. As part of this educational outreach program, a course will be
developed at the University of Missouri-St. Louis in which undergraduates create
interactive learning activities related to plant-microbe interactions. The
university students will then facilitate these activities with the YES high
school students in a seven part program at the St. Louis Science Center. The
high school students also will be employed by the St. Louis Science Center
during the summer to adapt some of the plant-microbe interactions activities for
presentation to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: HrpR
and HrpS are appropriate targets for the development of new control measures,
which may also be effective against other important plant pathogens. The project
will support also the training of graduate and undergraduate students in plant
pathology and molecular biology research. These students will gain expertise in
a variety of molecular, genetic, biochemical, and bioinformatic techniques that
will enhance their future career opportunities in the biological sciences.