* 0845997
* CAREER: Educational Data Mining for Student Support in Interactive Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Martin Ribarsky, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2015
* USD 646,982.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Creating intelligent learning technologies from data has unique potential to
transform the American educational system, by building a low cost way to adapt
learning environments to individual students, while informing research on human
learning. This project will create the technology for a new generation of data-
driven intelligent tutors, enabling the rapid creation of individualized
instruction to support learning in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. This has the potential to make individualized
learning support accessible for a broad audience, from children to adults,
including students that are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. This
project will (1) develop computational methods to derive cognitive models from
data that can be used to support individual learners through guidance, feedback,
and help; (2) develop approaches to providing student support that leverage data
to provide hints and guidance based on information such as frequency of student
responses, probability of future errors, and solution efficiency; (3) develop
interactive visualization tools for teachers to learn from student data in real
time, to allow teachers and instructional designers to tailor instruction to
address actual, rather than perceived, student problem areas; and (4) conduct
formal empirical evaluations of pedagogical effectiveness. The new software will
construct adaptive support for teaching and learning in logic, discrete
mathematics, and other STEM domains using a data-driven approach. From the
extensive but tractable student performance data in computer-aided learning
environments, student cognitive models will be automatically constructed. These
cognitive models will build on the investigator's prior work using Markov
Decision Processes and dimensionality reduction methods that leverage past data
to assess student performance, direct a student?s learning path, and provide
contextualized hints. Machine learning techniques will be used to expand
problem-specific models into more general cognitive models to bootstrap the
construction of new tutors and learn about student learning. For teachers and
learning researchers, web-based visualization and analysis tool will be
developed to graphically and interactively model student solutions annotated
with performance data that reflect frequency, tendency to commit future errors,
and closeness to a final solution. Through these new tutors and tools,
experiments will be conducted to investigate student learning in a variety of
contexts and domains, including logic, algebra, and chemistry. A team of diverse
students and colleagues will be engaged to bring interdisciplinary expertise to
this research and share findings broadly.