* 0845212
* CAREER: Synthesis, Characterization, and Application of Gel-Grown, Polymer-Reinforced Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Lara Estroff, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 12/31/2014
* USD 498,885.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Recent observations, both in Nature and in the laboratory, of
macroscopic, single crystals with incorporated polymer fibers and other
macromolecules have generated immense interest amongst materials scientists,
chemists, and biologists. The mechanisms by which they form, however, are poorly
understood. The research goals of this CAREER proposal are: to understand the
fundamental principles that govern the incorporation of polymer networks and
macromolecules into single crystals, to develop synthetic routes to a wide range
of polymer-reinforced crystals with detailed control over structure and
porosity, to characterize the internal structure of these crystals, and to
establish structure-mechanical property correlations for model systems. To
accomplish these goals, the PI will develop the use of crystal growth in gels to
produce polymer-reinforced single crystals of ionic, molecular, and covalent
crystals. When successful, this work has the potential to transform our current
understanding of the mechanisms that lead to the incorporation of large amounts
of polymeric impurities within crystals, without disrupting their single crystal
nature. The particular strength of this program lies in the interdisciplinary
approach that combines the PI?s demonstrated expertise in crystal growth,
organic synthesis, and materials characterization methods. By combining all of
these efforts, the project aims to generate a fundamental understanding of the
underlying mechanisms governing polymer fiber incorporation into single
crystals. This understanding, in turn, will allow the PI to generalize the
effects to materials of interest (e.g., bioactive minerals, inorganic
semiconductors, pharmaceutical compounds). The ultimate goals of the project are
to be able to design a gel system for a given crystalline material and to
predict the growth conditions required to obtain single crystals of that
material with incorporated networks.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project aims to understand the mechanisms by which
polymer networks become incorporated into macroscopic, single crystals. The
ability to make a variety of single crystals that contain well-controlled
distributions of organic polymers or pores, will lead to a new class of
composite materials with interesting structure-property relationships and
potential applications ranging from structural biomaterials to new formulations
of pharmaceutical drugs to materials for energy generation and storage. The
primary educational objectives of this CAREER proposal are to develop strategies
for introducing students (K-12, undergraduates, and graduates) to the
interdisciplinary fields of biological and bio-inspired materials, and in
particular, to recruit more female students to the Materials Science and
Engineering (MSE) department at Cornell University. The PI will train
undergraduate and graduate students for future research jobs in materials
science, with a focus on biomaterials. This preparation will include laboratory
research as well as the development of two courses: ?Materials Chemistry? and
?Biomineralization?. The course on biomineralization will be integrated with the
proposed research and is designed to train engineering students in the
fundamentals necessary to design new biomaterials, based upon an understanding
of the structure and formation of the natural biominerals (e.g., bone, teeth,
shells). To impact recruitment and retention of women in MSE at Cornell, the PI
will facilitate a new women?s group (Women in Materials Science and Engineering
or WIMSE). The goals of this group are to foster a supportive community amongst
women in the MSE department, to introduce female students to role models in
industry and academia, and to increase the number of female undergraduate majors
in MSE at Cornell over the next five years.