* 0845668
* CAREER:  An Innovative Study of Membrane Protein - Detergent Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Linda Columbus, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2014
* USD 684,691.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane proteins are the gatekeepers
of the cell and selectively mediate the flow of information and nutrients across
the membrane (walls) of the cell. Membrane proteins are abundant (~25% of a
typical genome). However, investigations of membrane proteins are considered
"high-risk", predominantly because preparing protein samples is difficult due to
their hydrophobic nature. Typically for structural and functional
investigations, membrane proteins are extracted from the native cell membrane
with detergent micelles. Detergents are empirically screened to solubilize and
stabilize the membrane proteins because of a lack in the understanding of how
detergents mimic the cell membrane and stabilize a membrane protein fold. The
screening process is expensive and time-consuming, and limits the progress of
membrane protein investigations. This research aims to overcome these hindrances
by (1) establishing a fundamental understanding of protein-detergent
interactions and (2) assessing the impact these interactions have on membrane
protein structure and stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to impact the broader community are focused
primarily on the encouragement and confidence building of middle school and
college age female and underrepresented groups in the area of chemistry. At the
undergraduate level, a new biochemistry curriculum was introduced that stepped
away from textbook learning and moved towards inquiry and research based
learning. Also, one-on-one and group mentorship programs such as a lunch series
have been implemented. For middle school girls, two avenues have been pursued
(1) interactive one hour programs were created that introduce chemistry to
middle school girls through outreach programs such as the University of Virginia
Young Woman Leadership Program and (2) three hour interactive demos and tours of
chemistry laboratories at the University of Virginia hosted by female faculty,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows were designed for local schools such
as The Village School (an all girls middle school).