* 0845749
* CAREER: Sensory Guidance of Locomotion: From Neurons to Newton's Laws
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Noah Cowan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 02/28/2014
* USD 514,001.00

How do nervous systems transform sensory signals into motor commands to guide
locomotion? To address this question, this research examines a class of sensory
guided locomotion tasks uniquely amenable to computational and engineering
analyses: sensorimotor stabilization tasks. In these tasks, animals
automatically modulate muscle commands to drive sensory signals (e.g.
electrosensory, tactile, visual) to desired equilibria or limit cycles.

Specifically, this research examines three remarkably divergent animal locomotor
behaviors: multisensory control of swimming in weakly electric knifefish, high-
speed antenna-based wall following in cockroaches, and visual yaw control in
fruit flies. While performing sensory guided locomotion tasks, these animals are
subjected to behaviorally naturalistic perturbations that lead to rich transient
dynamics during recovery. Mechanical signals (e.g. positions, forces) and neural
activity (e.g. action potentials) during recovery to these perturbations are
used to validate (or refute) specific closed-loop sensorimotor control models.
These models identify the roles of mechanics versus neural computation in the
stability and performance of each behavior. The same approach to modeling,
analysis, and experimentation is vetted in a biomorphic robot, establishing an
experimental baseline in a highly controlled context, as well as enabling the
translation of biological control strategies to a robotic platform.

This research, disseminated broadly through both the engineering and biological
literatures, lays a scientific foundation on which to develop biomorphic robots
for critical applications such as disaster recovery, space exploration, and
security. Longer term, the unified approach to biological and robotic modeling
developed in this project may lead to enhanced neural prostheses and brain--
machine interfaces.