* 0845916
* CAREER: Categorical Shape Reconstruction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Li Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2015
* USD 266,406.00

Reconstructing 3D geometric models of objects from their 2D images has been a
longstanding problem in computational vision. Traditional approaches to this
problem require many images taken of the same objects under different viewpoints
and/or illuminations; this requirement poses a significant limitation on the
operating range of these methods. For example, in consumer photography, the
majority of photos are not taken with such a purpose in mind. Even in research
communities, collecting multi-view/illumination image data sets is a tedious
task.

The PI and his team are investigating novel 3D reconstruction methods that
operate on a collection of images for similar-but-not-identical objects in one
category and recover a family of parameterized 3D models for the category. The
underlying assumption made is that the shape distribution has only limited
number degrees of freedom, many less than the image data that are available for
the category. This approach exploits the abundance of images on the Internet
that densely sample the appearance of similar objects in different categories,
such as faces, vehicles, architectures, humans, and animals. The outcome of this
research enables the creation of large-scale parameterized 3D model databases
for these categories, without the need of placing all individual objects on a
turntable in a controlled setting. Such databases have a wide range of impact,
such as autonomous navigation, security surveillance, human computer
interaction, biometrics, graphics, industry design, virtual environment,
forensics, archeology, and entertainment.

The PI also seeks to integrate the core idea of this research project into his
education plan. In particular, his primary education goal-both in course work
and in mentoring graduate students - is to emphasize a data - driven approach to
vision that is both foundational and practically important. The data and tools
will be disseminated in a timely fashion. Updates will be available from
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~lizhang