* 0845677
* CAREER: Computational Infrastructure for Full-Sequence Association Studies with Pooled Individuals
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Itshack Pe'er, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2014
* USD 399,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit. High throughput sequencing that allows human genetics to
access rare variation "Next Generation" sequencing is transforming human
genetics: several disruptive technologies are coming of age and now enable
resequencing throughput of megabases per dollar. Specifically, thousands of
individuals can now be sequenced for targeted regions of the genome, in pools of
individuals. The complete spectrum of common and rare alleles thus revealed is a
key resource for understanding origins, genomics, and heritable traits of our
species. Na√Øve tests of association of a heritable trait to a common variant are
inappropriate for analysis of rare gene variants, since the contribution of each
such rare variant to the trait is often statistically undetectable. The hope for
finding an associated gene therefore lies in accumulating association signal
across multiple functional variants. The problem of multiple-variant association
is complicated by background correlations between nearby variants.This proposal
tackles two challenges:

1.Initial task: Recovery of individual identity of mutation carriers from pooled
sequencing data

2.Main task: Using individual-level mutation data for scoring of association to
multiple variants in a locus

Proposed solution: Bayesian scoring, decomposable by individual and by variant.
This proposal involves design of overlapping pools for recovering mutation
carrier identity. Each individual will be sequenced in a unique combination of
pools. Mutations observed in such a set of pools will be inferred to be carried
by the corresponding individual, addressing the initial task. This proposal
tackles the main task by Bayesian scoring for genomic intervals containing
functional variants. Comparative genomics is used to guide a prior distribution
for whether a sequenced variant is likely to be functional. The association
score is further decomposed to contributions of each sample and each site, with
Markovian dependency between such contributions along the genome. A dynamic-
program is proposed for optimizing the causal locus boundaries.

Broad Impact. The outcomes of the project would facilitate new paradigms in
genetic research, alongside the recently launched high throughput experimental
technologies. Specifically, projected impacts include:

- software tools and tailored interfaces to be disseminated to the reseaerch
community. - Education for undergraduates by project courses implementing
proposed research tasks and for K-12 students by curriculum development and
delivery to high-school diversity students - allowing a generation to have
widespread access to their individual DNA.