* 0845294
* CAREER: A Fundamental Investigation of the Mechanics of Micro-Transfer  Printing Processes for Manufacturing Multifunctional Microsystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kevin Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to advance the capabilities of micro-transfer printing through a fundamental
investigation of the process mechanics that combines experimental
characterization and computational modeling. Micro-transfer printing is process
where a soft elastomer stamp is used to transfer micro- and nano-structures to a
broad range of substrates in order to create devices such as flexible
electronics, complex micromechanical structures, and solar cells. While micro-
transfer printing has been demonstrated numerous times and is beginning to be
implemented commercially, there remains significant empiricism in the design of
the processes due to a lack of knowledge of the underlying mechanics. In this
work, a new method to experimentally investigate the adhesion and separation
behavior of interfaces in micro-transfer printing will be developed and used to
characterize a series of interfaces important in transfer printing. A
computational model that describes the measured behavior of the interfaces will
be developed and subsequently integrated into a simulation tool for designing
micro-transfer printing processes. The simulation tool, which will be
experimentally validated, will be used to develop guidelines for developing
robust, manufacturable printing processes.

If successful, the results of this research will firmly establish an
understanding of the underlying mechanics of microtransfer printing and will
lead to improved strategies for designing effective manufacturing processes.
Improvements in the robustness, yield, and control of micro-transfer printing
processes will result in increased use and capability, ultimately leading to the
manufacturing of new types of microscale devices that cannot be realized using
existing techniques. The education plan that is tightly integrated with the
research effort will: (1) inspire students at all levels to pursue careers in
engineering and (2) educate students and practicing engineers in the areas of
micro- and nano-manufacturing and interface mechanics.