* 0845196
* CAREER:    A Computational Approach to Study Molecular Mimicry in Host-Pathogen Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Dmitry Korkin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 613,490.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award to support the
research of Dr. Dmitry Korkin, in the Computer Science Department and
Informatics Institute, at University of Missouri-Columbia. Dr. Korkin is a
second-year, tenure-track Assistant Professor. Infections are complex biological
processes that are common among a variety of microbial pathogens, targeting host
organisms from virtually all kingdoms of life. The pathogen's strategy of
entering the host organism and breaching its immune defenses often involves
interactions between the host and pathogen proteins. In many cases, the pathogen
can alter the host's cellular functions for the microbe's benefit by mimicking
either an entire structure of a host protein or its important functional part.
This PI is developing computational methodologies for accurate detection of
pathogen protein mimicry. These methods are improving our ability to predict
virulent pathogen mimicry when pathogen and host proteins are structurally
similar. In addition, this research is developing new methods to predict mimicry
when the structures of virulent and host proteins are not related but the
functional elements are. A comprehensive web-based database of host pathogens
mimicry interactions is being produced from this research. This research will
help biologists elucidate the key mechanisms behind this mimicry phenomenon and
will provide crucial information for combating infections in plants, animals and
humans. Databases and tools produced under this project will be accessible via
the PI's web site at http://korkinlab.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of his
CAREER plan, Dr. Korkin is computationally developing accurate predictions and
characterizations of host-pathogen interactions. The PI is integrating this
research with education by attracting a new generation of scientists into the
study of biology using computers (i.e. computational biology), broadening the
presence of women and groups traditionally underrepresented in science, and
designing unique courses that are providing interdisciplinary training in
computational biology.