* 0845500
* CAREER: Unstructured Dynamic Overlay Networks and Strategic Users
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Honggang Zhang, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2014
* USD 410,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates unstructured
dynamic overlay networks (unstructured networks): a type of computer network
formed from interactions among constantly changing strategic (i.e., self-
interested but rational) users. These users rely on each other for transferring
and finding data, and they form unstructured networks based on their own cost-
benefit tradeoffs by dynamically introducing/removing network communications
links and performing distributed resource allocations on top of the Internet.
Unstructured networks carry the majority of Internet traffic due to the
prevalence of the applications they support. Such applications include file
sharing (e.g., BitTorrent), user-assisted media streaming, video-on-demand, and
voice-over-IP (e.g., Skype). These networks also include selfish data-routing
overlays (where users choose routes independently), and multiple self-organized
data-routing overlays. The fundamental interactions/conflicts between users
within each unstructured network and among networks, and their interactions with
the Internet, can result in drastically unstable states, inefficient resource
usage, low performance of the applications they support, and adverse impact on
Internet Service Providers. To address these problems, the project is developing
effective mechanisms to ensure the stability and efficiency of unstructured
networks, and providing seamless interoperation with the Internet architecture
and service providers. Relying on a combination of optimization and game theory,
stochastic modeling, and distributed algorithm/mechanism design, this research
develops theoretical foundations/methodologies for quantifying the interaction
dynamics within/among unstructured networks, and between unstructured networks
and the Internet. Additionally, the project provides design
principles/algorithms for application/network designers and service providers
for meeting increasingly rich user requirements and will provide guidance for
the design of future Internet architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;