* 0845358
* CAREER: Understanding the Chemical Vapor Deposition Synthesis of Graphene: Science, Application and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Jing Kong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 12/31/2013
* USD 400,037.00

Technical: This project is to study growth of graphene on metal substrates such
as nickel using the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique and subsequent
transfer of the graphene layers to diverse types of materials such as
semiconductor, metal, and plastics. Graphene is the hexagonal arrangement of
carbon atoms in a one-atom-thick sheet. While there has been an explosion of
research activities on graphene over the past a few years, the success of future
fundamental research and applications of graphene is critically depending upon
the capability to obtain continuously large-area, single-crystalline graphene
sheets with controlled number of layers on arbitrary substrates. This project
aims to achieve this goal. The research activities of the project include two
complementary routes: One involves the direct investigation on the CVD growth,
via time-dependent in-situ Raman characterization. The second involves
structural analysis on both the graphene and metal substrate to provide feedback
information while various synthesis parameters are tuned. The intellectual
merits of the proposed activities include: (1) understanding of the CVD growth
mechanism of the graphene on metal substrates (2) identification of optimal
routes for graphene synthesis, (3) study of the effect of various defects to the
electronic properties and of the nickel-graphene interface phenomena. Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. If the large-area, single-
crystalline graphene on insulating substrate is successful, tremendous
opportunities will open up for the applications of graphene in electronics,
solar cells, flexible displays, light emitting diodes. The project activities
also offer an excellent opportunity for training of students in chemistry,
material science, nanofabrication and electrical engineering. This work is
expected to lead to a highly interdisciplinary and creative Ph.D. dissertation
and learning experience for students from all levels to be educated in
nanoscience and nanotechnology. Undergraduate students and high school students,
including those from under-represented groups, will be recruited to participate
in the proposed research. Investigations carried out in this research program
will also serve as a basis for several topics for undergraduate and graduate
courses.