* 0845497
* CAREER -- Clover cyanogenesis: Integrating ecological and molecular genetics in the study of adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kenneth Olsen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 915,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how species adapt to
local climates is critical for predicting how global climate change will affect
species distributions and their ecological interactions. This research examines
the genetic and ecological processes that determine patterns of cyanogenesis
(cyanide release with tissue damage) in white clover populations across North
America. Cyanogenesis protects plants against small herbivores; however,
cyanogenic compounds are energetically expensive and come at a cost of decreased
growth and reproduction. The research will employ DNA sequencing, greenhouse-
and field-experiments to determine whether the cyanogenic and acyanogenic forms
can arise multiple times independently, or whether cyanogenesis represents
ancient genetic variation maintained through natural selection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because white clover occurs in school lawns across North
America, this system is easily adapted to the high school Biology classroom,
where it can serve as a hands-on tool for understanding the connection between
genetics, physiology, and ecology. This project will use a multifaceted approach
to develop science educational resources: 1) summer lab internships for high
school Biology teachers, where they will receive hands-on scientific training;
2) dissemination of classroom lab kits to high school teachers nationwide, where
they and their students will collect cyanogenesis data from local clover
populations; and 3) web-based resources where students around the country will
contribute and analyze data addressing research questions on clover cyanogenesis
and climatic adaptation. &lt;br/&gt;