* 0845848
* CAREER: Information Theory and Coding for Wireless Broadcast Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Tie Liu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Information
Theory and Coding for Wireless Broadcast Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadcast
is a fundamental nature of wireless communication. With appropriate coding
architecture, the broadcast nature of wireless communication can be used to the
advantage of simultaneously transmitting to several receivers at high rates.
Most of the previous work focused on the following two scenarios: 1) to deliver
the same message to each of the receivers; 2) to deliver completely different
messages to different receivers. Between these two ?extreme? broadcast
scenarios, there is a rich collection of ?intermediate? problems with message
sets of interesting configuration and significant engineering appeal.
Understanding the limits and the appropriate coding architectures of broadcast
networks with general message set configurations is a relatively unexplored
challenge that must be addressed to fully harness the broadcast advantage of
wireless communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research takes a fundamental
information-theoretic view of broadcast networks to shed insight into what
coding architectures are appropriate for different message set configurations.
An important component of this study is the focus on concrete and physically
motivated models of wireless network communication. Of particular interest is to
understand the impact of multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communication.
Specifically, this research studies: 1) the impact of message set configuration
on the appropriate coding architecture of wireless broadcast networks; 2)
secrecy communication under physically motivated models; and 3) the value of
receiver message side information for broadcast network communication. The
research program is complemented by an educational effort to train the next
generation of engineers to become skilled in the design of wireless networks,
which involves developing a new course on information theory for wireless
systems and writing an accompanied textbook.