* 0845526
* Structures and growth mechanisms of patterned polycrystals by polarimetric imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bart Kahr, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 587,879.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Bart Kahr at New York
University, who will provide an understanding of the structures of
polycrystalline formations, which have characteristic lenghtscales of 10
micrometers. The investigator addresses the mechanisms leading to such
patterning, the optical properties of the meso-structures, and potential
applications in technology and in other scientific fields. Professor Kahr
proposes to attack a very complex subject, namely, to use to Mueller matrix
imaging polarimetry (and related techniques) to determine the structures and
growth mechanisms of banded spherulites of small organic compounds. These
polycrystalline systems have been the subject of earlier studies by researchers
who proposed a simple, single, growth mechanism that involved the twisting of
radii. This proposal attempts to understand growth mechanisms in these self-
assembling systems and in some cases reveal new phenomena. Preliminary results
suggest that the twisting mechanism is not in fact the universal explanation of
optical banding. Future work should lead to a much deeper understanding of the
origins of the nonequilibrium pattern formation in these systems. Understanding
and controlling the spontaneous formation of chiral mesoscale structures
transcend fundamental questions of crystal growth, and may lead to applications
from mirrors to waveguides, and in producing chiral thin
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed investigations
will be significant. The investigator is dedicated to chemical education
starting at the kindergarten level. He has found intriguing evidence that
crystallography was one of the topics covered in the curriculum of the first
children?s day care facilities in Germany in the 19th century. Professor Kahr
has written and translated books and articles on the history of chemistry and
crystallography. He is in contact with the authors of major chemistry books to
insure that his findings reach undergraduate chemistry students in a timely
manner. Courses for teachers are planned and these are major components of the
broader outreach plan. The investigator has a track record of working with
underrepresented groups of students. Professor Kahr is planning on working with
local schools to bring students to his lab to participate in research projects
with the hope of developing college-bound scientists who would otherwise never
enter the pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;