* 0845264
* CAREER: Modeling Nanostructured Systems Outside of Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* ZhiFeng Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2015
* USD 483,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research integrated with
education to study nonequilibrium nanostructured systems with educational
activities for undergraduate students as well as for current and future K-12
science teachers. The research program addresses a fundamental challenge of
understanding nanopattern self-assembly in both soft and solid complex systems,
particularly in strained semiconductor epilayers and block copolymer thin films,
through modeling, analysis, and simulation across multiple scales. The overall
research goal is to improve our understanding of the nonequilibrium and
nonlinear dynamic processes that occur in nanoscale phases in complex material
systems. The research will emphasize two promising areas in nanofabrication:
strained film epitaxy, particularly the mechanisms controlling properties of
surface/interface nanostructures and compositional profiles; and self-assembling
block copolymer thin films, particularly the achieving of long range order in
nanostructured but defected copolymer patterns used in soft-template
nanolithography. All of these theoretical efforts will be compared and connected
with experimental results through the PI's collaboration with experimental
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this CAREER proposal
will integrate the PI?s research expertise in modeling and simulation into
educational and outreach efforts in two major efforts. The first effort will
promote science education for K-12 teachers in the Detroit area by providing
interdisciplinary research opportunities. This project will provide a unique
opportunity for direct interaction between pre-service teachers and experienced
in-service teachers through establishing one-to-one research subgroups. The
evaluation of this project will be based on the effects of teachers' classroom
applications and the impact on their high school students who are mostly
underrepresented minorities. The second effort will enhance physics education at
Wayne State University by developing new undergraduate curricula with the aim of
encouraging a more diverse body of students to study physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical and computational research integrated with education to study the
process by which materials grow and organize themselves on length scales down to
one hundred thousand times smaller than a human hair. The research will be
integrated into educational activities for undergraduate students as well as for
current and future K-12 science teachers. One of the major challenges in
manufacturing of modern devices is the growth or assembly of embedded structures
of atoms and molecules. This research addresses a fundamental challenge of
understanding how these ?nanostructure? can self assemble into complex systems
using a combination of modeling, analysis, and simulation across multiple length
scales. The research plan will focus on study these effects in semiconductors
and in the self-assembly of thin films made from large chain-like molecules with
repeating molecular subunits, as well as developing more efficient theoretical
approaches for carrying out simulations in these areas. Theory will be compared
and connected with experimental results through the PI?s collaborations with
experimental groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this
CAREER proposal will integrate the PI?s research expertise in modeling and
simulation into educational and outreach efforts in two major efforts. The first
effort will promote science education for K-12 teachers in the Detroit area by
providing interdisciplinary research opportunities. This project will provide a
unique opportunity for direct interaction between pre-service teachers and
experienced in-service teachers through establishing one-to-one research
subgroups. The evaluation of this project will be based on the effects of
teachers' classroom applications and the impact on their high school students
who are mostly underrepresented minorities. The second effort will enhance
physics education at Wayne State University by developing new undergraduate
curricula with the aim of encouraging a more diverse body of students to study
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;