* 0845730
* CAREER: Modeling, Estimation and Coding for Biosensor Arrays
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Haris Vikalo, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator studies stochastic
modeling and signal processing aspects of biosensor arrays. The biosensor arrays
are time and cost efficient, and enable exciting new applications in medicine,
drug discovery, defense systems, and environmental monitoring. Protein arrays,
for instance, test for multiple pathogen infections by examining dozens of
different antigens at once. DNA microarrays, on the other hand, are capable of
screening tens or even hundreds of thousands of different gene sequences at the
same time, revealing critical information about the functionality of cells,
effects of drugs on organisms, etc. To fully realize the potentials of the
biosensor array technology, however, several key research challenges must be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular binding between the bio-molecules of
interest and sensing elements, which enables detection in biosensor arrays, is a
random process. Real-time biosensors can take multiple temporal measurements of
this process, thus allowing observation of the binding kinetics as well as a
precise characterization of its steady-state. The investigator specifically aims
to: (1) Develop stochastic models and solve the estimation problems in real-time
biosensor arrays. This research involves solving parameter estimation problems
in discretely observed systems modeled by stochastic differential equations. (2)
Determine limits of performance of estimation algorithms in biosensor arrays,
characterizing them via lower bounds on the minimum mean-square estimation
error. (3) Develop coding strategies that improve the performance of biosensor
arrays, and study signal recovery techniques which enable economic use of the
sensing resources therein.&lt;br/&gt;The results of the outlined work are
expected to have a major impact on the development and applications of biosensor
arrays, and are expected to broaden the educational experience of engineering
students at the University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;