* 0845592
* CAREER: Functional Scaffolds for Polymeric Antimicrobial Agents
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kenichi Kuroda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 09/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0845592 PI: Kuroda, Kenichi ORG:
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Functional Scaffolds for Polymeric
Antimicrobial Agents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The long-term goal of this
project is to develop new, broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents. The central
hypothesis is that the preassembly of membrane-active polymer chains will
enhance their cooperative ability to perforate the membrane, leading to an
increase in antimicrobial potency as compared to single linear polymer chains.
The study will focus on the creation of star- and bundle-shaped polymers that
contain multiple polymer chains assembled onto a core molecule, thus presetting
the geometrical features for each class of polymers. By utilizing complex
macromolecular frameworks, the PI seeks to understand how these three-
dimensional scaffolds can influence function in interactions with cell
membranes, and to use this knowledge in the further rational design of synthetic
biomaterials for clinical and medicinal uses. Additionally, the use of these
architectures provides a unique opportunity to not only specifically tune the
display of polymer arms to create optimal lytic agents, but also to provide
novel insight into the mechanism of action of membrane-active compounds more
broadly. As the general mechanism of antimicrobial peptides and polymers remains
highly controversial, in part because the lack of suitable tools presents a
formidable experimental roadblock, this work will significantly advance the
field. Similarly, these studies will be invaluable in providing a detailed
understanding of polymer-membrane interactions, improving our ability to
rationally design and engineer further iterations of polymeric antimicrobial
agents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The interdisciplinary nature of
the proposed research will provide an important educational opportunity for the
students and postdoctoral fellows in the PI?s and the PI?s collaborators? labs.
The students will explore a broad range of relevant literature in journal clubs
that will cement their theoretical understanding of their efforts in the
laboratory. The PI is also dedicated to improving the knowledge of students
outside of his direct supervision; in line with the PI?s current research, the
topics of antibiotic resistance and toxicity of materials will be incorporated
into the Biomaterials course that the PI teaches in the University of Michigan
School of Dentistry. Looking even more globally, the PI has initiated several
international research collaborations with research groups at Nagoya University
in Japan. These interactions will allow students not only to gain scientific
knowledge directly from world experts, but also to obtain valuable insight into
the scientific practices, particularly for those students who are able to take
part in our new international student exchange program. Finally, the PI is
committed to providing these and similarly engaging research opportunities for a
variety of students, and looks forward to his continued participation in the
University of Michigan programs for undergraduate and underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;