* 0845305
* CAREER: Characterization of new Arabidopsis mutants with altered response to auxin
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Nihal Dharmasiri, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 07/31/2015
* USD 549,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Some of the major challenges that the world faces today are how to feed the
ever-increasing population and to find the ways to deal with global climatic
change. A better understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in plant growth
and development is necessary to design new strategies to improve crop plants
that suit the changing environment. The plant hormone auxin plays a pivotal role
in growth and development, regulating many developmental programs. Although
molecular mechanisms involved in auxin signaling in plants have been studied in
great detail, our understanding on these molecular mechanisms is far from
complete. Synthetic chemicals that perturb signaling pathways have been used to
identify new genes and their functions in these signaling pathways. This study
will focus on identification and characterization of three Arabidopsis mutants,
pic7, pic30 and pic115 with altered response to picloram, an auxinic herbicide
that is widely used in Agriculture. During the term of this project, these three
mutant genes will be identified by map-based cloning, and their functions in
auxin response will be characterized using genetic, molecular and biochemical
approaches. As picloram functions differently from other known auxins, it is
expected that these genes and their functions will elucidate new molecular
mechanisms involved in plant auxin response.

The broader impacts of this work will enhance science education at different
levels. The project is set to train graduate, undergraduate and high school
students in auxin biology research during the term of this project. Texas State
University has 27% minority student enrollment and nearby San Marcos High School
(SMHS) has 64% Hispanic student population. The project will have a major impact
on training of minority students in science. Additionally, an inquiry based
semester?long laboratory module will be conducted with the undergraduate
students in Bio 3465 Plant Physiology course. To maximize the impact of the
research on grade 6-12 education, an inquiry module on auxin biology will be
introduced to pre and in-service teacher training at the Texas State University.
In collaboration with the SMHS, one to two high school students will be trained
during each summer. As experiments outlined here involve several disciplines
such as genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, physiology and genomics,
students will be exposed to hands on experiences in many scientific disciplines.