* 0845896
* CAREER: User-Controlled Wireless Privacy via Client-Oriented De-Identification
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Marco Gruteser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Number: 0845896&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Marco
Gruteser&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rutgers University&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER:
User-Controlled Wireless Privacy via Client-Oriented De-Identification&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
challenge of strengthening control over location privacy for users of wireless
devices such as smartphones. As these devices and their network services
continuously monitor our environment, they enable many novel applications with
tremendous societal benefits. However, they also raise significant privacy
challenges by making it difficult for users to control when information about
their whereabouts can be sensed or revealed. &lt;br/&gt;To address this
challenge, this project studies the hitherto relatively unexplored concept of
incorporating a comprehensive set of de-identification techniques into clients,
which limit device-specific information that could allow extended tracking and
eventually identification of the device?s user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
results are expected to lead to novel models that relate parameters such as
spatio-temporal precision and accuracy, sampling frequency, and the presence of
pseudo-identifiers to tracking and identification risks. These models complement
existing models for transactional database records and can be used to inform
users about their current level of privacy or guide system designers. In
addition, the project is expected to provide fundamental insights on physical
layer techniques that limit the accuracy with which infrastructure location
sensors can locate a transmitting client, and techniques that can automatically
detect candidate pseudoidentifiers in transmitted messages. The project also
strengthens Rutgers University?s electrical and computer engineering curriculum
by incorporating privacy and wireless mobile system topics. It further includes
industry collaboration and an outreach plan in collaboration with New Jersey's
Liberty Science Center to attract high school students from underrepresented
groups to the computer engineering profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;