* 0845871
* CAREER: Architectural Enhancement and Design Methodologies for Secure Processing in Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Yunsi Fei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law III-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With pervasive usage of embedded
systems in our daily life and infrastructures, strengthening the security of
embedded system in its design and implementation has become a critical priority
for the research community. This project targets augmenting the processor
architecture for run-time secure processing. Since the architectural support can
be made transparent to upper-level software, it cannot be easily circumvented by
new software security attacks. Meanwhile, in-processor changes offer great
efficiency. We are pursuing three research objectives to address random memory
corruption caused by software attacks. First, we explore effective architectural
augmentations of embedded processors to monitor code integrity, and incorporate
the monitor in a realistic application-specific instruction set processors
(ASIPs) design flow. Second, we utilize the embedded speculative architectures
of processors as a cache for legitimate behaviors to validate program control
flow, protecting control data and decision-making data. The program execution
validations are sampled at critical points to reduce the performance
degradation. Third, we scale architectural support in a single-core environment
up to more sophisticated and increasingly popular multi-core platforms. A suite
of CAD design tools will be released to public for free use. Our approach will
lead to a real impact on modern secure embedded processor design. The project
will also facilitate the integration of research and education across multiple
disciplines, and the PI is especially keen on promoting participation of
traditionally underrepresented minorities and women in such domains.