* 0845521
* CAREER:    Asymmetric Protein Localization and Control of Stomatal Lineage Cell Fate
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Dominique Bergmann, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 03/31/2015
* USD 575,000.00

During development, all multicellular organisms face a similar set of
challenges: they must create a diverse set of specialized cell types, organize
these cells into functional tissues, and maintain pools of stem cells to
replenish those tissues throughout their lifetimes. Asymmetric cell division, in
which one cell divides to create daughter cells that differ in size, location
and cellular components, is an important mechanism for solving these
developmental challenges. While all organisms must solve the same problem of
generating asymmetries, they do not always come up with the same answer. This
project uses the development of stomata (epidermal structures that regulate CO2
and H2O exchange between the plant and atmosphere) as a model to understand how
asymmetries are generated in plants. BASL protein, first identified by its role
in stomatal development, is a plant-specific regulator of cell and tissue
asymmetries, and will be used to identify the general components required for
plant asymmetric cell divisions. Stomata not only provide a framework to
discover fundamental developmental mechanisms, they function as major components
of terrestrial water and carbon cycles. As we witness changes in the global
climate, understanding the mechanisms by which plants control the density and
pattern of stomata will be essential to produce food or fuel crops that
withstand or mitigate production of detrimental climatic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal integrates research, teaching and
public outreach about genetics and developmental biology. A new course was
designed to make students consumers of biological information from a variety of
sources, including primary literature and the mainstream media. Then, in
partnership with The Tech Museum, students will produce publicly accessible
scientific articles. The Tech has programs designed to promote scientific
literacy among the adults and children and these programs reach a broad audience
including K-8 students in some of the most under-served school districts.
&lt;br/&gt;