* 0845347
* CAREER: Technologies for Genome-wide In vivo Study of Neuronal (Axonal) Degeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Mehmet Yanik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0845347&lt;br/&gt;M. Yanik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axonal degeneration is a major
process occurring during early stages of neurodegenerative diseases.
Understanding molecular mechanisms of axonal degeneration may lead to
therapeutic strategies for many devastating diseases. In vivo study of axonal
degeneration following physical injury has been largely limited to organisms
with complex nervous systems, where difficulty of performing injury and genetic
studies is significantly limiting discovery of molecular pathways. Small-animal
models like C. elegans allow powerful genetic manipulations. In this project,
cellular pathways of axonal degeneration in C. elegans will be studied using
genetic, microfluidic and optical technologies. Several mutant strains will be
characterized for understanding effects of various molecular pathways on axonal
degeneration. In vivo genome-wide studies of axonal degeneration will be
conducted following physical injury at sub-cellular resolution. The proposed
studies can allow rapid discovery of genetic targets and cellular pathways
involved in early stages of neurodegeneration with potential impact on both
fundamental science, as well as, medicine. In synergy with the research
component, this proposal will enable a substantial educational and outreach
program. Education and research will be integrated by (1) providing the students
(undergraduate, masters, and graduate) with exciting and valuable research
opportunities at MIT in a new and significant research field, (2) working with
secondary school outreach programs to help young students start a career in
science and technology, (3) trying to attract underrepresented minority students
(particularly African Americans, American Indians, Hispanic Americans as well as
others who add diversity to MIT's School of Engineering) to work in our research
group, (4) feeding new research results back into the courses that the PI is
currently developing, and (5) reaching community at large.