* 0845297
* Investigation of Chromatin Remodeling Mechanisms at the Promoters of Heat Shock Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Alexandre Erkine, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2010
* USD 160,000.00

Intellectual merit. Chromatin remodeling is a fundamental prerequisite to
eukaryotic gene activation. Despite intensive study over the course of decades,
understanding the mechanisms that underlie chromatin changes remains a key
challenge in the field of molecular biology. It has been established that the
intensity of chromatin changes at promoters of yeast heat shock genes during
temperature induction surpass the chromatin remodeling events at other well
characterized gene promoters, yet significantly differ from each other. These
features epitomize heat shock genes as a powerful model for studying chromatin
remodeling mechanisms. Stress response in yeast cells is regulated by two
classes of activators, HSF and Msn2/4, which differentially affect promoter
chromatin remodeling. &lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to investigate the
molecular mechanisms of chromatin remodeling at yeast heat shock gene promoters
and the reasons why the chromatin changes vary drastically even for closely
related and co-regulated heat shock genes. This project will address questions
about the function of histone chaperones and possible cooperation between them
and the identified ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers in regulating HSP gene
expression. Since some histone interacting domains of histone chaperones can
function as trans-activation domains, it will be tested if the converse is true,
that activation domain function includes interaction with histones. An
additional direction will be to investigate if and how the Msn2/4 degradation
rate is regulated by components of the Mediator complex and if this has an
effect on chromatin remodeling events.&lt;br/&gt;The methodological approach is
based on using antibodies against components of chromatin and the
transcriptional apparatus, available from a variety of sources, for chromatin
immune-precipitations followed by high throughput real-time PCR. This approach
allows the monitoring of changes in promoter-specific characteristics over a
time course. Investigation of chromatin remodeling and transcription initiation
will be done utilizing genomic collections of yeast strains with systematic
deletion or tagging of diverse components of the cellular proteome. Standard
genetic engineering techniques will be utilized as well for manipulating genes
and gene promoter regions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The impact of this project
will not only be on the scientific area of eukaryotic gene expression but also
on developing graduate courses: the Molecular Biology of the Gene, Medical
Biochemistry, and Foundations of Biomedical Sciences at the Sanford School of
Medicine at USD. Methods of modern Molecular Biology, including those mentioned
above, will be incorporated into the laboratory courses of graduate and
undergraduate programs at the Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences and USD
campus at Vermillion, South Dakota. Students from Indian tribal schools of South
Dakota have participated in summer programs in the past and this is expected to
continue in the future. Graduate and undergraduate students are currently
involved in the project. Scientific results of the project will be discussed and
disseminated via publications and international meetings and contacts.