* 0845558
* CAREER: Shoaling of Non-Linear Internal Waves over Gentle Slopes: Wave-Scale Interactions and Dissipative Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Peter Diamessis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2015
* USD 646,700.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Nonlinear internal waves (NLIWs), ubiquitous features of the coastal ocean and
lakes, are on the receiving end of an energy cascade initiated at large scales
by the winds and tides in stratified natural water bodies. These waves transport
this energy over 100km distances across gently sloping (shoaling) shelf regions
and dissipate it remotely. Recent massive field-scale experiments in the South
China Sea and the New Jersey Shelf have provided invaluable insight into the
process of NLIW shoaling. Nonetheless, due to limitations of field measurements
in space and time, a number of key questions on wave shoaling remain unanswered,
namely in terms of the associated energy dissipation mechanisms, which are
further complicated by the large-scale wave transformations due to variable
bathymetry. To this end, small-scale numerical modeling is imperatively needed.

The project aims at the use of a fully non-hydrostatic and nonlinear parallel
spectral quadrilateral sub-domain penalty method model to numerically study
shoaling of NLIWs over gentle slopes. The model enables the maximum possible
scale separation between wave-scale and the small-scale dissipative processes in
the wave interior/footprint with optimal resolution of the latter, allowing a
Reynolds number as close as possible to the oceanic value. Simulations will
focus on the basic physics of wave-scale transformations due to shoaling and
their impact on the three-dimensional turbulent dissipative dynamics of the
NLIW-induced benthic boundary layer and subsurface trapped recirculation cores.
A close comparison with field data from the above sites (including a very richly
documented set of observations from the South China Sea on NLIWs and trapped
cores) will establish consistency checks for the simulations, flesh out the
basic physics from the measurements and provide guidance for future deployments.

Understanding the physics of turbulent dissipation in the NLIW footprint and
interior is a crucial missing link in the closure of large-scale energy budgets
in the ocean and lakes. Furthermore, the flow fields inside trapped cores and
the NLIW-induced benthic boundary layer can drive powerful horizontal
biota/nutrient transport and intense resuspension of bottom-lodged
biogeochemical constituents, respectively. Beyond an enhanced description of the
fundamental physics of wave shoaling, the project will offer the foundation for
future investigations on how the flow fields within NLIWs directly interact with
underwater ecology, acoustics and optics and impact water quality. Improved
parameterizations of particulate re-suspension and near-bottom/surface
dissipation may then be developed for use in larger-scale models and field data
analysis.

The close comparison with South China Sea field data will initiate an active
long-term collaboration between Cornell and the University of Washington. All
important numerical results will be disseminated to interested members of the
oceanographic community via an internet database.

Motivated by the advanced numerical methods embedded in the multi-domain solver,
a tightly linked chain of educational activities seeks to initiate a
reconsideration of the current paradigm in scientific computing education at the
graduate/undergraduate level and to boost recruitment of high school students
into science and engineering majors. Starting with graduate coursework, the
proposed educational plan aims to create ocean model users who, although not
developers, have a robust numerical and oceanographic expertise which is aligned
with cutting edge computational methods. The restructuring of a sophomore-level
course on scientific computing will allow undergraduate students to discover the
potential of this research area and embrace it as a vehicle to complete their
studies in the sciences and engineering, thereby establishing a consistent flux
of future numerical modelers to the graduate ranks. A one-week high-school
course module on internal wave simulation in lakes will introduce a diverse
audience of high school students to computational modeling as an alternative to
the traditional 'wet lab' and the option of future studies in applied
computation in science and engineering.