* 0845077
* CAREER: Integrating Education and Research in NMR Structure-Function Studies of Mechanically Strained Elastin
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Gregory Boutis, CUNY York College
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 05/31/2010
* USD 0.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0845077 PI: Boutis,Gregory ORG: CUNY-York College

Title: CAREER: Integrating Education and Research in NMR Structure-Function
Studies of Mechanically Strained Elastin

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goal of the proposed research effort is to integrate
research and education in NMR structure-function studies of elastin, a
remarkable biopolymer that confers elasticity to many vertebrate tissues.
Combining high resolution Q-space imaging, deuterium quadrupolar echo
spectroscopy and double quantum filtered NMR experiments, the complex morphology
and interaction with water that confers elasticity to elastin will be studied.
Q-space imaging is an experimental method for directly measuring the probability
of displacement of nuclear spins in a confining structure. State of the art
technology has been developed recently in the PI?s laboratory allowing for
noncommercial pulsed gradient fields on the order of 20,000 G/cm that can be
delivered to a sample approximately 2 mm3 in volume in a standard NMR magnet.
Important characteristics of elastin, such as the surface to volume ratio and
surface tension of pores that confine mobile water molecules within single
elastin fibers can be readily probed with this technology. Double quantum
filtered NMR experiments of deuterium hydrated samples will allow for additional
probe of anisotropic motion and local order of water in elastin. In addition,
quadrupolar echo spectroscopy of deuterium labeled elastin mimetic peptides will
provide for a concomitant measurement of molecular dynamics, such as backbone
motion and side-chain flips over time scales ranging from 10-7 s to 10-3 s.
Together, these studies will be used to probe the complex structure-function
relationship of elastin, as a function of deformation, to give insight into the
morphology and interaction with water that imparts elasticity.

BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed work promises to open a new window into the role
of water in determining the dynamics of protein conformational change. The PI
works in the setting of a urban university campus with a 62% minority and 69%
female student population. He has already demonstrated his ability to engage
undergraduate students from these groups in a high caliber research operation
that will certainly help to prepare them to join the ranks of STEM scientists.
The PI also has access to a diverse group of graduate research students through
the city-wide CUNY graduate center. The PI has also demonstrated a strong and
effective commitment to K-12 outreach, and he takes appropriate advantage of
institutional resources in the city and university to connect with students and
teachers at the K-12 level.



