* 0845650
* CAREER: Computing with Things Small, Wet, and Random - Design Automation for Digital Computation with Nanoscale Technologies and Biological Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Marc Riedel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project strives for novel and transformative approaches to design automation
guided by physical views of computation. A broad theme is the application of
expertise from an established field, digital circuit design, to new fields, such
as nanotechnology and synthetic biology. A specific theme that cuts across these
domains is constructing and deconstructing probabilistic behavior. In the
biological realm, the project will develop techniques for synthesizing
biochemical systems that produce proteins according to specified probability
distributions. This will provide robustness and flexibility ? akin to hedging
with a portfolio of investments ? for applications in biochemical sensing and
drug delivery. In the engineering realm, the project will develop techniques for
designing digital circuits that process zeros and ones probabilistically. This
will mitigate against the noise and glitches that occur as circuit components
are scaled down in size to nanometers. &lt;br/&gt;The circuit design community
has unique expertise that can be brought to bear on the challenging design
problems in synthetic biology. Applications in biology, in turn, offer a wealth
of problems in algorithmic development. With its cross-disciplinary emphasis,
this project will bring new perspectives to both fields. An important goal of
the project is to communicate the goals and the impetus for interdisciplinary
research to a wide audience. A new graduate-level course will be developed,
titled "Circuits, Computation, and Biology". In parallel, a book with the same
title will be written, to be published by Pan Stanford Publishing. Also public
seminars will be given through the Café Scientifique series hosted by the Bell
Museum of Natural History in Minneapolis.