* 0845830
* CAREER: CCF-SHF Advanced Execution Environments for Next-generation Cloud Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Godmar Back, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 427,639.00

The next years will see a shift from traditional desktop or server applications
to a model that is dominated by the confluence of several trends: web-based
application delivery, utility computing, software as a service, data mash-ups,
and client-side extensions for web customization. This paradigm shift to next-
generation cloud applications profoundly changes the way in which users use the
world wide web and provides tremendous potential for accelerating scientific
discovery. A crucial component in this shift is the web browser and the server
infrastructure delivering those complex applications, which typically consist of
multiple, interconnected components from different sources.&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to create advanced browser and server execution environments that
address the needs of these applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates a research and education plan that develops abstractions for advanced
execution environments that can robustly support next-generation cloud
applications. Our primary focus falls on an advanced client-side execution
environment called script spaces.&lt;br/&gt;Script spaces provide an environment
that can support the client side of cloud applications in a reliable, robust,
secure, flexible, and scalable fashion. A complementary effort provides a
server-side execution environment. We are prototyping our abstractions and
validate our techniques by applying them to a client-side mash-up framework that
is in daily use. Our education plan applies the research artifacts we create to
reinvigorate our undergraduate curriculum by emphasizing real-world contexts in
student assignments, even in a first CS course.