* 0845951
* CAREER: Mining Genome-wide Chemical-Structure Activity Relationships in Emergent Chemical Genomics Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Jun Huan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2014
* USD 499,972.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
develop an integrated research and education program for advancing the
underlying theoretical and computational principles of data mining in the
emergent chemical genomics databases. The core technical innovations that this
research aims to advance are: (i) developing effective kernel-based
representations and structure pattern extraction and selection methods to
capture the intrinsic characteristics of irregular and discrete spaces such as
the chemical space, (ii) designing methods for adaptive and scalable similarity
search in large databases of complex data and methods for accurate
classification models, and (iii) deriving application oriented validation. A key
strength of this work is the application of the theoretic and computational
advancements to real-world problems, namely, chemical toxicity prediction based
on microarray gene expression profiles and high-throughput chemical screening.
Collaborators in academia, industry, and government agencies will evaluate the
new algorithms. The data mining knowledge gained will be applicable beyond the
chemical domain; examples of such applications include social network analysis
and sensor network analysis. The PI will work closely with the Center of
Excellence in Chemical Methodologies and Library Development at the University
of Kansas (KU CMLD) to evaluate research prototypes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the
fundamental problem of learning functional dependencies between arbitrary input
and output domains. In particular, this research: 1) focuses on complex input
domain, the space of all chemicals, 2)aims to derive a uniform representation of
the domain by working on innovative tools for graphs and geometric structures
that are associated with the domain, 3) will provide practical tools to search
through the domain, and will design new algorithms that uncover real connections
between the input domain to an equally complex output domain (a space of
biological entities). The data mining knowledge gained from this project will
provide the research community with much better techniques for searching,
mining, and analyzing domains of complex data and for uncovering the real
connections between domains of complex data. The proposed research is a timely
effort to integrate and advance knowledge in three communities: cheminformatics,
data mining, and machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Accurate data mining tools for chemical structure-activity
relationship discovery will simplify and accelerate drug discovery and hence
improve human health. Better prediction tools for chemical activity including
toxicity will lead to better strategies for environmental monitoring and
preservation. Deep understanding of chemical structure-activity relationships
should enable rational material design in the research for renewable and clean
energy. The research program is strongly linked to the educational goals of this
proposal, which are, among others, (i) to enrich curriculum for the
undergraduate and graduate education in new interdisciplinary training programs
and (2) to encourage K-12 and undergraduate students to pursue careers in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).