* 0845162
* CAREER:   Understanding Molecular Networks Controlling Plant Glucosinolate Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Sixue Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 675,973.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Plants produce
thousands of chemicals that are important to their growth, development and
interaction with the environment. Many of these chemicals, such as
glucosinolates, impact agricultural practice, human nutrition and health.
Glucosinolates are a major group of thioglucosides with diverse biological
activities, including defense against pathogens and insects. They are present in
important Brassica crops as well as in the model plant Arabidopsis, which will
be used for the proposed research. In order to engineer plants to improve crop
quality and yield, create renewable energy and develop nutraceuticals, it will
be essential to define the organization and connectivity of complex metabolic
networks like those involved in glucosinolate production. The research team will
use modern biological tools to understand the chemical networks that regulate
plant glucosinolate metabolism. The project is expected to identify novel
chemical components including proteins and metabolites and put them into
functional context of glucosinolate metabolism. The research is expected to
provide comprehensive knowledge of regulatory and metabolic mechanisms
underlying glucosinolate metabolism that will help to develop crops with
enhanced defense and improved quality. The approaches employed will provide
technology development for future network analysis of other important plant
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to the scientific
impacts, this project will involve multidisciplinary training of students at
different levels, as well as bring current knowledge of the plant chemical
factory and modern functional genomics to high school classrooms. Education and
training of high school teachers and students will facilitate effective
preparation of our next-generation scientists and citizens with cutting-edge
biological sciences. Educational/training activities will be developed for high
school students and teachers in functional genomics, including online functional
genomics resources. The large-scale data generated by this project will provide
excellent materials for active learning, critical thinking, and problem solving.
Thus, the broader impacts include advancing the discovery and understanding of
essential plant chemical processes and establishing a platform to expose modern
scientific research and technologies to high school teachers and their students.