* 0845766
* CAREER: Measurement, modeling and control of molecular motors above a nanopore
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* William Dunbar, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 406,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Novel approaches for single molecule measurement and
manipulation are required to uncover with high resolution the dynamics and
function of biological macromolecules. The proposed research will optimize a
biological nanopore instrument for measuring and controlling individual
molecular motors at sub-millisecond resolution. In preliminary work, active
voltage control regulates a single DNA in a nanopore for repeated binding and
dissociation of individual enzymes above the nanopore. The first research aim is
to reduce the total latency of detecting DNA-enzyme complex formation. Modeling
will then be employed to estimate equilibrium and binding rate constants from
the measured DNA-enzyme complex assembly data. The final aim is measuring and
controlling individual lambda exonculease motors during degradation of duplex
DNA into single-stranded DNA above the nanopore. Active control and modeling
will permit exploration of voltage dependence in pausing and in the
translocation step in the catalytic cycle of lambda exonuclease on the nanopore,
at the single molecule level.

Broader Impacts: The primary goal of the education plan is to advance feedback
control as the basis for interdisciplinary outreach efforts, in the form of high
school, undergraduate and graduate courses at UCSC. The PI has co-designed an
introductory course on dynamics and control, which is taught in summer to high
school students, and each fall and spring to freshmen and sophomores at UCSC. A
graduate course on the role of feedback control in single molecule
instrumentation, cross-listed for computer and electrical engineering and
bioengineering students, will also be developed to disseminate the more advanced
topics of the research plan.

