* 0845827
* CAREER:   A Machine Learning Framework for Metagenomic Relationships
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Gail Rosen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 679,704.00

(This award is funded through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009: Public Law 111-5).

This is a CAREER award to support the research of Dr. Gail Rosen, in the
Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering at Drexel University. Dr.
Rosen is a third-year, tenure-track Assistant Professor.

Dr. Rosen is developing a computational framework which enables identification
and comparison of microorganisms to the environmental factors in their habitats.
With recent technologies, DNA can be extracted directly from the millions of
cells in any environment, and vast amounts of this DNA can now be sequenced from
an environment, a technology known as metagenomics. The ability to analyse these
metagenomic datasets lies in the problem of identifying the content of this
fragmented mixture, which is composed of thousands or millions of genomes.
Machine learning, with its ability to recognize patterns in complex data, is
well-suited to this task. Dr. Rosen believes a machine learning approach to
analyzing metagenomic datasets will allow the vast majority of the unculturable
microbial species in an environment to be studied. For example, machine learning
may enable biologists to determine the combinations of microbes and genetic
capabilities present that promote soil health and increase crop-yield.
Typically, sequenced DNA fragments are identified by scoring their alignment to
previously sequenced organisms. Unfortunately, annotation protocols employed for
single genome analysis do not hold for a mixture of environmental DNA. The Rosen
lab is developing a general classification system to identify the genomic origin
of sequenced fragments, methods to reconstruct fragment taxonomy and infer
functional relationships through discriminative classification methods and a
genomic word-frequency model to predict feature sparseness as a function of
fragment length and database complexity. This research will also address
fundamental biological questions about global genomic features and their effect
on taxonomical and functional relationships. All tools development in this
project will be posted on Dr. Rosen?s website: http://www.ece.drexel.edu/gailr/

As a part of her CAREER plan, Dr. Rosen recognizes that this research endeavor
is naturally interdisciplinary with concepts from electrical engineering,
computer science, and biology. Therefore, her lab is developing an
interdisciplinary graduate and undergraduate Bioinformatics curricula (in
collaboration with a molecular ecologist) and K-12 modules to incorporate an
NSF-funded K-12 program. A particularly creative activity includes image and
audio processing applications for the classroom to illustrate math and science
concepts through effects used in Photoshop and Garage Band applications. For
example, the students are asked to transcribe particular musical chords and as a
parallel, ?translate? codons to their amino acids. This activity illustrates the
parallel of the Genetic Code to piano chords.

