* 0845157
* CAREER: Programming Interfaces and Hardware Designs for a Polymorphic Multicore Cache Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Thomas Wenisch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The semiconductor industry has hit a wall - chip-level power and
cooling constraints have slowed the march of clock frequency, forcing industry
to instead bet on multicore to provide energy-efficient performance scalability.
Although the multicore trend poses daunting challenges for application
developers, it also creates new opportunities unavailable in traditional multi-
chip multiprocessors: the drastic change in the relative costs of on-chip
communication and computation enable application designs with tightly-coupled
threads and frequent sharing that would prove latency- and bandwidth-prohibitive
in traditional multiprocessors. Unfortunately, current multicore memory systems
are inflexible and poorly-suited to support coordinated execution, as they
provide no direct means for core-to-core communication or to optimize data
placement on chip. Moreover, intra-chip access patterns vary drastically across
applications - there is no one-size-fits-all static cache architecture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these deficiencies, this project seeks to
develop a Polymorphic Multicore Cache Architecture (PMCA) - a modular on-chip
cache design where software configures primitive hardware mechanisms to provide
a cache architecture suited to a specific workload. The PMCA concept will be
pursued along three fronts: First, PMCA?s architectural interface and behavioral
design through a full system, cycle accurate simulation will be conducted.
Second,language level constructs, software management policies, and
virtualization of PMCA through FPGA based functional emulation will be
investigated. Third, trade-offs in performance, area, and power for various
designs will be examined.