* 0845149
* CAREER: Enforceable Economic Mechanisms for Cooperation in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Sheng Zhong, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 01/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Recent advances in computing hardware and wireless technology have resulted in
widespread popularity of applications and systems involving highly distributed
wireless networks. In such a network, each node may belong to an independent
organization or individual that has its own interests, and so may not always
want to behave cooperatively. However, if these nodes do not cooperate, the
performance of the network may degrade, or the entire network may become
dysfunctional. Consequently, we need to design economic mechanisms to stimulate
these nodes to cooperate.

In this project, we study the design of enforceable economic mechanisms. We say
an economic mechanism is enforceable if it provides sufficiently strong
incentives for cooperative behavior and security protection against cheating and
has been systematically evaluated in experiments. We emphasize the great
importance to make economic mechanisms enforceable because if an economic
mechanism is not enforceable, it cannot be effectively used in practice to
simulate cooperation.

Our research plan is to focus on two specific problems, namely the Routing and
Packet Forwarding Problem and the FDMA Channel Assignment Problem, because they
are simple but fundamental. Besides these two problems, it is also planned to
study experimental methods for systematically evaluating the incentive
compatibility and computation and communication efficiency of economic
mechanisms in wireless networks, as well as a few other selected problems of
non-cooperation in wireless networks. In addition, the plan includes education
activities to disseminate cutting-edge knowledge on cooperation in wireless
networks to undergraduate and graduate students.

