* 0845401
* CAREER: Immersive Architectural Daylighting Design Experience
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2016
* Barbara Cutler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2016
* USD 494,808.00

In this project the PI, building on her expertise in computer graphics,
computational geometry, daylighting, and architectural design, will use computer
graphics and daylight modeling to advance the science of architectural
daylighting design, to promote the science and understanding of creativity in
design, and to create innovative tools that allow designers to explore
alternative designs and new technologies for improving the sustainability of
their buildings. In particular, the PI will extend her prior results on
efficient, interactive algorithms for qualitatively and quantitatively accurate
interactive lighting simulation, to develop a "plug in" for global illumination
and visualization that can be seamlessly incorporated into the early stages of
design and that will work directly with meshes produced by commonly-used
modeling programs. The new tool will be intended for use on a standard desktop
computer by an experienced designer, who need not be an expert in daylighting
technology or advanced graphical simulations. The PI will also develop, as a
companion system, a full-scale, immersive environment in which multiple
architectural designers, a designer and a client, or a teacher and student(s)
can gather to experience animated visualizations of the natural illumination
within a proposed design by controlling the time of day, the season, and the
climate. Participants will also be able to interactively redesign the space, by
changing the geometry and materials. This system will be developed and exhibited
on the PI's campus in the Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center (EMPAC),
leveraging the computational resources at the new Computational Center for
Nanotechnology Innovations (CCNI), two state-of-the-art facilities that are
unique to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The tools to be developed in this project will incorporate
fundamentally new interactive global illumination algorithms to solve for the
challenging dynamic illumination conditions presented by daily and seasonal
variations of the sun and sky. Techniques from the realm of parallel and
distributed computing will be applied and extended, in order to facilitate
online simulation and optimization during iterative architectural design. The
architectural design process will thus become more effective and creative,
enabling better exploitation of daylighting with a consequential reduction in
the need for supplemental electric lighting, thereby leading to more energy-
efficient building designs. The same framework will be applicable to other
design problems that require complex physical simulation and visualization,
including for example passive solar heating and cooling, acoustics, aerodynamic
building envelopes, structural analysis, and general (non-architectural) design
scenarios.