* 0845507
* CAREER:   Molecular mechanism of Indole-3-butyric acid action in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Bethany Zolman, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 05/31/2014
* USD 575,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Auxins are plant hormones that play
important roles in growth, development, and responses to environmental cues,
especially in roots. Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is the principal form of the
hormone. Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) is a naturally-occurring compound that is
converted to IAA in plant cells, providing a source of IAA when and where the
active hormone is required. IBA is used widely in horticulture to initiate
rooting in cuttings in a variety of plant species. However, how IBA is converted
to IAA is not known. The research activities presented here use biochemical and
genetic approaches to determine the mechanism of the IBA-to-IAA conversion and
identify the specific roles(s) of IBA in plant growth and development.
Identification of the enzymes that catalyze these reactions and the impact of
IBA activity will further our understanding of auxin metabolism. These specific
aims will be first steps towards the long-term goal of understanding the
importance of, purpose for, and interactions between different IAA-metabolic
pathways; application of this knowledge will allow manipulation of these
pathways to increase rooting and enhance plant growth. The education section of
this project includes creation of an inquiry-based plant molecular biology lab,
designed to increase opportunities for undergraduate research. The primary
objective of this course is to increase student understanding of the scientific
process by generating a hands-on project that will engage and enlighten
students. Research aims from the proposal will be directly integrated into the
course, providing students an exposure to real-world science while advancing the
understanding of IBA metabolism. Undergraduate participants will present their
work at local high schools, thereby exposing the next generation of students to
scientific research and future opportunities.