* 0845282
* CAREER: Generalized Image Understanding with Probabilistic Ontologies and Dynamic Adaptive Graph Hierarchies
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Jason Corso, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 539,086.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From representation to learning to
inference, effective use of high-level semantic knowledge in computer vision
remains a challenge in bridging the signal-symbol gap. This research
investigates the role of semantics in visual inference through the generalized
image understanding problem: to automatically detect, localize, segment, and
recognize the core high-level elements and how they interact in an image, and
provide a parsimonious semantic description of the
image.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research examines a unified
methodology that integrates low- (e.g., pixels and features), mid- (e.g. latent
structure), and high-level (e.g., semantics) elements for visual inference.
Adaptive graph hierarchies induced directly from the images provide the core
mathematical representation. A statistical interpretation of affinities between
neighboring pixels and regions in the image drives this induction. Latent
elements and structure are captured with multilevel Markov networks. A
probabilistic ontology represents the core knowledge and uncertainty of the
inferred structure and guides the ultimate semantic interpretation of the image.
At each level, rigorous methods from computer science and statistics are
connected to and combined with formal semantic methods from
philosophy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A symbiotic education plan involving graduate
and undergraduate mentoring and education, professional tutorial courses at the
boundary of vision and ontology, and K-12 outreach is incorporated into the
research plan. The research and education, disseminated broadly through both the
applied science and semantics/philosophy literatures, lays a foundation on which
to both utilize and automatically extract rich semantic information from images
and other signal data for critical application areas such as internet vision,
autonomous navigation, and ambient biometrics. &lt;br/&gt;