* 0845760
* CAREER: Predicting global climate change through fluctuation-dissipation: A practical computational strategy for complex multiscale dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Rafail Abramov, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 472,997.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal describes a practical
computational framework for the response of a complex chaotic nonlinear
multiscale dynamical system to changes in external forcing parameters. It is
based on the PI's recent successful efforts to create a numerical approach for
the fluctuation-dissipation theorem to predict linear response of a nonlinear
chaotic forced-dissipative dynamical system to an external perturbation with
improved skill, based on a precise geometric response formula for systems with
chaotic attractors. While the method developed is observed to perform well for
relatively simple dynamical systems, complex realistic climate models are more
computationally expensive, have nonlinear interactions on multiple scales, and
sometimes include stochastically parameterized processes. Here the PI proposes
several numerical strategies to adapt the new approach for complex multiscale
nonlinear forced-dissipative, and, possibly, stochastically parameterized
dynamical systems with many variables and highly non-Gaussian equilibrium state,
as well as reduce its computational cost. Successful implementation of proposed
algorithms should help create a novel computational framework for global climate
change prediction. The proposal also suggests development of a set of graduate-
level courses with strong emphasis on the basic subjects of chaotic nonlinear
dynamics, atmospheric and oceanic physics, and computational weather and climate
prediction, which are the key topics needed to become an interdisciplinary
weather and climate research scientist. These courses will give graduate
students an opportunity to interact directly with the PI's research and learn a
variety of advanced theoretical approaches and numerical methods directly from
the PI through graduate advising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of
the linear fluctuation-dissipation approach to identify the ranges of parameter
perturbations which produce catastrophic climate response can be helpful in
determining potentially harmful types of anthropogenic intervention into the
Earth's global climate cycle. This data may provide additional information to
help define economic, political and legislative initiatives to preserve our
environment and to develop advanced technologies for more reliable
environmentally-friendly renewable power systems. In addition, such an approach
is also suitable for the inverse climate change problem, where the geological
evidence of past climate changes is used to compute the range of physical
forcing parameters which triggered these climate changes, which can help to
determine the cause of these climate changes on the planetary scale. The set of
courses under the PI's development may potentially evolve into a consistent
interdisciplinary educational program on the graduate level to train future
climate and weather research scientists with heavy mathematical and
computational bias, which could eventually be adopted as a basic educational
standard for climate and weather research. Implementation of this program will
reduce the burden on national weather and climate research centers and
laboratories which currently spend substantial efforts on the training of their
employees at the postdoctoral level.