* 0845789
* CAREER: Principles and Techniques for Automated Middleware Specializations in Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Aniruddha Gokhale, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 533,181.00

Standardized general-purpose middleware remain an attractive option to develop
performance-sensitive and safety-critical distributed systems due to their
support for commonly required features that simplify distributed computing. The
feature-richness of these middleware and coarse-grained design, however, often
adversely impact memory footprint and performance of the applications.
Proprietary solutions and handcrafted optimizations to standardized middleware
are infeasible due to high development and maintenance costs. This research is
addressing these problems via automated specialization of general-purpose
middleware (i.e., pruning unwanted features, and adding and customizing the
necessary ones). The intellectual merit of this research lies in how the
automated specializations are realized by (a) identifying and exploiting the
algebraic structure of middleware that helps map the specialization problem into
a feature-oriented software development problem; (b) developing a new theory for
feature composition, refactoring, and interactions across the lifecycle stages
of applications; and (c) developing a well-defined specialization process based
on generative programming. The broader impact of this CAREER research is
observed through the (a) development of new principles to design middleware that
make them inherently amenable to specialization; (b) documentation of
specialization patterns, which reduces software maintenance; (c) enhanced
developer productivity and system correctness; and (d) transitioning of the
research artifacts to education and scientific community through an open source
tool suite called GAMMA (Generative Aspects for the Manipulation of Middleware
Architectures).