* 0845314
* CAREER:  Research, Education, and Capacity Building - Genomic Structure of Native Peruvian Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Cecil Lewis, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 644,946.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER project integrates next-
generation molecular genetics with an aggressive education strategy to prepare
students and professionals in genomics and to communicate the importance of
science to the public. The research questions asked are: What is the geographic
pattern of human population diversity? and, How have migrations, the
environment, and culture shaped this pattern? Addressing these questions
provides a foundation for numerous fields of biological and medical science
including the study of natural selection, the search for disease predisposing
genes, and the handling of confounding factors in disease association research
that are attributed to modern genetic exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The country
of Peru will serve as a ideal case study: 1) to date, only one population in
Peru has been studied at a genomic level; 2) Peru is ecologically diverse, with
deserts, high plateaus, and the Amazon Jungle; 3) Peru has an extremely rich
cultural prehistory and extensive present-day linguistic and ethnic diversity.
The genomic data will be informative of sex-biased patterns of migration, the
extent of genetic admixture between native and non-native peoples, and the role
of geographic and linguistic barriers on patterns of human genetic diversity.
The genetic data includes mitochondrial genomes and a genome-wide survey of 800
repeat motifs for 15 geographically dispersed native populations. These novel
data will be integrated with previously published data providing the most
extensive genomic sampling of human populations to date.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education activities will reach a broad audience by
accounting for varied levels of training in biological science. They include an
annual professional development workshop for high school and community college
teachers, a course and hands-on experience in genetics for undergraduate
students, courses and hands-on training in genomics for graduate students,
capacity building in Peru, public education using an online course, and the
dissemination of the research by a project website. This project will employ one
professional, full-time technician who is Hispanic, and a number of
undergraduate and graduate students will participate as research interns during
the duration of the research.