* 0845921
* CAREER: Mathematical Sketching: Pen-based Tools for Conceptual Understanding in Mathematics and Physics
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2016
* Joseph LaViola, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2016
* USD 539,776.00

Pen-based computing has the potential to make a significant improvement in the
education of our students in STEM disciplines so as to produce a more skilled
technical workforce able to compete in the new global economy. Mathematical
sketching, a pen-based interaction paradigm that is providing a new approach to
STEM education, is the process of making and exploring dynamic illustrations by
associating handwritten mathematics with free-form diagrams. The proposed
research will develop new mathematical sketching tools to improve student
learning in STEM. High level semantic recognition techniques for understanding
mathematical sketches (the combination of handwritten problem description,
mathematical expressions, and drawings) will be explored to ensure proper
interactive feedback, facilitation of correct cognitive models, and the
generation of the most appropriate dynamic visualizations for a given problem.
In addition, these techniques will, in part, be used to develop strategies in
inferential statics and dynamics, the process of finding appropriate animations
when users do not directly specify motion equations in the problem solving
process. Given the reliance on recognition-based interaction in mathematical
sketching, usability studies will examine how users are affected by recognition
feedback and accuracy levels. These studies will provide useful guidelines for
ensuring that the mathematical sketching interface is usable by both teacher and
student. Two educational studies will also explore how mathematical sketching
affects teaching and learning. This work will advance the state-of-the-art in
pen-based UIs through the development of techniques and exploration of user
interface design issues for enriching mathematical sketching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This proposal links research in pen-based
UIs with STEM education, a critical application area. Thus, the work has the
potential to reach thousands of students each year. The PI has the opportunity
to work on this research in conjunction with the University of Central Florida?s
EXCEL Program, an NSF STEP-funded project that helps students succeed in math
and science during the first two years of college, where the mathematical
sketching paradigm is directly applicable. The PI will give demonstrations and
lectures through the Florida High Tech Corridor Council techCAMP program to
bring mathematical sketching to teachers and students in African American and
Hispanic high schools. The proposed research will be integrated into a graduate-
level course on pen-based UIs, thus enhancing the education of tomorrow?s pen-
based UI designers and researchers. Finally, undergraduate courses will be
taught on human computer interaction (HCI) and design of interactive systems
that, together with the graduate course, will be an educational foundation for
HCI at UCF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;