* 0845074
* CAREER: An Integrated Multiscale Platform for Fundamental Studies of Peptide Self-Assembly
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* M. Scott Shell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 403,254.00

0845074 Shell

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

An Integrated Multiscale Platform for Fundamental Studies of Peptide Self
Assembly Peptides are exceptionally versatile platforms for tunable molecular
self assembly, forming an impressive variety of nanoscale morphologies in
response to cues spanning temperature, pH, salt, solvent, and chemical
additives. Moreover, their high degrees of biocompatibility, conformational
specificity, and molecular recognition have made these systems ideal candidates
for bottom up design in materials, nanotechnology, medicine, and biotechnology.
Yet despite successes in experimental peptide engineering, a predictive
theoretical understanding that could be used to rationally design peptide self
assembled materials is lacking. Specifically, there are no general, quantitative
methods for understanding the impact of single residue mutations on assembly
thermodynamics and kinetics, or for predicting the rich, diverse phase
morphologies that different peptides can adopt.

Intellectual Merit:

The CAREER project involves the development of new multiscale simulation methods
to overcome existing barriers to multipeptide modeling, and the use of these to
generate new insights into the thermodynamics of peptide self assembly. This
work develops a novel, general multiscale methodology that rigorously derives
coarse grained peptide models from carefully performed all-atom simulations. At
the heart of this approach is the relative entropy, a quantitative metric for
linking models at different scales: optimized sequence specific coarse grained
models will be developed by minimizing the relative entropy between coarse
grained and reference all atom peptide dimer simulations. The reduced models
developed will enable long time scale studies of large oligomeric assemblies
that will provide new fundamental molecular perspectives on peptide self-
assembly thermodynamics. Specifically, this work will study conformational
switching peptides, a class of engineered peptides that react sensitively to
environmental cues to transform among different self assembled nanostructures.
The diversity of these peptides stands to delineate fundamental and sequence
specific aspects of peptide self assembly, and provides a sensitive test of
predictive simulations. Using the proposed multiscale methodology for switching
peptides, this work will examine sequence effects on phase behavior and
morphologies, and elucidate the basic physical interactions that drive their
self-assembly.

Broader Impacts:

This work will develop a fundamental, rigorous new approach to multiscale
simulation that will be useful not only for peptides, but for many problems in
multiscale physics, offering an important tool for bottom up rational design of
nanoscale technologies built on self assembly. For peptides specifically, this
work will be the first to couple accurate, converged all atom simulations with
multiscale coarse grained ones, and will generate new perspectives on the
complex balance of single peptide structure and self assembly driving forces.
The prediction of peptide assembly from sequence alone will enable rational
peptide design efforts in materials and biology. Work on this project will
parallel several educational initiatives. The PI will develop a new graduate
molecular simulation elective and online text on molecular thermodynamics that
emphasize multiscale physics and leverage peptides as broad examples of self-
assembly, solution thermodynamics, polymer physics, nanomaterials, biophysics,
and physical chemistry. The PI will continue to use successful research programs
at UCSB, such as the Graduate Research Internship Program, to incorporate
undergraduates (four so far, including one female) and underrepresented minority
students (one summer masters student thus far) in his research. An individual
collaboration with a Florida A&M University group will further recruit
underrepresented minorities from that institution for summer research in the
PI's group. The PI will also continue participation in UCSB's summer
undergraduate research seminars and K-12 outreach programs. Finally, the PI will
initiate an annual departmental graduate symposium to broaden the reach of
research by Ph.D. candidates.