* 0845955
* The Appalachian Ohio Herbarium Database Network:  Infrastructural Enhancements, Resource Building and Database Completion
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Philip Cantino, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 494,019.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This three-year award builds infrastructure for significant plant collections in
Appalachian Ohio, completes databasing/imaging projects at four academic
institutions and two Wayne National Forest districts, and establishes the online
Appalachian Ohio Herbarium Database Network. The grant will outfit the new plant
collections research space at Ohio University, provide specimen cabinets to
Youngstown State University, and fund essential computer equipment and
microscopes to the above-mentioned institutions, Marietta College and Muskingum
College. It supports student personnel to database and image 254,000 algae,
fungi, moss, fern, conifer and flowering plant specimens housed across the
region. The institutional databases will be linked at
http://www.herbarium.ohiou.edu/regional_database_network, making cumulative
specimen data, images of pressed specimens and living plants, ecological data,
literature references, and a dynamic GoogleMap mapping facility available to the
public as an invaluable resource on Appalachian Ohio's rich plant life.

This is Ohio's first regional biological collections network and is a model for
a future statewide network. The project will train 23 undergraduate and five
graduate students and collaboratively engage nine biologists across the region.
Summer programs will expose 675 elementary school children in Ohio University's
"Kids on Campus" program to local natural areas, the relevance of biological
diversity, and hands-on research experience with Appalachian plants.