* 0845450
* CAREER: Towards an Understanding of the Underlying Chemistry in Collision-Induced Dissociation of Peptides in Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2015
* Nicolas Polfer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 03/31/2015
* USD 635,000.00

Nicolas Polfer from the University of Florida (UF) is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division to
investigate the collision-induced dissociation (CID) of peptides, a cornerstone
in mass spectrometric sequencing and identification of peptides and proteins.
Under the high-energy conditions of CID, some fragments can undergo
rearrangement processes, such that the original sequence information is lost.
This "scrambling" process is thought to operate via a cyclization reaction from
the N-terminus. Dr. Polfer's group employs infrared photodissociation
spectroscopy to identify the fragment structures formed, and ion mobility mass
spectrometry to separate and quantify the often heterogeneous mixtures of CID
products. The studies seek to determine whether sequence "scrambling" and/or
other processes are pervasive and thus a concern for peptide
misidentification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project exposes undergraduate
students at UF and high-school teachers in Florida to life sciences and life
science-enabling technologies (such as mass spectrometry) via the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute Science for Life program, where undergraduates are introduced
to highly interdisciplinary approaches and techniques important for
biotechnology. The PI is also developing modules focused on the application of
cutting-edge technologies related to protein identification and mass
spectrometry for summer teacher workshops organized by the Center for
Precollegiate Education and Training at UF. Teachers are encouraged to transfer
derived knowledge and skills to their high-school classrooms; a follow-up spring
workshop follows their progress. The project supports participation by teachers
from disadvantaged areas.