* 0845062
* CAREER:   Elucidating the regulation mechanisms of ErbB signaling using quantitative imaging
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,10/31/2015
* Diane Lidke, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 10/31/2015
* USD 765,167.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The responses of a cell to its
environment result largely from the movement of signals from receptor proteins
on the outer cell surface to the cytoplasm and nucleus. Strict regulation of
this signal transduction is crucial for cell survival, differentiation, growth
and other activities. However, many aspects of how the cell maintains control of
signaling pathways remain unclear. The objective of this project is to reveal
new details about the molecular mechanisms that regulate signaling.
Specifically, we will examine signaling mechanisms of the erbB protein family to
1) characterize receptor dynamics and their influence on protein interactions;
2) determine the order and rate of protein recruitment to signaling complexes;
and 3) measure the conformational changes that induce erbB activation.
Comparisons between normal and mutant erbB receptors that exhibit altered
signaling will provide further insight into regulation mechanisms. New imaging
techniques and analyses will be developed for the study of dynamic protein
events at the molecular level on living cells. This research will result in
quantification of protein dynamics at the single molecule level, revealing
information that cannot be elucidated by traditional biochemical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This multi-disciplinary
project will train students in research at the interface of biological and
physical sciences. Graduate and undergraduate students will be introduced to
exciting new research in cell biology and fluorescence microscopy through
development of a cross-campus light microscopy course. Working with the Explora
Science Center and Children's Museum of Albuquerque, artistically and
scientifically compelling videos and presentations based on live cell imaging
will be developed. Explora's visitors include &gt; 60% minority students of all
ages, allowing us to reach an underrepresented group in science and providing an
ideal forum to introduce the world of cell biology to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by the Cellular
Biosystems Cluster and Physics of Living Systems Program.