* 0845193
* CAREER:   Tip-Enhanced Fluorescence Microscope for Resolving Single Molecules Within Dense Biomolecular Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Jordan Gerton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 05/31/2014
* USD 732,666.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to develop
an optical microscope that is capable of deciphering the organization of intact
biomolecular networks at the molecular length scale, with a particular emphasis
on membrane-associated networks. The function of such a network is closely
related to its structure, which can be disrupted by genetically or
environmentally triggered conformational changes to the molecular components,
sometimes resulting in disease or other malfunction. A key weakness of most
high-resolution structural techniques for deciphering the network architecture
is their inability to determine molecular composition, since they generally lack
the sensitivity to identify individual molecules. Only optical spectroscopy can
routinely achieve single-molecule detection, but traditional optical techniques
are not sensitive enough to resolve the molecular features of a sample by almost
two orders of magnitude. The technical component of this award involves a number
of innovative improvements to an emerging high-resolution structural analysis
technique called tip-enhanced fluorescence microscopy (TEFM). TEFM is a near-
field optical method whereby the optical intensity of a laser beam is
concentrated at the apex (tip) of a sharp needle analogous to a lightning rod.
The enhanced-intensity region increases the fluorescence rate in the vicinity of
the tip, which enables spatial resolution limited only by its sharpness. TEFM
has been used to image individual molecules with ~10 nanometer spatial
resolution, and is particularly promising for studying planar samples such as
biological membranes. Several innovations in this project, including a
polarization modulation scheme and customized single-photon analysis algorithms,
increase TEFM contrast and improve compatibility with soft biological samples.
To increase its versatility, TEFM combines on a single integrated platform with
other imaging modalities such as wide-field fluorescence microscopy, confocal
microscopy, phase contrast microscopy, total internal fluorescence microscopy,
fluorescence correlation microscopy, and fluorescence lifetime microscopy.
Several independent spectral channels are also implemented to enable
simultaneous multi-color imaging. Finally, temperature regulation and closed-
loop focus control will be developed for imaging live cell membranes. The
instrumentation developed under this award is expected to have broad
implications for biological imaging research. Results will be published in the
scientific literature and also on a publicly accessible webpage. Detailed
information will be shared upon request. &lt;br/&gt; The education and outreach
component of this award involves the development of an undergraduate integrated
science major; mixed-media modules for high-school students and college freshmen
on the Physics of various outdoor activities (e.g. skiing, sailing, SCUBA,
surfing); and science modules for elementary school students. These projects are
ongoing and the results will be described on a publicly accessible webpage.
Education materials developed under this award will be provided upon request.