* 0845834
* CAREER:   Fundamental Advancement in Understanding of Tree Reproduction and Development of Educational Activities in Genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Mehmet Yuceer, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 06/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

M. Cetin Yuceer &lt;br/&gt;IOS-0845834&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Fundamental advancement
in understanding of tree reproduction and development of educational activities
in genomics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An intricate network of signaling pathways controls
reproductive development in plants. However, the basic mechanisms that have
evolved to control signaling pathways, and thus variation in the onset of
reproduction across different growing habits, remain unknown. The woody
perennial poplar (Populus spp.) has developed a reproduction program that is
intertwined with dormancy and spreads over multiple years to complete one cycle.
The genes FLOWERING LOCUS T1 and T2 are major players controlling the onset of
sexual reproduction in poplar trees. The specific aim of this project is to
determine how these and additional genes control reproductive bud formation in
poplar, how they interact, and how environmental factors influence them. The
specific aim will be addressed via manipulative genetic and physiological
experiments coupled with high throughput techniques and computational tools.
This project will advance our fundamental understanding of the onset of
reproduction in trees and reveal how tree domestication can be accelerated to
increase bioenergy production and carbon sequestration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is a strong and an integral component of this
project. Students and teachers, including minorities and underrepresented
groups, will be involved in the project. Undergraduate students will be trained
in genomics by actively contributing to research. Science fairs and training
workshops in genomics will be organized for elementary school students and
elementary and high school teachers. These integrated educational activities are
expected to prepare students as a future work force, encourage them to study
science, and increase awareness in the importance of trees, forest products, and
the environment.