* 0845494
* CAREER:   Computational and Statistical Genomics of Gene Families
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Matthew Hahn, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,003,333.00

(This award is funded through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009: Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award to support
the research of Dr. Matthew Hahn in the Department of Biology and School of
Informatics at Indiana University. Dr. Hahn is a third-year, tenure-track
Assistant Professor. Genome sequencing projects have revealed large and frequent
changes between species in the size of gene families. These changes have been
shown to be responsible for morphological, physiological, and behavioral
differences between species, and to contribute to much of the genetic and
genomic diversity we observe in nature. To further understand the importance of
these changes, researchers must be able to understand the mechanisms and modes
by which gene families evolve. Despite the growing body of data on gene
families, until recently we lacked a statistical framework that would allow for
inferences regarding gene family evolution among species. In earlier work from
his dissertation research, Dr. Hahn proposed such a framework for studying gene
family evolution, and showed that it could be used for hypothesis testing,
inference of ancestral states, and estimation of gene duplication and deletion
rates. This project will be developing novel statistical and computational
methods for studying gene families, and examining the biological mechanisms
underlying gene family evolution. This work is enabling more refined estimates
of gene duplication and loss rates, and will provide new ways for detecting and
studying whole genome duplications. Methods for studying gene families from low-
coverage genomes will also be developed. Gene duplication can distribute
paralogous genes across the genome. Locations of individual genes will allow
study of both within-genome and between-genome dynamics of gene families.
Lineages differ in their rates of gene turnover which raises the question of how
these differences come about. This research is identifying the biological
factors determining observed rate variation among lineages and among individual
gene families. Dr. Hahn is developing new computational models and free
software, which will be available at
http://www.bio.indiana.edu/~hahnlab/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute to many fields, including studies of gene and genome duplication to
studies of gene regulation, transposable elements, genetic robustness, and RNA
interference. As a part of his CAREER project, the PI is integrating knowledge
from these diverse fields at high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels to
inform biological reasoning and to create new lines of scientific inquiry.
Further, the PI will prepare and implement a curriculum for students at a local
technology-focused high school. This curriculum will integrate computers into
the biology classroom by introducing the basic principles of programming
alongside the basic principles of biology.&lt;br/&gt;