* 0845686
* CAREER:  Engineering Materials with Biological Activity and Structural Hierarchy
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Yan-Yeung Luk, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research objective of this
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to develop a new kind of
colloidal science that will result in materials with structural hierarchy and
biological functions. For nearly five thousand years, spontaneous self-assembly
of small molecules in water has been known to be involved with amphiphilic
molecules, which are part oily and part water-soluble. This project will
demonstrate the self-assembly of entirely water-soluble molecules, and will use
these assemblies as templates to support gel formation of polymers coated on the
assemblies. This approach, templated synthesis, will result in a new class of
structures, including bicontinuous hydrogels, connected hydroshells,
microcapsules and nano-molecular rods. Because the synthesis does not involve
amphiphilic or surfactant molecules that can denature proteins, proteins will be
copolymerized into the gel materials with preferred spatial location and with
retained enzymatic activities. These structures can function as supported
biocatalysts, having the potential to simulate living tissues. The new science
in the research will be integrated with education at multiple levels, including
high school seniors, high school teachers, undergraduates (about 7% of the
funding for this award will be used for hiring undergraduate researchers),
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
knowledge derived from this research will advance making small-molecule drugs
and modifying protein drugs developed in pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical
industries. The hydrogel materials can be coated onto a wide range of materials,
including those used in medical instruments, to reduce biofouling and occurrence
of infection in patients. The new hydrogels also have the potential to function
as biodegradable implants for tissue regeneration. As this project elucidates
new fundamental principles of self-assembly, the research has the potential to
change the landscape of colloidal and interfacial sciences. Integrating with
education, laboratory manuals and web pages will be generated.