* 0845917
* CAREER: Effects of Volatility and Morphology on Vehicular Emitted Ultrafine Particle Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2009,09/30/2010
* Yifang Zhu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 09/30/2010
* USD 400,014.00

CBET- 0845917&lt;br/&gt;Y. Zhu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vehicular emitted
ultrafine particles (UFP) of diameter &lt; 0.1 Ã¬m have unique semi-volatile
properties and fractal-like morphology that make existing aerosol dynamic models
derived from non-volatile spherical particles of limited use in assessing their
environmental and public health impacts. This CAREER proposal is to fill the
knowledge gap by investigating transport and transformation of UFPs from vehicle
tailpipes to incabin microenvironments in terms of mechanistic laboratory
experiments, analytical and computational fluid dynamic (CFD) modeling, and
field studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major research tasks are: (1)
experimentally characterize fundamental mechanisms affecting UFP dynamics. The
PI will generate near-monodisperse UFPs with volatility and morphology similar
to vehicular emitted UFPs and apply these realistic test particles instead of
traditional nonvolatile spherical particles to study fundamental mechanisms
governing UFP transport and transformation from vehicle tailpipes to in-cabin;
(2) develop novel in-cabin UFP models to predict UFP behavior traveling from
vehicle tailpipes to in-cabin, integrating laboratory results simulating
realistic driving conditions; and (3) field-calibrate and validate the models
through measurements in onroad vehicles and school buses from local public
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will use school buses for many field
studies, with students directly assisting in the measurements. The investigator
will also assist in developing 10th grade lectures on environmental quality. The
international field studies will promote international contacts in Mexico,
China, Finland, and Iran. Also, the investigator is to make a strong effort to
involve underrepresented groups.