* 0845748
* CAREER:Teaching Mixed Methods, International Research, and Comparative Perspectives through a Study of Childbearing and Childrearing under China's Fertility Limitation Policies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Vanessa Fong, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 375,911.00

Anthropologist Dr. Vanessa L. Fong, of Harvard University, will continue her
unique longitudinal study of the childbearing and childrearing practices of the
first generation of young adults born as singletons under China's one-child
policy. Fong's research addresses three focal questions:1) What factors cause
childbearing preferences and outcomes associated with low fertility? 2) What
factors cause son or daughter preference and skewed sex ratios at birth? And 3)
What effects do discrepancies between childbearing preferences and outcomes have
on childrearing goals and practices? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fong will administer
surveys to the approximately 1,600 Dalian young adults who previously responded
to a survey conducted in 1999, when they were adolescents. She also will
interview and conduct participant observation among 100 of them. Unlike single-
wave and single-method studies that have difficulty addressing issues of
causality, this mixed-method, longitudinal approach will permit understanding
cause and effect in the lives of the same individuals and families over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will help social
scientists to understand the social dynamics of childbearing and childrearing at
a time when issues of population pressure and population ageing are increasingly
pressing worldwide. The research also will help to bridge the divide between
qualitative humanistic and quantitative scientific approaches to social
research, using their complementary strengths to shed light on these pressing
social problems. Because the researcher will engage students in her research and
develop new educational programs, this award also supports expanded
opportunities for interdisciplinary training for a new generation of social
science researchers.