* 0845641
* CAREER:   Floral development in the Zingiberales:   An Integrative Approach to Understanding the Evolution of Plant Form and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Chelsea Specht, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,005.00

Chelsea D. Specht, IOS-0845641 "Floral development in the Zingiberales: an
integrative approach to understanding the evolution of plant form and function"

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

This project initiates a long-term investigation of the genetic mechanisms
underlying interactions of floral form and function, specifically targeting
novel morphologies involved in the key innovation of pollination "syndromes," or
morphological innovations that make plants attractive to particular pollinators.
The evolution of novel floral forms that enable changes in pollinator attraction
and affect shifts in rates of diversification will be studied in the order
Zingiberales (tropical gingers, bananas), important agricultural, ecological and
ornamental plants. The main objective is to investigate the structural and
functional evolution of Zingiberales MADS box-containing genes as moderators of
plant organ identity in this order. By focusing first on organ identity, we will
elucidate the mechanisms underlying floral development and diversification in
this diverse lineage, while simultaneously increasing our understanding of MADS
box gene and floral organ evolution across all flowering plants. This project
uses a comparative approach to determine the role of candidate genes in major
changes in floral morphology, and to investigate how different interactions with
pollinators may influence speciation rates within a diverse group of plants. A
combination of developmental genetics, phylogenetics, bioinformatics and
comparative plant morphology will be used to study patterns and processes of
floral evolution and morphological diversification within the Zingiberales.
While model systems have provided us with information about independent
developmental systems of a few organisms and conserved developmental paradigms
across widely divergent organisms, this information is only recently being used
to understand the genetics of speciation. In 1996, Rudolf Raff wrote
"Dichotomies of perspective have retarded the study of evolutionary
developmental biology." Such dichotomies still prevail between
organismal/evolutionary biology and molecular developmental biology disciplines.
The interdisciplinary education and research program associated with this
project will provide a new generation of researchers with the academic and
technical tools necessary to create an intellectual environment primed for
making breakthroughs in understanding the basic developmental genetics
underlying specific evolutionary events.