* 0845156
* CAREER:   Dissecting the Regulation of Ribosome Assembly by the Essential GTPase Bms1
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Katrin Karbstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Neocles Leontis
* 10/31/2010
* USD 277,783.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are the functional entities in all cells.
They are synthesized on large molecular machines, called ribosomes. Ribosomes
themselves consist of 78 proteins and 4 RNAs, incorporated into large particles.
Cellular function depends on ribosome accurately translating the information
contained in the genetic code into proteins. This, in turn, requires the correct
assembly of ribosomes. One way in which correct ribosome synthesis is achieved
is by ordering steps, so that a later step depends on the prior steps being
accurate. This project investigates how a regulatory protein, called Bms1, uses
energy to regulate and order essential steps in ribosome assembly. These
questions will be addressed in a combination of biochemical, kinetic and genetic
experiments. Insights garnered from this work will also have implications for
other cellular processes that involve the dynamic assembly of RNA-protein
complexes, including pre-mRNA splicing and RNAi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Faculty members at large universities have
two important, sometimes competing, missions in educating young scientists.
Class-room teaching is meant to convey already established knowledge to
undergraduate and graduate students, while young scientists are raised and
educated in the lab. Many graduate students at the University of Michigan have a
strong interest in teaching careers, which makes it important to connect these
two missions by raising excellent scientists that are also well-trained as
teachers. The educational part of the project will develop a lecture series
called Scientific Discovery. This lecture series will introduce undergraduate
students to cutting edge research, both to help them make the connection between
lab and textbook, but also to spark their interest in science. This lecture
series is specifically designed to involve senior graduate students and postdocs
in teaching at the undergraduate level (not just via Graduate Student Instructor
positions). Furthermore, the new Techniques in Biochemistry Lab Course will
introduce the web-based enzymology teaching tool webZyme. This novel instrument
will give students the opportunity to "perform experiments" that they would
normally not be able to do, and introduce the Graduate Student Instructor to
this exciting new tool. It is expected that a virtual enzymology lab might be
especially valuable in the small undergraduate institutions that many of our
students have identified as their "ideal" future employers, thus enhancing their
job prospects as well as their effectiveness as future teachers.