* 0845036
* CAREER: Scalable Algorithms for Individual Decision Making in Multiagent Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Prashant Doshi, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 445,663.00

Research under this award is developing efficient and effective methods for
strategic decision making by an individual artificial agent cohabiting with
other agents in uncertain environments. For example, how should an autonomous
unmanned aerial vehicle decide between closer surveillance of a possible
fugitive or intercepting the target who may be aware of the monitoring? Toward
this goal, the research is identifying the sources of computational complexity
and understanding the conflicting interrelationship between computational
efficiency and decision-making effectiveness. This problem of individual
decision making in uncertain multiagent settings is formalized using a
recognized framework that combines the decision-theoretic paradigm of partially
observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) with elements of Bayesian games
and interactive epistemology. In this framework, called interactive POMDP
(I-POMDP), the research utilizes innovative ways of minimally modeling
contextual knowledge in multiagent settings, exploits novel decision-making
heuristics and embedded structure in problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration
of research and education is manifest in the development and delivery of a
multi-disciplinary course on strategic decision making under uncertainty, which
integrates and compares normative theories with real human decision-making
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining aspects of decision and game
theories, both of which seek to understand normative ways of decision making,
with attention to real human decision-making behavior, this research is
contributing to long-term research and development of artificial agents that can
assist with rational, long-term decision making and planning in areas including
emergency response, environmental sustainability, autonomous vehicles and many
others.