* 0845150
* Collaborative Research:  Formation of Multiple Zonal Jets in the Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* J. Thomas Farrar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2013
* USD 224,126.00

Observational and modeling studies have recently demonstrated that the ocean
contains multiple, alternating, nearly zonal jets that cover all oceanic basins
and penetrate from the top to the bottom of the ocean. The typical width of each
jet is 100-300 km, typical velocity is 1-5 cm/s, and the jets are embedded in
the large-scale oceanic currents. The oceanic jets may be also dynamically
related to the multiple alternating jets in the atmosphere of such giant gas
planets as Jupiter. The atmospheric jets have been studied for a few decades,
and the atmospheric community developed a set of useful theoretical ideas. The
prevailing hypothesis in these theories is that these jets are a nonlinear
phenomenon, maintained by eddies. However, not only do the atmospheric jets
remain poorly understood, but also the relevance of the corresponding
theoretical ideas to the oceanic jets is under question.&lt;br/&gt;Potential
mechanisms of the multiple jet formation will be studied with a hierarchy of
ocean circulation models. The central idea is to understand physical mechanisms
that can maintain the observed jets and determine their structure. Specific
objectives are to: (i) systematically describe phenomenology of the jets in the
context of available observations; (ii) establish dependence of jet properties
on various physical factors; (iii) analyze importance of eddy flux convergences
and anisotropic mixing within the jets; (iv) examine low-frequency variability
associated with the jets, and (v) determine the mechanisms of jet formation. The
underlying flow mechanisms and jet properties will be studied both with analysis
of the nonlinear solutions and with linear stability analysis of the flow
components. Important properties that need to be explained include meridional
and vertical structures, amplitude, and transient variability of the jets.
Connection will be made to existing atmospheric-jet ideas, as well as to the
broader literature on anisotropic turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address fundamental but poorly understood physics of this particular class
of oceanic eddy/large-scale interactions, using theory, models, and
observations. The work has to do with providing the physical basis for the
emerging observations of the multiple jets. Parameterization of highly
anisotropic transport associated with these jets is another research topic that
will benefit from fundamental understanding of the phenomenon. This project will
support one graduate student at the University of Miami.