* 0845469
* CAREER: Enabling Independent Access to Digital Graphical Content for People with Visual Impairment
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Baoxin Li, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2015
* USD 451,768.00

While sighted people readily enjoy the added value of the graphical content
(digital images, maps, diagrams, etc.) that has become prevalent in the
information age, visually impaired users can with the help of screen-reader
software such as JAWS and Window-Eyes independently access only digital textual
data, because such software cannot handle graphical information. Typical
procedures for manually producing tactile graphics by sighted professionals are
generally time consuming and labor intensive, hence coverage is extremely
limited; furthermore, there is no online and independent availability if the
production has to be done by third-party professionals. The PI's ultimate goal
is to afford users with visual impairments independent real-time access to
diverse types of graphical information, while taking into account often-
overlooked issues such as privacy. In this project, however, he will address one
specific and challenging subproblem of practical significance: how to make
digital graphical content more independently accessible to students in the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. In addition to
line-drawing graphics of a primarily binary nature, a specific type of
continuous-tone image, human portraits, will also be considered, both due to the
special value that facial images have in our social and emotional life, and also
to demonstrate the potential of the PI's approach for handling more complex
visual content. The research activities planned to these ends include a focused
study of the peculiarities of haptic perception in tactile exploration of
graphics, development of visual processing techniques for automated visual-to-
tactile conversion, a usability study to determine intuitive and efficient
presentation and interface schemes for the target end-users, prototype
development and evaluation. Encouraging preliminary results have been obtained
by the PI, demonstrating the feasibility and potential of the planned research
and of the proposed methodologies. This research will advance our knowledge in
the domains of visual-tactile cognition, image understanding, human-computer
interaction in general and assistive technologies for people with visual
impairments in particular. The PI?s institution provides an excellent and unique
environment for performing this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will contribute to the research fields of visual-tactile cognition,
automatic understanding of visual data for visual-to-tactile conversion, and
development of assistive devices for the visually impaired. It will have
significant impact on society, by ultimately enabling independent access to a
wide range of visual content by people who are blind. More immediately, the
project will help overcome the current barriers to the STEM fields that confront
individuals with visual impairments.