* 0845332
* CAREER:   Investigating Abl Kinase Signaling Pathways that Regulate Actin Dynamics during Development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Traci Stevens, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2015
* USD 883,365.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit Organization of cells into tissues and organs during
development is a highly regulated process that requires coordinated cell shape
changes and cell migration. These cell behaviors are directed by rearrangements
of the actin cytoskeleton. Abelson (Abl) kinases are key players in relaying
signals for rearrangement to the actin cytoskeleton, but the mechanisms by which
Abl receives signals from the cell surface and remodels actin during animal
development remain unknown. The overall goal of this project is to characterize
the molecular pathways that Abl uses to regulate cell migration and other actin-
based processes in vivo. Drosophila embryos expressing activated Abl provide an
ideal model system to elucidate Abl signaling pathways in the context of an
organism, since activated Abl alters cell migration and leads to visible defects
in embryonic development. This research program aims to both explore the
functions of candidate genes and identify new components of the Abl signaling
pathways that modulate cell migration in vivo. These studies will provide
significant insights into the molecular pathways that regulate behaviors of
individual cells during developmental processes.

Broader Impact. This research will be integrated with the training and mentoring
of young scientists at both the undergraduate and high school levels. The
overall goals of this program are to provide more young scientists with hands-on
research training and to inspire these students to pursue careers in basic
research. Scientific training will be incorporated at the undergraduate level by
providing additional opportunities for independent research projects and by
integrating aspects of this research program into the laboratory component of
Genetics, a core biology course, at Randolph-Macon College. This project also
aims to provide unique inquiry-based experiences to local high school students
and high school biology teachers, who will work as teams to investigate aspects
of Abl signaling pathways in cell migration. Opportunities to do original
research early in their careers will both challenge and motivate students to
pursue additional scientific training. To reach a broader community, the biology
teachers will develop a plan for directly translating their inquiry-based
experiences in this research program to their high school science courses.