* 0845415
* CAREER: Morphogenetic Primitives: Self-Organizing Geometry Based on Morphogenesis and Evolutionary Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* David Breen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2015
* USD 436,141.00

Morphogenetic Primitives: Self-Organizing Geometry Based on Morphogenesis and
Evolutionary Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. David Breen&lt;br/&gt;Department
of Computer Science&lt;br/&gt;Drexel University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been
noted that two types of systems exist in the world: 1) systems designed and
built by humans to perform a specific job, and 2) biological systems that self-
organize to also perform complex tasks without a master plan or overseer
directing the actions. The self-organization found in biological systems is a
powerful untapped paradigm that, if formulated and exploited, could lead to a
superior approach to designing human-made structures. Self-organization
algorithms could enable collections of software agents, micro-devices and
engineered cells to form into user-defined shapes using only minimal, local
information. Developing these algorithms should lead to advances in geometric
computer-aided design, tissue engineering, swarm robotics, sensor networks and
the custom-design of living cell aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;This research project
combines and extends concepts from morphogenesis (the cell-level spatial process
that produces the structure of an organism), cell aggregation simulation and
evolutionary computing in order to produce a new, organic approach to shape
generation. Called Morphogenetic Primitives (MPs), this approach captures the
fundamental algorithmic constructs of geometric self-organization and harnesses
their capabilities within a software framework. MPs are being applied to a
number of innovative and important problem-domain areas. The approach creates a
new class of self-organizing modeling primitives that may be programmed to
?grow? shapes that meet a specific need while adapting to constraints in the
environment. The conceptual framework of MPs is rooted in developmental biology
and is based on the multiple biological/physical mechanisms of morphogenesis.
Local cell-level interactions aggregate to create high-level shapes and
structures. Given the extreme challenges of determining the correct local
actions that produce a desired final structure, evolutionary computing
techniques are utilized in order to computationally produce the instructions and
equations needed for a specific morphogenetic primitive application. &lt;br/&gt;