* 0845390
* CAREER: Coordinated Power and Thermal Management for Virtualized Data Centers: Algorithms, Framework, and Middleware
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Xiaorui Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 09/30/2011
* USD 239,693.00

In recent years, power and thermal control has become one of the most serious
concerns for large-scale data centers that are rapidly expanding the number of
hosted servers. In addition to reducing operating costs, precisely controlling
power consumption and heat dissipation is an essential way to avoid system
failures caused by power capacity overload or overheating due to increasingly
high server density (e.g., blade servers). Power and thermal control becomes
even more challenging as many data centers start to adopt the virtualization
technology for resource sharing, leading to increased utilization and power
consumption.

This CAREER project addresses the following research topics. 1) We plan to
design and evaluate advanced power and thermal control algorithms, based on
feedback control theory, to achieve analytic assurance of control accuracy and
system stability. First, we propose novel control algorithms at multiple layers
to control power and application performance for virtualized server
environments. Second, we propose highly scalable hierarchical algorithms to
control the power consumption of an entire large-scale data center. Third, we
will design cascaded control algorithms to control heat dissipation and handle
thermal emergencies by coordinating with power control loops. 2) We propose
power and thermal control middleware. Our middleware will find the optimal
coordination strategy for multiple control loops to work together at different
layers, and then configure them to achieve the desired control functions. In
addition, our middleware can automate the procedure of controller design and
analysis for a universal control solution. 3) We will also investigate other
components such as hard drives and network switches, as well as the
controllability and feasibility problems, in order to provide a complete power
and thermal control framework for today's large-scale data centers.

