* 0845552
* CAREER: Towards a Unified Declarative Platform for Composable Verifiable Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2016
* Boon Thau Loo, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

CNS - 0845552 Loo, Boon Thau University of Pennsylvania CAREER: Towards a
Unified Declarative Platform for Composable Verifiable Networks

This research project investigates a declarative, composable and verifiable
network infrastructure -- one capable of bridging between existing networks,
stacking them in layers, dynamically changing the layers or bridges, and
allowing for rapid extensibility with new functionalities. The proposed
infrastructure utilizes declarative networking, a declarative, database-inspired
extensible infrastructure that uses query languages to specify behavior. This
approach provides the benefits of compactness, safety, composability, and the
potential for correctness checks. Intellectual Merit. The first contribution of
the proposed research explores mechanisms for network composition where distinct
parts or elements of existing networks are combined via declarative
specifications to create a new network with new functionalities. The second
contribution leverages the dynamic composition capabilities provided by the
declarative framework and infrastructure to enable adaptable hybrid protocols,
i.e. protocols built from combining several existing protocols based on changing
application needs and network conditions. The third contribution explores a
formal methodology towards verifying the properties of declarative networks and
their compositions. Three verification techniques will be explored: static
analysis of database query languages, theorem proving techniques that leverages
declarative networking's connection to logic programs, and runtime verification.
Broader Impact. The education goal of this proposal is an integrated research
and teaching program that emphasizes data-centric and formal methods approaches
towards networking. The intellectual merit of this proposal is the development
of a unified declarative framework for specifying, composing, formally
verifying, and implementing networks. The broader impact of this proposal lies
in the ability to enable and create new functionalities from the network
diversity that technologies such as virtualization and overlays make possible.

