* 0845919
* CAREER:    Self-organization mechanisms in Myxococcus xanthus swarms
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Oleg Igoshin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 670,804.00

Intellectual Merit In recent years the ubiquity of microbial communities in
nature has become apparent. For example, bacterial surface-associated
communities, biofilms, are the most common mode of bacterial growth and are
oftentimes resistant to environmental stress or antimicrobial treatment.
However, it is still not clear how individual cells self-organize into these
communities and how a community as a whole responds to environmental cues. This
project aims to discover the mechanisms of self-organization in dynamic single-
species biofilms (swarms). In these swarms, bacteria display collective surface
motility, cooperatively sense the environment, execute collective developmental
programs, and often differentiate into distinct cell types that perform
specialized functions. Research on mechanisms of biofilm formation addresses
questions similar to those in developmental biology; connecting macroscopic
phenotypes and biochemical pathways in individual cells. Even when the genome
composition of the cells is known, relating mutations affecting emergent spatio-
temporal patterns to mechanisms of intercellular signaling and motility remains
a challenge. Decoding these mechanisms from phenotypic observations is a complex
reverse-engineering problem that cannot be solved solely by traditional
experimental research. A complementary approach combining agent-based modeling
and biostatistical image quantification with experimentation will address this
problem. This research focuses on self-organization in spreading or aggregating
biofilms formed by Myxococcus xanthus, an important model organism for studying
microbial cooperation, development, and collective motility. This bacterium uses
two motility systems and multiple sensory and signaling pathways to move over
surfaces, forming a variety of population patterns. These patterns reveal
motility coordination of individual cells as well as their ability to
collectively sense and respond to environmental cues. This project will develop
an approach to decode diverse phenotypes and uncover intercellular interactions
using mathematical models that mimic experimentally observed patterns.

Broader Impact Broader impacts of the project include the development of new
methods that bridge gaps between subcellular, cellular, and multicellular scales
in spreading bacterial biofilms. Despite the focus on a specific model system
(M. xanthus), the project will elucidate general mechanisms behind collective
motility behavior. More than 50 bacterial genera use surface motility to form
various types of dynamic biofilms, and many of these are important in industry.
The methods and software developed for this project will be made available to
the Myxobacteria research community worldwide. Developed tools and results of
the research will be incorporated into a M. xanthus model organism database
(xanthusBase) based on Wikipedia principles of community participation.
Answering complex biological questions in the post-genomic era will require a
new generation of life scientists with cross-disciplinary training in combining
experimental and computational methods. To broaden the impact of this project,
the PI seeks to improve and expand Systems Biology education on various levels,
attract a diverse pool of talented students to the field of computational and
systems biosciences, and contribute significantly to their training. The
cornerstone of the educational component of this project is training for
postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, undergraduate students, and high
school teachers and their students. In addition the training includes a plan for
outreach to include students from members of underrepresented groups.