* 0845861
* CAREER: From Incidental Algorithms to Reusable Components: Managing the Emergent Complexity of Large-Scale Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Jaakko Jarvi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 426,579.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-world software
systems are large, complex artifacts built up over multiple layers of
abstraction using diverse collections of components. Though individual
components are often reusable, code that manages interactions between components
seldom is. Such code is large-scale itself, and encodes significant amounts of
application logic. A potential for communication between components, typically
effected by message passing between objects, forms incidental structures in a
program. Though such structures are real data structures, they lack an explicit
representation in program code and at run time, and are thus difficult to reuse,
manipulate programmatically, and reason about. This project focuses on
identifying incidental structures that arise in important domains of mainstream
programming---human interfaces in particular---and modeling them as
declaratively specified explicit software artifacts. The hypothesis is that
large amounts of ad-hoc code can be obsoleted, and replaced by reusable
algorithms and components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular source of
incidental data structures in user interfaces is the event handling code,
implementing propagation of values, validation logic, interface element enabling
logic, scripting support, etc. The project seeks to demonstrate that these
functionalities, typically implemented with application-specific non-reusable
code, are not specific to a particular user interface; they can be realized with
reusable generic algorithms, parameterized over a (declaratively specified)
model that captures the relations, as a system of constraints, between values
manipulated by the user interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
impact future large-scale software development, aiming to realize substantially
increased productivity and software that is more reliable, efficient, and
predictable.