* 0845894
* CAREER: A Framework for Preventing Web-based Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* V. N. Venkatakrishnan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The World Wide Web is a critical
infrastructure that serves our society&lt;br/&gt;by facilitating information
exchange, business and&lt;br/&gt;education. As it continues to evolve, the
number of web-based&lt;br/&gt;attacks that target innocent web users keeps
increasing. &lt;br/&gt;Examples of such attacks include Cross-site Scripting,
SQL Injection&lt;br/&gt;and Cross-site Request Forgery. Recent attacks on end-
users and&lt;br/&gt;online enterprises through these virulent attacks have
resulted in&lt;br/&gt;widespread damage. Defending these attacks is therefore of
very &lt;br/&gt;important concern to Internet economy and to society-at-large.
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a comprehensive plan for defending web
&lt;br/&gt;applications from these attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
contributions of this project are in the development of
the&lt;br/&gt;technologies that elicit the intended behavior of a web
application&lt;br/&gt;and prevent attacks by enforcing these intended behaviors.
We build&lt;br/&gt;a framework in which the intentions of a web application are
represented &lt;br/&gt;using models, which are then enforced to ensure robust
prevention of attacks. &lt;br/&gt;This framework uses novel techniques based on
static and dynamic&lt;br/&gt;analysis, symbolic evaluation, runtime checking and
&lt;br/&gt;isolated execution as foundations. This project also
develops&lt;br/&gt;techniques that enable a web application and a browser
to&lt;br/&gt;collaborate in order to prevent attacks, and apply fine-
grained&lt;br/&gt;restrictions on Web content. The tools being developed in this
project &lt;br/&gt;will have immediate impact on defending legacy web
applications &lt;br/&gt;that are vulnerable to these attacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER research project is closely tied with
educational&lt;br/&gt;efforts by integrating topics on web security in the
undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;and graduate computer security classrooms. Finally, a
collaborative &lt;br/&gt;effort with a Chicago inner-city elementary school is
also part of this &lt;br/&gt;project's educational mission.