* 0845643
* CAREER: Architecting A Database Management System for Semantic Web Data
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Daniel Abadi, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Semantic Web is to free Web data from the
applications that control them, so that data can be easily described and
exchanged. &lt;br/&gt;This is accomplished by supplementing natural language and
other data found on the Web with machine readable metadata in statement form
(e.g., X is-a person, X has-name Joe, X has-age 35) and enabling descriptions of
data ontologies so that data from different applications can be integrated
through ontology mapping. One element of this vision is to turn the Web into a
giant database, against which one can issue structured queries and receive
structured answers in response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SW-Store project is
undertaking the clean-slate design of a DBMS specifically architected for this
type of Web metadata and the prevalent Semantic Web data model, the Resource
Description Framework, or RDF. The management of Semantic Web data presents many
difficult challenges. The size of the data is growing rapidly, and in theory
could reach the scale of the Web. The types of queries vary greatly in
complexity, ranging from keyword search to complicated parameterized subgraph
matching. Data integration, inference, and reasoning must be primitive
operations that can operate at scale without human intervention. A data
management system must not only be a place where data is stored and from which
data is accessed; it must use the machine-readable semantics of the data to
develop higher level models and help guide a user through the mass of
information. In sum, a data management system for the Semantic Web will look
very different from a standard, transactional, relational database
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SW-store project researches the architecture of
such a system. This research is inherently interdisciplinary, bringing in ideas
from the data management, Semantic Web, and artificial intelligence communities.
The project involves experimenting with partitioning schemes, where data is
allocated to different nodes on a shared-nothing cluster so that queries can be
run in parallel across multiple machines. It also involves exploring how
ontology reasoning can be integrated inside the database system so that it can
benefit from the near limitless scalability a shared-nothing cluster can offer.
SW-Store further investigates providing iterative query interfaces and
integrating complex queries with text search. Finally, the project involves
studying the design of the storage layer for a Semantic Web data management
system, looking at how data should be laid out, updates should be performed, and
what materialized views to create.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information
about the project can be found at the project Webpage:
&lt;br/&gt;http://db.cs.yale.edu/swstore/&lt;br/&gt;