* 0845983
* CAREER: Wireless Network-on-Chip: A New Communication Paradigm for Heterogeneous Gigascale MPSoCs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Danella Zhao, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 621,230.00

Proposal ID: 0845983 &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Wireless Network-on-Chip: A New
Communication Paradigm for Heterogeneous Gigascale MPSoCs&lt;br/&gt;PI name:
Zhao, Danella &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Louisiana at Lafayette
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Many-core System-on-Chip (MCSoC)
designs are rapidly emerging, where hundreds or even thousands of IP cores are
integrated on a single die. Such MCSoC devices allow superior performance gains
while side-stepping the power and heat dissipation limitations of clock
frequency scaling. Consequently, the on-chip communication fabric becomes the
performance determinant. This project aims at developing a new on-chip
communication system, dubbed Wireless Network-on-Chip (WNoC) to sustain the
exponential growth of computing performance in the next generation gigascale
heterogeneous MCSoCs. The PI lays out the research directions of WNoC from
various crucial aspects. The UWB physical layer will be explored to accomplish
high data-rate, high bandwidth and low-power wireless on-chip communication. The
system architecture will be designed in a way that decouples communication from
computation, and a reconfigurable RF infrastructure will be developed to address
the heterogeneity of MCSoC. The layered protocol will be specially designed to
tackle distinct features of WNoC from conventional wireless networks and to
simplify the hardware implementation. Highly compact and configurable RF nodes
will be designed to support heterogeneous architecture and customization for
specific application mapping. A suite of development and prototyping activities
will be carried out to demonstrate the applicability and feasibility of WNoC.
Some breakthroughs could be forthcoming in the area of intra-chip RF/wireless
interconnect network for high performance computing in the upcoming nanoscale
MCSoC paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boarder Impact: This project
will have a very broad impact on the on-going and future research in Nanodevices
for high performance computation. Innovative pedagogical methods for classroom
instruction will be explored. Research opportunities will be offered for
minority and female students. It will foster the partnerships with industry and
government laboratories.