* 0845257
* CAREER: Multicore-Based Parallel Disk Systems for Large-Scale Data-Intensive Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2016
* Xiao Qin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2016
* USD 448,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;To improve disk I/O performance, one may integrate multicore
processors with parallel disk systems. Unfortunately, architectures and data
processing algorithms for multicore-based parallel disk systems are still in
their infancy. This motivates us to develop novel architectures for parallel
disk systems, where significant multicore processing power and memory are
integrated into parallel disk drives. This CAREER project provides the first
parallel disk system in which large parts of data and I/O processing are
offloaded to multicore processors, embedded in disk drives. The proposed
techniques and mechanisms are highly adaptive to dynamic workloads with both
large and small disk requests, making modern parallel disk systems leverage
multicore processors for better performance and
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this CAREER
Development project is to build hardware and software parallel disk
architectures that put substantial multicore computing power on disks. The
research consists of three basic tasks: (1) designing hardware and software
architectures for multicore-based parallel disk systems, (2) developing
multicore-based data processing techniques, and (3) building software
performance models and an analysis toolkit. The educational plan include: (1)
establishing a storage systems laboratory; (2) developing new courses; (3)
implementing the concept of a mini-conference to educate students; and (4)
increasing underrepresented student involvement in research activities. In
addition, the project would benefit society by developing hardware and software
modules for next-generation parallel disk systems, where multicore processors
and disk drives are tightly integrated to boost disk I/O performance.