* 0845284
* CAREER: Towards Interactive Simulation of Giga-Scale Agent-Based Models on Graphics Processing Units
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Roshan D'souza, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2010
* USD 105,865.00

This research investigates techniques for efficient simulation of large scale
agent-based models (ABMs). ABMs are increasingly being used to understand
complex multi-scale behaviors in many natural, built and social systems.
Although ABMs have the necessary structure to capture complex model
characteristics in these systems, this very structure makes them computationally
challenging. Current techniques for desktop computing and extensions to
traditional high performance computing are incapable of efficiently handling
this computational complexity. This has severely limited the applicability of
ABMs. This research investigates novel techniques designed to leverage the
massive computing power available on commodity graphics processing units (GPUs).
It greatly expands the availability and applicability of agent-based modeling by
effectively democratizing super computing for ABM simulation. Furthermore, it
enables virtual testing of "what-if" scenarios in public policy, contingency
planning for disaster relief, drug therapy design etc., on inexpensive desktop
computers at realistic levels of detail.

The main challenge in this research is the re-formulation of ABM computation
tofit the data-parallel model of GPUs. Specific research topics include
representation of agent data, functions for agent motion, replication,
decimation, communication, representation and manipulation of non-spatial agent
networks, adaptive behaviors, run-time user interaction, fast visualization,
hardware and model-aware automatic code optimization, and multi-level
parallelism for multi-GPU platforms. The techniques developed are being applied
to two specific problems in medicine: simulation of tuberculosis and systemic
inflammatory response syndrome. These models enable efficient simulation of
disease pathology and in-silico testing of novel therapeutic drug protocols.
Educational topics include development of courses, outreach to K-12 students
through development of ABM themed video games, undergraduate involvement in
research, and the development of a comprehensive dissemination web page.