* 0845292
* CAREER: Analysis of quantum many body systems
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Robert Seiringer, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2012
* USD 128,748.00

The main focus of this research project is the mathematical analysis of many-
body &lt;br/&gt;quantum systems, in particular, interacting quantum gases at low
temperature. &lt;br/&gt;The recent experimental advances in studying ultra-cold
atomic gases have led to renewed interest in these systems. They display a rich
variety of quantum phenomena, including, e.g., Bose-Einstein condensation and
superfluidity, &lt;br/&gt;which makes them of importance both from a physical
and a mathematical point of view. In mathematical physics, there has been
substantial progress in the last few years in understanding some of interesting
phenomena occurring in quantum gases, and the goal of this project is to further
investigate some of the relevant issues. Due to the complex nature of the
problems, new mathematical ideas and methods will have to be developed for this
purpose. Progress along these lines can be expected to yield valuable insight
into the complex behavior of many-body quantum systems at low temperature. Among
the questions that are addressed in this project are bounds on the free energy
of quantum gases at low density and low temperature, as well as qualitative and
quantitative statements about the corresponding thermal equilibrium states. The
systems to be considered include both homogeneous and trapped systems, either
continuous or on a lattice. The questions of interest concern, e.g., Bose/Fermi
mixtures, low dimensional systems, rapidly rotating gases, as well as
superfluidity for lattice systems. Moreover, the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer
theory of fermion pairing will be investigated, with the goal of further
increasing the understanding of the low temperature behavior of fermionic
systems with general interactions. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The goal of this
project is the development of new mathematical &lt;br/&gt;tools for dealing with
complex problems in many-body quantum systems. New mathematical methods lead to
different points of view and can thus increase &lt;br/&gt;the understanding of
physical systems. These methods will be used in physics graduate courses of the
P.I. and others. The organization of mathematical physics conferences and
schools will disseminate the use of these powerful methods.