* 0845005
* CAREER:Tailored Glycoconjugates for the Precise Detection of Toxins and Pathogens
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Suri Iyer, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 575,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Suri S. Iyer at the
University of Cincinnati who will synthesize ligands that exhibit antibody-like
selectivity, are robust, inexpensive, amenable to scale up and require no
refrigeration. Glycans possess these desirable properties and they are unique
recognition molecules that modulate essential communication processes such as
cell adhesion, proliferation, migration, and differentiation. However, synthetic
glycoconjugates because of selectivity and sensitivity issues cannot be used for
practical applications. A better understanding of the binding event at the
molecular level will help to fill the gap in knowledge that has prevented the
use of synthetic glycans in diagnostics and therapeutics. Consequently, the PI
proposes to identify the molecular determinants (such as structure, multivalency
and mode of presentation) of glycan-receptor interactions by developing a
library of chemically defined glycans and assaying them with different strains
of toxins and pathogens using a variety of biophysical techniques. The overall
goal of the proposal is to understand how modifications in structure, valency
and architecture modulate glycan-receptor recognition events. The successful
outcome of this project will advance knowledge in the area of glycoscience and
pathogen detection. It is expected that researchers will use the knowledge
gained to rationally design ligands to modulate glycan mediated biochemical
processes.

The proposed activities will broaden the participation of underrepresented high
school students by providing them with an opportunity to work in a research
laboratory. Professor Iyer will provide an active and structured learning
environment and will provide students with valuable training in multiple
disciplines that include glycoscience, biophysical measurements and
microbiology. In addition, a summer workshop for K-12 science teachers to
promote training and exposure to emerging interdisciplinary areas will be
included. It is expected that these K-12 teachers will be able expose students
to these topics at an early age. The PI will continue to disseminate his
research on glycoscience, biodetection, and nanoscience through publications,
reviews, presentations, and visits to local schools and rotary clubs.