* 0845230
* CAREER:  Telling the Story of a Visual World: Event Classification and Integrated Image Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Fei-Fei Li, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2010
* USD 102,338.00

The ability to make meaning out of a visual world, such as recognizing objects,
scenes and semantically meaningful activities and events, is a cornerstone of
artificial intelligence. In computer vision, very important progress has been
made recently in object and scene level recognition. But such tasks are often
performed without an integrated and coherent description of the scene. Moreover,
very few current algorithms are capable of further interpreting higher level
semantic meanings of an image such as an event or activity. The goal of this
project is to achieve event classification via an integrated image understanding
given a single unknown image.&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to push the frontier
of integrated and descriptive understanding of images through the development of
sophisticated learning frameworks suitable for training algorithms by using a
large amount of real-world data such as the ones from the Internet. High
accuracy performance, minimal human supervision, flexibility and scalable
learning will be the focus of this endeavor. This project?s theoretical
framework ties together several areas of computer vision, offers interesting
model representations for the machine learning field, and connects more
semantically driven visual recognition problem with the natural language
processing field. &lt;br/&gt;The results are vital for image understanding
technology for the visually- impaired; automatic annotation of images for large
digital library as well as the next generation of image retrieval engines; and
translation, education and rehabilitation technology for language students and
medical patients (such as aphasia, stroke, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;The project?s long-
term educational plan focuses on bringing the latest visual computation and
cognition research directly into the classroom and the community at large, with
an emphasis on reaching the underrepresented groups of students. &lt;br/&gt;