* 0845984
* CAREER:  Phylogenetic Revisions of South American Water Beetles (Coleoptera: Adephaga: Hydradephaga):  A Model for Teaching Systematic Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2009,12/31/2015
* Kelly Miller, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2015
* USD 675,000.00

This project will investigate the systematics of South American water beetles
(Hydradephaga), including diving beetles, burrowing water beetles, and whirligig
beetles. Diving beetles are remarkable for their size and intricate color
patterns. They also exhibit interesting differences between males and females;
males have adhesive disks on their bodies that let them stick to the females
during mating, whereas females have grooves that allow them to resist mating.
This project will determine how many species there are in this group of beetles,
and how they are related to each other. The project will test whether changes in
male adhesive disks are mirrored by corresponding changes in the grooves on the
females. DNA sequences will also be used to determine which larvae will grow in
to which adults. One product of this work will be an interactive, fully
illustrated, on-line identification key for the water beetles of the Neotropics.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide training in monographic and
revisionary systematics for one Ph.D. student, two master's students, and four
undergraduates, the latter for at least two years each. Summer workshops will be
provided for local-area high-school teachers so they may take knowledge of
systematics back to their classrooms. The public school system in Albuquerque
and the University of New Mexico are significant minority-serving institutions
with Hispanics and Native Americans as major constituents. In addition, two
university courses will be developed, one of which will be offered during the
summer term, so that students can be taken to South America to collect insects
relevant to the revisionary part of the proposed research. These collections
will be processed by the students and deposited at the Museum of Southwestern
Biology at UNM.