* 0845504
* CAREER: Reliable On-Chip Wireless Communication Network for Multi-Core Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Partha Pande, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tao Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 449,978.00

Multi-core processing platforms have an increasingly broad range of
applications. From consumer multimedia to image processing to defense
applications, new designs containing large numbers of embedded cores are
emerging. Network-on-Chip (NoC) has emerged as an enabling technology to
integrate large numbers of embedded cores in a single die. In spite of all its
advantages, a serious performance limitation in a traditional NoC arises from
its planar metal interconnect-based multi-hop communication, wherein the data
transfer between two distant blocks gives rise to high latency and energy
dissipation. These problems can be simultaneously resolved if all or some of the
wired links in a NoC are replaced by high-bandwidth single-hop wireless
channels. Moreover, wireless links will alleviate the problem of wire congestion
in NoCs.

Recent research has uncovered excellent emission and absorption characteristics
leading to antenna-like behavior in carbon nanotubes (CNTs). This opens up new
opportunities for detailed investigations regarding the possibility of building
a wireless NoC (WiNoC) with CNT antennas and subsequently making the WiNoC
robust against performance uncertainties inherent in nanodevices. The CAREER
proposal?s overall research objective will be attained by pursuing two specific
goals: 1) Establish design trade-offs and evaluate performance of WiNoC
architectures; the proposed WiNoC has the capability to outperform corresponding
wireline architectures; 2) Apply error control codes to make the WiNoC robust
against possible malfunctions; by incorporating efficient channel coding
schemes, the WiNoC will be made robust against varied types of malfunctions. The
research proposed here is significant, as it addresses the on-chip interconnect
problem from a fundamentally new perspective, namely by developing a wireless
network at the nanoscale, as opposed to pursuing incremental improvements of
relatively traditional methods of wire-line interconnection. By bringing the
world of radio communication to the on-chip environment, the proposed research
has the capability to transform the design of multi-core chips. The educational
objective of the proposal is to recruit and retain undergraduates, high school
students and students from the underrepresented groups in the engineering
program. Exposure to research will be accompanied by proactive enabling
activities, including broad spectrum introduction to engineering and
individualized assistance to increase academic preparedness of the targeted
students. The educational activities are expected to enhance research and
educational opportunities for underrepresented students in the PI?s department.
Advancement of such students is expected to have broad societal impact.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).