* 0845783
* CAREER:  Development of the UCSC Interaction Browser for Integrative Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Joshua Stuart, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,179,483.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The University of California, Santa Cruz is awarded a career-development grant
to create new algorithms for discovering causal genetic interactions and extend
the UCSC Interaction Browser, an online functional genomics resource for
investigating networks of gene-associated relationships. Physical and regulatory
gene interactions form the basis for many molecular mechanisms that govern the
phenotypic output of cells. Cells respond to developmental programs or
environmental queues using cascades of signals and molecular-level physical
interactions. Characterizing such genetic wiring diagrams in normal and diseased
cells is one of the next major challenges in molecular biology. The results of
high-throughput approaches, most notably genome-wide expression data collected
from DNA microarrays, are available in public repositories. It is critical to
develop algorithms to discover functional and causal gene interactions
underlying normal and disease processes from both observational and
interventional data. The research carried out under this award will develop
retrospective analyses based on network alignment and metaanalysis using data
within and across species to identify gene-gene linkages that are general,
specific to experimental contexts, conserved across different subsets of
species, or present only in certain lineages of evolutionary history. The
project will deliver online resource to allow researchers to superimpose their
own experimental results with those inferred from published studies. This will
provide a much-needed summation of the large collections of high-throughput
functional genomics datasets to facilitate the interpretation of new datasets.

The resource will be made available through UCSC's web portal
(http://genome.ucsc.edu/) so that the large research community of
bioinformaticians and biologists that use the UCSC Genome Browser can access the
Interaction Browser. Genetic networks determined from functional genomics
studies or predicted from computational algorithms will be available for
browsing and bulk downloading. The project will incorporate integrative network
analysis topics into undergraduate- and graduate-level courses at UCSC. Three-
dimensional displays at the San Francisco Exploratorium will enable students and
the general public to visualize genetic networks, see how gene function can be
predicted from network context, and investigate the evolution of gene
interaction networks.