* 0845803
* CAREER: An Integrated Approach For Efficient Privacy Preserving Distributed Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2016
* Murat Kantarcioglu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Increasingly, different organizations need to securely share their private data
to execute many critical tasks. Recently, several different approaches based on
secure multi-party computation (SMC) and data sanitization techniques have
emerged to enable privacy preserving distributed data analytics. Although SMC
based privacy-preserving protocols allow the participating parties to learn only
the final (accurate) result, they do not scale well for large amounts of data.
On the other hand, sanitization based techniques allow organizations to reveal
privacy sensitive data under some privacy guarantees by distorting the data. In
many cases, significant data distortion that is needed to preserve privacy could
lead to inaccurate results. &lt;br/&gt;Due to the limitations of the current
approaches, efficient and accurate privacy-preserving solutions are needed for
handling large distributed data sets. To address this challenge, we design and
develop a novel framework where sanitization and SMC techniques are integrated
to develop efficient privacy-preserving solutions under resource constraints.
Basically, we use the data sanitization techniques to get initial approximate
results and carry out SMC operations selectively to increase the accuracy. Since
we use existing techniques in a black box fashion, our approach is orthogonal to
any new sanitization or SMC techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Our new techniques will
substantially decrease the cost of executing privacy-preserving distributed data
analytics protocols. This will have a direct economic impact by opening the way
for new applications (e.g., e-health and e-government applications) that are at
present considered infeasible due to the lack of necessary privacy-preserving
solutions that can work efficiently on large data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;