* 0845239
* CAREER:  Designing Embryonic Stem Cell Culture Systems Based on Developmental Microenvironments in the Heart
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Laura Suggs, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0845239&lt;br/&gt;L. Suggs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a culture system to generate a
therapeutic cell population from embryonic stem (ES) cells as well as a method
for cell delivery to treat cardiac disease. This system will serve as a model
for the translation of ES cells to fully differentiated cell types based on a
biomimetic approach that closely approximates the embryonic development of
cardiovascular structures in the heart. This approach overcomes the limitations
in differentiation efficiency of current ES cell technology that is primarily
focused on inducing differentiation via soluble signals. The unique aspect of
this work is the novel use of protein-immobilized beads and insoluble factors in
3D matrix culture to encourage differentiated cell function. The Principal
Investigator's (PI's) engineered systems have been designed to provide the
necessary instructional cues that comprise the cellular microenvironment during
development. The PI proposes to accomplish the overarching goal through a staged
differentiation process that will initially drive differentiation towards a
uniform mesodermal progenitor. Subsequent steps will facilitate differentiation
towards a therapeutic cell population that can contribute towards cardiac
repair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success
of the research objectives would result in cell culture techniques that will
serve as templates for the generation of functional, tissue-engineered
constructs. The intent is to design a protocol for the generation of a readily
available progenitor cell population combined with a tailored delivery system to
treat patients following myocardial infarction. This would provide the
scientific foundation for a timely clinical solution with none of the
complications involved in tissue harvest. The educational goals are tightly
linked via the ideological concept of engineering design. As a junior faculty,
the PI has conceived of and implemented the entire Biomedical Engineering senior
design sequence at UT Austin. The PI has a strong and continuing passion for
design and its instruction and proposes that design should be integrated at all
educational levels. The outreach activities described in this proposal extend
from precollege through the level of the college instructor. Specific tools will
be developed including teaching modules, online course resources, as well as
instructional tools for use by existing pre-college outreach programs.