* 0845822
* CAREER:Novel Reconfigurable Aperture Antennas and Arrays for Compact Multifunctional Antenna Solutions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Satish Sharma, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Haddad
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to explore novel reconfigurable aperture
antennas and arrays, which can provide compact multifunctional antenna
solutions. The approach is to examine (i) reconfigurable radiation pattern
aperture antennas with multiple phase centers by controlling the modal
amplitudes and phases in multimode radiating elements, (ii) frequency
reconfiguration of microstrip antennas by implementing radio frequency (RF)
Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems (MEMS) switches and MEMS variable capacitors,
and (iii) ground plane reconfiguration of microstrip antennas to reconfigure the
impedance and radiation pattern properties.

The research will lead to novel, compact and reconfigurable aperture antennas
for wireless communications and radar systems providing multifunctionality. The
proposed innovative approaches have the potential to allow hardware
minimizations, simplify complex antenna implementations, and provide enhanced
performance antenna solutions. The theory and analysis tools developed will help
in conceptualizing future antennas and enhancing the quality of antenna and
microwave education.

The research outcomes are expected to lead to high performance and cost-
effective transformative antenna solutions for wireless communications and radar
applications, meeting societal needs in many ways. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in the research work learning valuable
research skills and hands-on-experience in antenna design. The research work is
expected to generate industry-sponsored projects. The participation of middle
and high school students is highly encouraged. Further, this research will help
in creating interest, recruiting, and retaining engineering students including
minorities and women in the San Diego area.