* 0845957
* CAREER: Multi-scale Interactions of Waves, Currents and Morphology with Application to Rip Currents
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Walter Robinson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2015
* USD 567,232.00

0845957 Yu

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Coastal erosion has increasingly become a concern due to rising global sea
levels, changing climate and accelerating human activities. The hydrodynamics in
the surf zone has significant influences on nearshore sediment transport, hence
shoreline erosion, and on the transport and mixing that affect the water quality
in coastal oceans and floodplains. Understanding the complex dynamics of the
nearshore system is of fundamental relevance to the development of reliable
predictive tools for planning, management and mitigation to build a sustainable
and resilient coastal environment. This study aims to improve this understanding
by investigating the multi-scale interactions among three key nearshore
processes: waves, currents and sediment transport. Rip currents, an important
nearshore process, are also a dangerous beach hazard, accounting for 80% of surf
zone rescues in the US. Theoretical understanding of their generation mechanisms
has not been satisfactory, in particular on beaches lacking alongshore
variability. Recent studies have mostly focused on morphodynamic instabilities,
stressing the feedback between currents and sediment transport but not fully
considering the dynamical interaction between waves and currents. This research
will investigate all multi-scale interactions. The research will use extensive
linear instability analysis, numerical modeling of the nonlinear multi-scale
dynamics, and model validation through comparisons with observations. The
methodology developed here will be applicable in modeling other environmental
systems including estuaries and floodplains. Research and education will be
fostered by developing a graduate research program and curriculum in coastal
dynamics and environmental fluid mechanics. This will rejuvenate undergraduate
education in fluid mechanics at NC State to stress its role in natural
environments. Key concepts of coastal engineering research will be brought into
the K-12 science curriculum by direct interaction with teachers through a
collaborative initiative. Further broad impacts are expected through the
outreach programs of the PI's collaborators, including the National Weather
Service, Army Corps of Engineers Field Research Facility, Sea Grant and UNC-
Coastal Studies Institute.

This project is being co-funded by the Engineering, Geosciences, and Cyber
Infrastructure Directorates.