* 0845011
* CAREER: Novel diastereoselective bond forming reactions via siliconate intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Michael Jennings, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2014
* USD 550,000.00

While in situ siliconate formation followed by hydride reduction of an
oxocarbenium cation is a synthetically very valuable tool, expansion of this
initial observation to include carbon based transfers are highly desirable to
the synthetic community. Thus, the possibility of siliconate formation, carbon
based nucleophilic shift to an oxocarbenium cation affording new
diastereoselective carbon-carbon bonds, and concomitant silylation of the
initial hydroxyl 'directing' group is a tremendous goal that this award
addresses with respect to cyclic and acyclic stereocontrol. This project will
further investigate the inclusion of carbon based nucleophiles which would
greatly expand the reaction sequence beyond that of a hydride reduction of the
oxocarbenium cation. This type of carbon group transfer should allow for the
formation of quaternary or tertiary carbons dependent of the oxocarbenium
substitution pattern and will make a tremendous impact on stereocontrolled
carbon-carbon bond formation. In addition, the education portion of this CAREER
award will provide a 'real world' research experience for highly motivated,
underrepresented minority high school students from rural Alabama. This award
will bring these young adults into the laboratory for their first encounter with
scientific research. This exposure will help to foster and promote interests in
future careers within the physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Professor Michael P. Jennings of the Department of Chemistry at The
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa. Professor Jennings' research efforts revolve
around the development and further fundamental understanding of oxocarbenium
cation reductions within the greater context of natural product synthesis.
Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on synthesis in
the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries.