* 0845333
* CAREER:Feasibility of Control Tasks---Towards Control-Computing-Power Co-Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Fumin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

CAREER: Feasibility of control tasks-towards control-computing-power co-design

PI: Fumin Zhang

Intellectual Merit. The PI proposes a fundamental research program to establish
theoretical foundation for battery supported cyber-physical systems (CPS). Such
systems play vital roles in real-time controlled applications across multiple
disciplines such as sensor networks, robotics, and transportation systems, where
limited computing resources and energy budget pose major constraints. The
proposed effort advances control theory to understand and adjust the behaviors
of control tasks supported by embedded computing devices and batteries. The
research work provides guidelines for control-computing-power co-design aiming
for more reliable cyber-physical systems. Timing control is proposed to
complement existing approaches in feedback scheduling by incorporating
performance of physical systems. The PI develops integrated models that
explicitly address dynamics in the physical, computing, and battery domains.
This will be a unique contribution and may be utilized by specialists in
computer architecture and battery design to facilitate potentially
transformative research. PI's theoretical effort will be verified and extended
through his ongoing experimental activities in mobile sensor networks and
underwater robotics.

Broader Impacts. PI has established collaborations with small businesses so that
industries may benefit from the proposed research. He founded the first PhD
level research and education programs in both control systems and robotics in
Savannah, GA. His robotics teaching and outreach lab supports undergraduate
courses and has become an explorer post for Boy Scouts of America. The PI has a
proven record on supporting women in engineering and students from under-
represented groups.

