* 0845753
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Nonlinear Dynamics in Biological Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Xiaopeng Zhao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 02/28/2015
* USD 455,807.00

The research program of this faculty early career development (CAREER) project
is to develop a comprehensive computation and analysis framework for system-
level understanding of nonlinear dynamics of heart rhythm disorders that lead to
fatal cardiac diseases such as ventricular fibrillation and atrial fibrillation.
The specific research objectives of this project include: 1) developing
simplified models to accurately describe the dynamics of cardiac myocytes; 2)
developing multiscale computational methods to study dynamics of extended
cardiac tissue; and 3) developing system-level understanding of cardiac
arrhythmias using theoretical analysis and numerical simulation. This research
aims to impact the diagnosis and treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. Ventricular
fibrillation induces sudden cardiac death, a leading cause of death in the
industrialized world. Sudden cardiac death kills more than 350,000 people each
year in the United States. Atrial fibrillation is the leading cause of stroke,
which will affect one-fifth of Americans over 65. Improved understanding of
cardiac dynamics gained from this research may eventually have a broader social
impact through its medical implications.

The proposed research activities will also support new cross-disciplinary
collaborations in the areas of biomedical engineering, life science, and
mathematics. Oscillatory and rhythmic phenomena are common in many biological
processes, such as circadian cycle, metabolism, and brain activity. Because of
their nonlinear, multiscale complexities, these systems defy understanding based
on the conventional reductionist's approach, in which one attempts to understand
a system's behavior by putting together all the constituent pieces that have
been examined separately. The computational and analytical methods developed in
this project provide useful tools to advance system-level understanding of these
nonlinear processes. The education plan of this project aspires to train the
next generation of scientists who bring nonlinear thinking into biomedical
research. College students and graduates are not familiar with nonlinear
phenomena and their mathematical representations. The lack of knowledge in
nonlinear analysis leaves the students unprepared for real-world problems and
nonlinear thinking inherent in biomedical research. Various aspects of the
proposed work will be used to enhance graduate and undergraduate education in
nonlinear dynamics in biological systems. An outreach program will be developed
to expose K-12 students to the excitement and importance of mathematical
modeling for biomedical research. In addition, the research will be used to
promote higher retention rates among engineering freshmen and underrepresented
groups.