* 0845410
* CAREER: Connecting Human and Machine Learning through Probabilistic Models of Cognition
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Thomas Griffiths, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 02/28/2014
* USD 556,847.00

People are able to learn new concepts much faster than computers, often
requiring only a handful of examples where a computer might require hundreds.
This remarkable ability is partly the consequence of extensive experience with
the world, resulting in strong prior knowledge about the kinds of objects that
are likely to form categories. This research project bridges the gap between
human and machine learning by developing probabilistic models of human category
learning, connecting psychological data with the latest theories from computer
science and statistics. These mathematical and computational models are used to
explore how people learn categories so quickly, to capture the effects of prior
knowledge on categorization, and to build a catalogue of human concepts that can
be used to test psychological theories and to train machine learning systems. In
each case, the research combines the ideas, methods, and sources of data used in
psychology and computer science, using hierarchical Bayesian models and Markov
chain Monte Carlo algorithms to model human cognition, laboratory experiments to
test these models, and large databases as a source of statistical information
that guides model predictions. This research program is integrated with an
educational plan that incorporates undergraduate and graduate teaching and
mentoring, development of a textbook on probabilistic models of cognition,
tutorials and workshops aimed at increasing contact between the computer science
and psychology communities, and outreach through talks and a website.