* 0845893
* CAREER:   Distribution of fitness effects, identity and interaction of beneficial mutations available for adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Christopher Marx, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 702,452.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Population genetics provides powerful,
well-tested theory for the fate of existing versions of genes in a population
during evolution. In contrast, no strong quantitative framework exists to
predict how new versions of genes arise and take over due to natural selection.
Questions critical to understanding the basis of adaptation such as how often
beneficial mutations occur, the relative balance of small vs. large beneficial
mutations, and why adaptation to new environments almost always slows down
rapidly with time remain unanswered. This proposal synthesizes recently
developed population genetic theory, a novel, newly-developed marker system for
tracking subpopulation dynamics, and cutting-edge techniques for high-throughput
culturing, whole-genome sequencing, and assaying frequencies of different
versions of genes to address a fundamental question - what is the raw material
available for adaptation? - in a manner not possible
previously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A deeper understanding of adaptation is
critical to predict how populations and communities will respond to rapid
natural or anthropogenic changes, including climate change, ocean acidification,
the harsh environments used in biotechnological processes, or emerging diseases.
The research incorporates diverse educational and training activities such as an
Evolution in Action undergraduate course, high school outreach laboratories,
teacher training, and the development of videos for museum exhibits.