* 0845751
* CAREER: A Vertically Integrated Approach to Microprocessor Design for Unpredictable Silicon
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 449,879.00

The basic hardware technology that is used to build microprocessors and the
applications we run on them are are radically changing. Hardware building blocks
are becoming increasingly brittle and error-prone, leading to a fundamentally
unpredictable hardware substrate. Applications are also changing, and emerging
new classes of applications are increasingly relying on probabilistic methods.
They have an inherent tolerance for uncertainty, do not require hardware to be
correct all the time, and this provides an opportunity to creatively utilize
hardware.

This CAREER proposal develops a vertically integrated approach that exposes
these hardware properties to the applications to develop more efficient system-
wide solutions. This simplifies the physical manufacturing and design of
microprocessors, and can make them more efficient. The PI unifies analyses in
different parts of the microelectronics system stack to develop new interfaces
between layers and techniques to expose more information across these layers. In
the integrated education plan, the PI seeks to broaden the computer architecture
curriculum by educating students on the implications of these physical silicon
technology drivers on microprocessor designs. The research component of this
proposal has broad implications across all microelectronic systems since it is
becoming harder to manufacture smaller and smaller devices. The innovations
proposed can enable continued technology scaling and have the potential to
reduce complexity and cost in the overall micro-electronics system stack, and
help maintain the US lead in microelectronics.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).