* 0845835
* CAREER: Mothership/Daughtership Architectures for In Situ Science by Robotic Sensor Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Eric Frew, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Chirikjian
* 06/30/2015
* USD 511,497.00

The objective of this project is to develop fundamental understanding of control
strategies that can exploit the complimentary computation, sensing, and
communication capabilities of the members of a mothership/daughtership robotic
sensor network performing in situ volumetric sensing. Concepts from networked
unmanned systems, cooperative control, controlled mobility in ad hoc networks,
motion planning, and optimal distributed sensing are combined to create a new
heterogeneous robot team comprised of two classes of robots with significantly
different, though complementary, attributes. Research activities are organized
into three main thrusts: i.) daughtership control using ordered upwind methods
for motion planning in the presence of strong currents and decentralized
coverage control for cooperative sampling in the presence of intermittent
communication; ii.) mothership control algorithms based on reinforcement
learning to provide delay-tolerant networking and stochastic dynamic programming
for optimal deployment and reassignment of the daughterships; and iii.)
experimental demonstration performed on an indoor robotic sensor network,
outdoors on a heterogeneous unmanned aircraft system, and part of field
campaigns with atmospheric scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research project will provide new capabilities for in situ volumetric sampling
of complex atmospheric phenomena which will lead to a direct improvement in the
ability to understand complex environments. This project will have its broadest
impact through the applications that will benefit from robotic sensor networks
performing in situ science. Collaborations focus on the study of tornadogenesis
in severe storms, sea ice change, and spatio-temporal evolution of airmass
boundaries. Additionally, research and education are integrated into activities
aimed at improving the perception of the engineering field by K-12 students,
retaining those students who are initially attracted to engineering, bringing
hands-on active learning to several aerial robotic courses, and fostering
interaction between scientists and engineering researchers.