* 0845947
* CAREER: Adaptive Power Management for Multiprocessor System-on-Chip
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Qinru Qiu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 01/31/2012
* USD 287,552.00

CAREER: Adaptive Power Management for Multiprocessor System-on-
Chip&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiprocessor System-on-Chip (MPSoC) is becoming a
major VLSI system design platform due to its advantages in low design cost and
high performance. However, power consumption in MPSoC is a crucial factor that
is limiting the growth of system performance and functionality. The complexity
of the MPSoC hardware and software imposes new challenges and requirements for
research in system-level power management.&lt;br/&gt;An effective power manager
must be aware of the status of the hardware, the application and the working
environment and be able to adapt to the changes. It should be able to work
robustly even if the perfect system information is not available. As the number
of components that can be power controlled increases, it is increasingly
difficult to perform power management in a centralized manner. A hierarchical
and distributed power management method is more suitable for MPSoC platforms.
Finally, resource management, power management, and thermal management are
inter-correlated tasks and it is desirable for them to be optimized
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses the above mentioned
challenges by investigating the theoretical foundation and the applied framework
of adaptive power management for the next generation MPSoC. This project
consists of four research components: (1) investigate online modeling techniques
for runtime workload prediction and hardware performance/power characterization;
(2) research new optimization techniques for adaptive resource and power
management in a partially observable system; (3) model the distributed power
management problem as a multi-agent cooperative game and develop control policy
using game theory; (4) develop a unified and standard platform for modeling,
optimization and evaluation of power-managed MPSoC.&lt;br/&gt;The educational
components of this project will introduce the students to the implementation and
optimization techniques of system-level power management and provide students
unique hands-on experience with MPSoC design and optimization. &lt;br/&gt;