* 0845309
* CAREER: Local Remediation of Global Internet Epidemics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Jonathon Giffin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 11/30/2012
* USD 155,044.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Internet-connected computer systems face ongoing software attacks. Existing
defensive solutions, such as intrusion detection systems, rely on the ability to
identify malicious software (malware) in order to prevent its installation. This
approach remains imperfect, resulting in widespread, persistent malware
infections, malicious execution, and transmission of undesirable Internet
traffic. This project develops solutions that help computer systems
automatically recover from unknown malicious software infections by identifying
and disabling the software. It departs from previous malware analysis because it
employs strict post-infection analysis matching real-world environments: it
assumes that security monitoring does not exist during the critical malware
installation time and develops hypotheses of the malware's design and system
alterations given only observations of the infected system's execution. It
designs on-line forensic analysis techniques that hoist an infected system into
a virtual machine for runtime execution monitoring.

This project investigates three primary areas: (1) Analysis and interpretation
of unknown malicious software behavior when no clean reference system is
available for comparison. (2) Correlation of undesirable network activity with
malicious software components responsible for that activity. Attack recovery, or
remediation, reclaims the infected system for legitimate use by disabling these
components. (3) Inference of unobserved malicious software installation steps,
enabling protection against reinfection. This project offers hands-on student
training in binary code analysis, appropriate responses to successful attack,
and the role of virtual machines in secure system design. By helping users and
organizations recover from widespread infections, it offers practical value to
system and network operators.