* 0845685
* CAREER:    Computational Protein Function Annotation for Metagenomics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Yuzhen Ye, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 520,810.00

&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER
award to Dr. Yuzhen Ye of the Department of Informatics at Indiana University.
Dr Ye is a second-year tenure track Assistant Professor. Metagenomic sequences
are vast in number and as obtained in the lab, fragmented and short (due to the
limitations of sequencing techniques). The complexity of metagenomics data can
also be overwhelming, as it contains sequences (by random sampling) from
different individuals of different species, or different strains of the same
species living in the same niche. As a result, many of the computational methods
that have contributed to the success of numerous individual organismal genome
projects are not directly applicable to metagenomics projects. New computational
methods need to be developed to optimize the analysis of metagenomic sequence
data and advance the field. This grant to Dr. Ye will develop computational
protein function annotation of metagenomic sequence data to improve functional
annotation of metagenomic sequence data. In this project, software is being
designed and developed for improved protein sequence prediction by using ORF
(Open Reading Frame) assembly and by specifically designing a gene finder for
DNA fragments that can tolerate sequencing errors. Annotations of various
biological functions including biological pathways, transmembrane transporters
and enzymes are being carried out with computational tools. Exploratory projects
are being developed to test several ideas for utilizing metagenomic sequence
data to improve function annotation methods. Several computational tools and
pipelines, designed specifically for metagenomic sequence data analysis, will be
released as open access (e.g., through collaboration with CAMERA). The tools
will be available through the Ye lab website:&lt;br/&gt;http://mendel.informatic
s.indiana.edu/~yye/lab/index.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part of her CAREER
award, Dr. Ye will develop highly-integrated activities using metagenomic
science as a model for education-research integration. The PI is actively
working with the Office of Strategic Mentoring (OSM), Alliances for Graduate
Education and Professoriate Program (AGEP), Women in Science Program (WISP), and
Women in Computing (WIC) organizations at Indiana University to recruit students
into her program.