* 0845998
* CAREER: Communication-Centric Chip Multiprocessor Design
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Eun Jung Kim, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 440,000.00

The ever-shrinking feature size in CMOS process technology has enabled the
integration of a large number of devices such as cores, caches, and other
special engines in a single chip. The growing popularity of Chip Multiprocessors
(CMPs) has ushered in the arrival of a communication-centric system where the
design of interconnection architecture has a significant impact on the overall
system performance as well as power dissipation and area of a chip. To overcome
traditional interconnects problems, Network-on-chip (NoC), using switch-based
networks, has been widely accepted as a promising architecture to orchestrate
chip-wide communication. Although there has been significant research on NoC
designs, there is still a lack of a unified design methodology integrating
system and NoC design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is developing a
comprehensive design paradigm for exploring the on-chip interconnect design
space, especially focusing on how it interacts with the rest of the CMP
architecture. This research program is comprised of four intertwined research
objectives. First, simulation testbeds and traffic analysis methodologies are
developed to understand the interplay between applications and system
architecture. Traffic analysis tools are used to capture the runtime behavior of
various applications in CMPs. Second, solutions for high and predictable
performance within power and area budgets in current and future technology
generations are provided. Third, the PI is developing a domain specific NoC
design for CMP memory systems. As the last objective, the PI explores new
opportunities and challenges posed by future applications of next-generation
CMP. The research is integrated into the education curriculum, through existing
and new graduate courses, and in undergraduate research programs.&lt;br/&gt;