* 0845445
* CAREER:   Research and Education in the Structure and Function of Intramembrane Aspartyl Proteases
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Raquel Lieberman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2015
* USD 890,599.00

Intellectual Merit: Nearly one-third of all sequenced genomes encode integral
membrane proteins, which are involved in critical and diverse cellular functions
such as catalysis, active and passive transport, and signal transduction. In
spite of their importance in biology, the structural characterization of
membrane proteins lags considerably behind that of soluble proteins. As part of
this CAREER project, a detailed study of the structure and function of a
particular enzyme (signal peptide peptidase) that accomplishes peptide
hydrolysis chemistry within the confines of the lipid membrane, will be
undertaken. Students will determine its three dimensional structure and develop
straightforward assays to measure enzymatic activity. In addition, as part of
the pursuit of a high-resolution molecular structure, new techniques to
facilitate the crystallization of membrane proteins will be developed. Crystal
growth is a major rate-limiting step in membrane protein structure
determination. The methods developed as part of this proposal will be applicable
to the study of other membrane proteins.

Broader Impact: A central aspect of the broader impact of the program is
educating, training, and diversifying the future generation of scientists. In
addition to mentoring activities and research training for Georgia Tech
undergraduate and graduate students, this CAREER project includes a partnership
with Westlake High School in Fulton County, Georgia. The PI, a high school
biology teacher, and selected Georgia Tech undergraduate Biochemistry majors
will collaborate to develop two discovery-based modules for an advanced high
school biology course. These modules combine protein science, art and computers,
and will be freely available on the internet for all educators. The teacher and
high school students will also conduct summer research in the PI's laboratory,
and then showcase their results as poster and oral presentations in their school
and at science fairs.