* 0845392
* CAREER:   Population genetics of Pediculus humanus using coalescent approaches with multi-locus data
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* David Reed, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2015
* USD 934,498.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Some of the most compelling questions in evolutionary biology concern the
history of our own species. Fossil and genetic data have provided great insights
into human evolutionary history, but many important questions remain unanswered.
Parasites are closely associated with their hosts, but usually evolve more
rapidly, so their genomes may record details of the history of the host that are
not recorded clearly in the host's genome. This project examines three lineages
of a human parasite to provide new insights into human evolution. The human
parasite Pediculus humanus will be collected with the help of colleagues and
medical clinicians worldwide. Their genetics will be examined using a suite of
modern molecular and analytical methods to explore patterns of human evolution,
human migration across the globe, and human demography.

Specimen data, images, DNA sequence data, and other research findings will be
made available via the Internet. A post-doctoral associate and several graduate
students and undergraduates will be trained through participation in the
research. The education portion of this project will train undergraduate and
graduate students to effectively communicate basic science research findings to
broad audiences, training that currently is lacking from most scientific
education.