* 0845129
* CAREER: Effects of Prolonged Droughts, Severe Fires, and Forest Parasites on Regional Ecosystem Pattern in the Rocky Mountains Over the Past 5,000 Years
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2016
* Bryan Shuman, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2016
* USD 480,264.00

Climate change is an ongoing outcome of human activity. Regions such as the
Rocky Mountains have already experienced significant warming in the past decade.
The warming has reduced snowpack and related runoff, facilitated extensive
forest damage from insects and other pathogens, and increased areas burned by
wildfires. Such effects on water and ecosystems are likely to generate
substantial societal challenges for decades or longer, but are poorly understood
and hard to predict. Characterizing past climate changes and their impacts
provides a means to place such regional changes in a long-term context and to
anticipate how such impacts on ecosystems and the goods and services they
produce will continue to develop in the future. This project focuses on the role
of disturbances (i.e., fires and forest-parasite infestations) in mediating
vegetation responses to persistent droughts over the past 5000 years. The goal
is to document the types of interactions and regional differences that can
influence regional responses to climate change. To do so, the project will study
sediments from six lakes in the Park Range of northern Colorado, which were
chosen to represent different aspects of the region. Sedimentary evidence of
episodes of low lakes-levels in the past will be used to document past droughts,
and then will be compared with fossil evidence of vegetation change, forest
fires, and forest-parasite outbreaks to document possible climate-disturbance-
vegetation interactions and their spatial patterns. Two lakes are located at the
lower margins of the range near the border between pine forests and sagebrush
steppe, two are within dense pine forests at mid-elevations, and two are within
open forest parklands at high elevations along the Continental Divide. The
results will show how the lower border between forest and steppe was shifted
through time by drought, fire, and parasites, and how the density of forest
cover at mid- and high-elevations affected the sensitivity of fire regimes, and
thus forest composition, to climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change
is altering the patterns of ecosystems from local to continental scales. Because
changes in precipitation, vegetation, and fire regimes in the Rocky Mountains
during the past decade have been dramatic, the project will document these
recent changes with repeat photography, and then place the changes in a long-
term context via studies of ancient climate changes and their impacts on the
forested landscape. To enhance public understanding of climate change impacts,
the results of the study will be displayed and explained in an on-line atlas of
environmental change in the Rockies along with photography of the ongoing
changes in the region (using new photos as well as others taken more than ten
years ago). The photos and other results will be made available through a web-
based atlas of environmental change in the region, which will be designed to aid
K-12 teachers in understanding and explaining the geography and potential
outcomes of climate change.