* 0845286
* CAREER:   Computational Approaches to Understanding Membrane Protein Energetics and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Michael Grabe, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2014
* USD 932,252.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins that reside in the cell
membrane play important structural roles, but they are also critical to the
cell's ability to sense and respond to environmental stimuli. For instance, ion
channels open in response to changes in membrane voltage or membrane tension to
permit the flow of molecules into and out of the cell. Knowledge of how proteins
interact with the membrane is essential to our understanding of these functions.
The research goal of this project is to build and use computational tools for
elucidating the nature of membrane proteins' interactions with the membrane.
Such tools are needed to understand the folding and trafficking of proteins from
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the plasma membrane and to understand the
functional properties of proteins that undergo conformational rearrangements in
the membrane. Currently, molecular simulations of charged helical peptides
predict membrane insertion energies that are much larger than those derived from
experiment. Therefore, new computational approaches are needed to pinpoint the
source of these differences and help to resolve them. This CAREER project will
(a) allow for the development of a fast, continuum based method for calculating
the insertion energies and relative stabilities of membrane proteins, (b) use
this computational model to predict the energy and kinetics of protein
extraction from the membrane and compare these rates with in vivo extraction
experiments from the ER, and (c) study how voltage changes manipulate voltage-
sensor proteins to control their behavior. The membrane insertion model will be
packaged into a freely available, cross-platform JAVA program with an intuitive
graphical interface for carrying out membrane protein energetic
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The educational component of
this CAREER project involves continued development of a new mathematical biology
course that introduces upper division undergraduate students to mathematical
concepts that have greatly impacted biology. This project will enable the
writing of an undergraduate textbook by the investigator and his colleagues. The
undergraduate course and textbook will train future biologists in the
mathematics needed to understand cutting-edge technologies in the biological
sciences. Additionally, this research program includes the development of a
summer course in basic mathematics for high school students who are members of
minorities under-represented in science and who are enrolled in the School-to-
Career Teen Program (Pittsburgh, PA). It will permit continued math and science
education for these high school students and encourage them to attend and
succeed at post-secondary educational institutions.