* 0845125
* CAREER:   Integrated xylem function:   An analysis of storage, transport, and biomechanics
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Robert Brandon Pratt, California State University-Bakersfield
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2015
* USD 782,253.00

Wood, or xylem, is a globally important commodity that has been important to
humans for building material, shelter, and fuel for millennia. In plants, wood
makes up the water transport tissue that is crucial for moving water and
chemicals throughout the plant body to maintain healthy functioning.
Understanding how wood functions not only enables more efficient use of this
important resource, but it is also important to the understanding of how plants
are adapted to the environment, how ecosystems function, and how plants evolve.
Wood has important functions besides transport of water such as structural
support of the plant body and storage of water and nutrients. These functions
are largely interdependent such that wood that is proficient at one function may
necessarily be poor at another function giving rise to tradeoffs. Understanding
these tradeoffs, their structural basis, and evolutionary consequences is a
central objective for plant biologists. Although storage is an important wood
function, research is lacking on how wood storage integrates with the water
transport and mechanical support functions of wood. The proposed study will
examine xylem functional tradeoffs with an emphasis on how storage interacts
with transport and biomechanical traits among plants in California's biodiverse
Mediterranean type climate region. To get a broad understanding of this topic,
sampled species will include woody plants with evergreen and deciduous leaf
habits, and plants that either sprout after fires or those that do not sprout.
Analyses will include both stems and roots. This project will aid in the
teaching of undergraduate and Master's students, and a post-doctoral scholar at
a minority serving institution, California State University, Bakersfield. The
educational impact will be heightened by presentation of the ongoing research at
an on campus Environmental Study Area, which hosts about 6000 visitors annually
ranging from school children to seniors. A summer program will also be initiated
for high school/community college students and teachers to conduct plant
research related to wood function.