* 0845020
* CAREER:   An integrated analysis of torsinA, a conserved modulator of cellular homeostasis and neuronal function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Kim Caldwell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2014
* USD 753,563.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein production, trafficking and
degradation are essential for proper cellular function. Perhaps no cells are
more sensitive to imbalances in these tightly coordinated processes than
neurons. An important cellular compartment, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
functions to balance levels of neurotransmitter transporters, receptors, and
accessory proteins. Thus, deficits in the capacity of the ER to properly handle
intracellular stress, such as misfolded proteins, may dramatically affect the
activity or survival of neurons and disrupt homeostasis. The focus of this
research is an ER-resident protein called torsinA, a member of a family of
proteins that appear to have evolved among all multicellular organisms to act as
cellular 'gatekeepers' in the prevention of cellular stress. This research uses
the well-studied nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans, as a model system whereby the
function of torsinA can be more rapidly discerned. Through a combination of
behavioral, genomic, and biochemical experiments for evaluating torsinA
activity, this study will advance our understanding of how neurons work to
prevent stress and maintain homeostatic balance. C. elegans is ideal for this
analysis, as this worm has a defined nervous system, a wealth of genetic tools
applicable to detailed mechanistic analyses, and a transparent anatomy that
enables changes in ER-associated stress to be quantified in living animals using
fluorscent biomarkers. Moreover, the ease by which this organism is manipulated
is attractive in terms of providing undergraduate students the opportunity to
conduct and achieve significant research goals. Outcomes of this CAREER project
include mentoring of graduate students, in addition to engaging underrepresented
populations of freshmen students in the discovery process through a combination
of classroom and mentored-research experiences through an institutionally-
supported program, the Alabama Emerging Scholars, aimed at increasing retention
of at risk students by early exposure to research.