* 0845932
* CAREER:   Mechanisms of Phytoplankton Community Re-organization Under Global Change
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Elena Litchman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2016
* USD 529,507.00

Fresh water is becoming a major limiting resource worldwide. Global
environmental change is exacerbating freshwater limitation by negatively
affecting not only water quantity but quality as well, through stimulating
harmful algal blooms (HABs) in waterbodies across the globe. This project aims
to understand and predict how and when communities of microscopic algae in lakes
shift towards dominance by the toxic algae (cyanobacteria in particular)
responsible for most HABs in freshwaters. Using lake sampling in Michigan and
mathematical models, Litchman will explore how global warming alters lake water
movement and thus conditions such as light and temperature that affect algae
growth, including toxic cyanobacteria. Because many HABs can increase the
availability of nitrogen in the water, the project will also investigate how
changing nutrient availability affects interactions among algal groups. Finally,
Litchman will explore how rapid evolutionary response of harmful cyanobacteria
to changing climate shapes community composition of microscopic algae and
impacts water quality. During this award, Litchman will teach a new course on
Field Aquatic Ecology at Michigan State University for advanced undergraduate
and graduate students focusing on the effects of global environmental change on
aquatic ecosystems. Teachers from local rural schools will work with the PI to
develop age-appropriate learning activities on aquatic ecology, water quality
issues and global change. Undergraduate and graduate students will participate
in the project as will local lake residents and lake associations who will aid
in sampling efforts to detect HAB-forming species. Litchman will collaborate
with European colleagues on adapting lake physics models to predict HAB
occurrences in the future.