* 0845670
* CAREER: Haptography: Capturing and Recreating the Rich Feel of Real Surfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Katherine Kuchenbecker, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 499,495.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address two
fundamental questions in the field of haptics: How can we mathematically
characterize the feel of real and virtual surfaces? and How can a computer-
mediated interaction best duplicate the rich feel of a real surface? Specific
contributions of this work will include the creation of hand-held instruments
that accurately capture and re-create the broad-bandwidth experience of natural
touch-based interactions with real object surfaces; the construction of a
signal-processing pipeline that can use recorded motion data to derive
perceptually relevant dynamic models for the tool-contact states of hovering,
pressing, and traversing, plus the event-based transitions between these states;
the generation of an interactive online database of haptographs for a wide
variety of tool-surface pairings; evaluation of the benefits and drawbacks of
the proposed approach to high-fidelity acceleration feedback for virtual
environment rendering; and an understanding of the role of the human
haptographer in these processes. In the domain of education, the specific
contributions of this project will include improvements to the PI?s hands-on
engineering mechanics course for first-year engineers; carefully guided
involvement of a diverse range of undergraduate and graduate students in the
proposed research endeavors; and the development of novel instructional methods
and materials for the PI?s new graduate-level class on haptics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned combination of research and education
activities have numerous potential benefits for society and the student
community in and around University of Pennsylvania. Particular positive
ramifications of establishing the approach of haptography are to allow doctors
and dentists to create haptic records of medical afflictions such as a decayed
tooth surface to assist in diagnosis and patient health tracking; to improve the
realism and consequent training efficacy of haptic surgical simulators and other
computer-based education tools; to allow a wide range of people, such as museum
goers and online shoppers, to touch realistic virtual copies of valuable items;
to facilitate a haptographic approach to low-bandwidth and time-delayed
teleoperation, as found in space exploration; and to enable new insights on
human and robot touch capabilities.