* 0845832
* CAREER: Coordination Mechanisms for Performance-aware Virtualization in Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Kartik Gopalan, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2015
* USD 415,852.00

Virtualization technology is rapidly being adopted in modern cluster platforms
that support performance-sensitive applications such as web services, real-time
financial transactions, data mining, eScience, and E-commerce. State-of-the-art
techniques for virtual machine (VM) scheduling, allocation, and migration often
treat the VMs in isolation rather than within the context of other VMs and the
cluster environment with which they constantly interact. This project
investigates cluster-wide coordination mechanisms that exploit inter-VM and VM-
cluster interactions to improve both application performance and cluster
utilization. The research targets four specific directions: (1) improving
timeliness across inter-VM interactions for time-sensitive applications, (2)
virtualizing cluster-wide memory resources to support large memory and large
dataset applications within VMs, (3) exploiting inter-VM dependencies to guide
VM migration decisions, and (4) reducing network fabric contention through
coordinated network access across VMs and virtual clusters. Broader impact of
the project will be in the development of virtualization technologies that
better support performance-sensitive applications in emerging data centers and
high-performance computing clusters. Educational impact will be in training
technology experts in virtualization, strengthening the experimental computer
science curriculum at Binghamton University, and mentoring of undergraduate,
minority, and high school students.