* 0845105
* CAREER: Architectural Support for Integrating NAND Flash Solid State Disks into Enterprise-Class Storage Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Tao Xie, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* M. Mimi McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 436,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With recent advances in capacity, bandwidth, and durability, NAND flash memory
has been successfully employed in mobile devices like PDAs and laptops and it is
starting to replace hard disks in desktop systems. Integrating NAND flash memory
into server domain applications, which normally demands a high level of data
reliability and exceptional random I/O performance, however, is much more
challenging because NAND flash memory exhibits relatively poor random write
performance and insufficient reliability due to limited erasure cycles. To
address these problems, an architectural support for flash SSD must be devised
in order to fundamentally boost its performance and longevity by a
software/hardware combined effort. In this project, we will develop a novel
flash disk storage architecture that exploits the addition of RAM and dedicated
software schemes to incorporate flash SSDs into enterprise-class storage
systems. We plan to implement a flash disk array prototype and deploy it in
real-world data-intensive application. In addition, we will develop new software
techniques such as a double-buffer write ordering management scheme and an
inter-disk wear-leveling technique. This project will contribute to energy
conservation, performance enhancement, data management, and reliability
technology for enterprise-class storage systems by developing the flash disk
array storage architecture, accompanied by an array of new software schemes.
This project will also promote teaching, learning, an training by exposing both
undergraduate and underrepresented students to technological and scientific
underpinnings in the field of server-class storage systems.