* 0845464
* CAREER: Atomically-Engineered Complex Oxides and their Heterostructures for Novel Electronic Functionalities
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Seongshik Oh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 525,000.00

****Non-technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER award is
to combine research efforts to investigate novel functionalities in atomic-
scale-engineered complex-oxides going beyond the limitations of conventional
semiconductors with education and outreach programs to train a new generation of
scientists and engineers in the areas of materials physics and nanoscience. One
of the promising material systems for post-silicon nanoelectronics is complex-
oxides. Complex oxides exhibit a wide range of functionalities such as high
critical temperature superconductivity, (anti)ferromagnetism, and
ferroelectricity that do not exist in conventional semiconductors. Moreover,
entirely new functionalities can be created when different complex oxides are
combined into a heterostructure. This project will investigate emergent
functionalities hidden in this new materials family, utilizing a newly developed
atomic-layer engineering technique. In order to bring the excitement of these
research activities to a broader community and train a new generation of
scientists and engineers, a number of education and outreach programs will be
developed aimed at K-12 and university students. Hands-on demonstration modules
for middle-school students will be developed for the mobile Rutgers Science
Explorer program. Pre- and in-service high-school teachers will learn research
methods in the lab and develop teaching modules for high-school students
reflecting their experience in a materials physics research lab. Graduates and
undergraduates, especially from underrepresented groups, will be actively
involved in the main research activities and outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this CAREER project will create
and investigate a number of novel complex oxides and their heterostructures
anticipated to show previously nonexistent functionalities and properties such
as: highly-tunable high-mobility d-band 2DEGs, new multiferroics, and artificial
high-temperature superconductors, utilizing a newly developed complex-oxide
atomic-layer MBE. These studies will deepen understanding of electron-electron
correlation effects in 2D d-band electrons, interfacial coupling mechanisms
between magnetism and ferroelectricity, and the effect of atomic-scale control
parameters such as modulation doping on superconducting properties of artificial
high-temperature superconductors, and pave the way to a new age of complex-oxide
nanoelectronics. In order to bring the excitement of these research activities
to a broader community and train a new generation of scientists and engineers, a
number of education and outreach programs will be developed aimed at K-12 and
university students. Hands-on demonstration modules for middle-school students
will be developed for the mobile Rutgers Science Explorer program. Pre- and in-
service high-school teachers will learn research methods in the lab and develop
teaching modules for high-school students reflecting their experience in a
materials physics research lab. Graduates and undergraduates, especially from
underrepresented groups, will be actively involved in the main research
activities and outreach programs.