* 0845120
* CAREER: A Scalable, Ultra-Low Power Active Fabric for ECoG
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Brian Otis, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

PROPOSAL # 0845120&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to investigate a
new system-on-brain paradigm, one of the next great challenges of the integrated
circuit community. The approach is to use an active electrogcorticography (ECoG)
electrode array ?fabric". ECoG recording uses a planar, flexible 2-D electrode
array on the surface of the brain. It provides much higher spatial resolution
and signal fidelity than electroencephalography scalp recording, and is less
invasive and more robust than penetrating single-unit neural recording
electrodes. ECoG brain surface recording is a highly promising candidate for
future neuroprosthetic devices.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this
research include the design of low energy communications circuitry for
wirelessly transmitting ECoG data, low power mixed-signal circuitry for
recording and interpreting low-level neural signals, and miniaturized system
integration. The ECoG fabric will integrate a distributed network of low power
ICs across a biocompatible microelectrode array. Each IC records from multiple
electrodes and forms the core of thin, flexible ?unit cells?. The high spatial
resolution and scalability of this architecture provides high signal quality.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact the field of neuroprosthetics by
demonstrating a new class of active fabric neural implants. This research will
directly impact science currently underway at the University of Washington and
elsewhere, which will provide realistic local testbeds to verify the devices
while providing a significant outreach opportunity to the medical community.
Additionally, this project will provide a platform to promote the participation
of underrepresented minority and women students through collaborations with
local teachers and the Engineering Advising and Diversity
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;