* 0845265
* CAREER:   Genetic & evolutionary mechanisms of ecological divergence in migration tendency in salmonid fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Krista Nichols, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A number of animal groups (e.g. mammals, birds, fish) undertake long-distance
migrations between feeding and breeding grounds. The alternative evolutionary
'decisions' of migration versus permanent residency play important roles in
maintaining ecological diversity across animal taxa. Salmon, trout, charr and
whitefish species are an especially diverse group of fishes that vary in the
propensity and timing of migration, and serve as an excellent model to study the
genetics and evolution of this trait. Using rainbow and steelhead trout, which
exhibit variability in migration and residency across their native range, this
research aims to reveal the genes that have been shaped during the
diversification of this trait along with the developmental and molecular
mechanisms that underlie these alternate strategies.

Results from this research will make important contributions to the conservation
of an economically and evolutionarily important group of fishes. The study
integrates outreach and education with Native Americans, including those whose
subsistence depends on migratory fish species. Climate change has been shown to
alter the migration patterns of some species in this group of fishes.
Understanding the genetics and evolution of migration or residency will provide
an important baseline for future studies on the impacts of climate change.