* 0845183
* CAREER: Ultrafast Vibrational Dynamics Probed by Femtosecond Stimulated Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* David McCamant, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2015
* USD 678,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Professor David McCamant of the
University of Rochester will develop femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy
(FSRS) to study ultrafast processes in photochemistry and photobiology. FSRS is
a unique spectroscopic method that can probe vibrational modes over a very broad
spectral window with femtosecond time resolution while maintaining high spectral
resolution. The first application will be an exploration of excited-state
structural dynamics of nucleic acids, specifically the structural evolution of
model nucleotides and DNA oligomers after photo-excitation. This work will
provide new understanding of the effects of ultraviolet light on DNA, which can
includes photo-damage and the production of skin lesions. The second project
will develop two-dimensional FSRS to probe vibrational anharmonicity, especially
for molecules in pure and mixed solvent environments. Vibrational anharmonicity
is the mechanism that drives heat conduction through molecules. Hence, these
experiments will illuminate the mechanisms of heat dissipation and thermal
degradation in biology and molecular electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
the five-year project, graduate students, postdoctoral scientists and
undergraduate researchers will be trained in a wide variety of experimental and
theoretical techniques. Optics designs developed during this project will be
published online, thus becoming available to a wide community of ultrafast
spectroscopy researchers.&lt;br/&gt;