* 0845966
* CAREER: The role of language in children's acquisition of number concepts
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2016
* Anna Shusterman, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2016
* USD 726,727.00

The proposed five-year project seeks to investigate the connections between
symbolic and nonsymbolic representations of number and the role of language in
facilitating the transformation from approximate number sense to exact numerical
systems in 3- to 5-year old children. The basic research question is as follows:
Do developments in symbolic and non-symbolic number systems occur in tandem
during the preschool years? Both systems of numerical representation are
dynamically changing during this period of early childhood, but the extent to
which these developments are correlated and the underlying mechanisms that bind
them are currently not known. The following three lines of studies will be
investigated: (1) Correlational analysis of symbolic and non-symbolic number
representations in preschoolers; (2) Developmental account of numbers in oral-
deaf children, and; (3) Developmental account of attentional shifts from objects
to sets in young children. Various empirical tests with hypotheses will be
conducted annually, including a longitudinal study in the case of study (1). The
proposed educational activities include: (1) annual workshops for teachers on
number development for both early childhood educators and educators of the deaf;
(2) summer fellowship program for undergraduate students; (3) development and
teaching of a capstone course at a preschool for the deaf, and; identification
of mechanisms to further evaluate and disseminate preschool mathematics programs
for deaf to hard-of-hearing children. It is important to know whether deaf
children are delayed on preschool-level math skills, because such a delay could
entrench otherwise bright children on a path away from optimal mathematical
learning in school and other contexts. This knowledge can directly translate
into interventions that reduce the well-documented achievement gap between deaf
and hearing students in STEM disciplines.

The proposed project will impact STEM education by advancing our knowledge of
the foundations of mathematical learning before children enter formal
educational settings. The studies will advance our understanding of: (1) how
preschool children acquire number concepts; (2) what role language plays in the
development of number concepts, and; (3) how language delays impact the
development of number concepts. More broadly, the project investigates how
symbolic systems (like language) interact with non-symbolic systems (like
quantity representations) over the course of development. In addition, this work
will provide a much needed analysis of number development in young deaf or hard-
of-hearing children because studies of numeracy in the deaf rarely extend to the
preschool ages. The proposed work will provide us with a better understanding of
conceptual development of number in young children, which hopefully will
contribute to the development of appropriate and effective preschool curricula
to support future mathematical learning. The proposed project also includes
participation by undergraduate researchers and collaborations with early
childhood teachers and practitioners.