* 0845268
* CAREER: Beyond Perspective Cameras: Multi-perspective Imaging, Reconstruction, Rendering, and Projection
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Jingyi Yu, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2015
* USD 400,001.00

A perspective camera captures the spatial relationships of objects in a scene as
they would appear from a single viewpoint. In contrast, a multi-perspective
camera combines what is seen from several viewpoints into a single image and
provides a potentially advantageous imaging system for understanding the
structure of observed scenes. However, most existing computer vision and
graphics algorithms are not directly applicable to multi-perspective cameras.
The goal of this project is to develop a complete framework to characterize and
design new multi-perspective cameras and displays and to use these systems for
computer vision and graphics applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the vision
front, the PI explores two types of real multi-perspective cameras: the first
extends existing catadioptric mirrors and the second uses specially-shaped
apertures. To categorize these cameras, a ray geometry analysis is applied to
identify important ray structures and study their implications on image
distortions. The PI also investigates several new 3D reconstruction methods,
such as epsilon stereo matching, ray-curvature analysis, and curvature-from-
distortions, for a broad class of multi-perspective cameras. On the graphics
front, the PI explores practical multi-perspective display architectures by
combining a consumer projector with specially-shaped mirrors/lenses. Such
displays can offer an unprecedented level of flexibility in terms of aspect
ratio, size, field of view, etc. The PI also investigates real-time multi-
perspective rasterization and frustum culling algorithms by modifying the
traditional rendering pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to
education by involving undergraduate and graduate students in self-contained
projects with both theory and application components, and attracting under-
represented students through the pre-engineering program between the University
of Delaware and the Delaware State University. &lt;br/&gt;