* 0845484
* CAREER: Using Rich Information from Speech and Text for Meeting Summarization
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2017
* Yang Liu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 408,077.00

Recent advances in text summarization and speech recognition have not been
paralleled by similar advances in speech summarization. This project on meeting
summarization has three focuses. First, it investigates two different
summarization task definitions, generic extractive summarization, and query-
based summarization. Second, it addresses the core challenges that arise when
simply applying text summarization techniques to speech recognition output. It
evaluates the impact of low-level structural information (such as sentence
boundaries and disfluencies), uses high-level meeting structural information
(such as topics and meeting structure, speaker interaction), and uses rich
recognition output (confidence measures in the recognition hypotheses, n-best
and lattices) for summarization. Finally, various measurements are used to
evaluate the effectiveness of summarization approaches, including comparing to
human summary references, extrinsic metrics (e.g., based on a question-answering
task), and human evaluation for the usefulness of the query-based
summaries.&lt;br/&gt;This project employs advanced algorithms to combine well-
motivated rich information from both speech and text for meeting summarization.
An important outcome will be the findings about the usefulness of the
summarization task for the meeting domain and development of new approaches to
measuring success for this task. This work will advance the frontier of our
understanding of human interactions and improve our ability to automatically
process human speech. The annotated data and evaluation tools developed in this
project will be shared with the community. This project is multidisciplinary,
involving speech processing, natural language processing, and conversation
analysis. The tight integration of research and education will significantly
enhance the excellence of next-generation researchers.&lt;br/&gt;