* 0845968
* CAREER: Next Generation Network Coding: Distributed Design Via Coded Feedback
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2015
* USD 397,192.00

The exponentially increasing demands for heterogenous services&lt;br/&gt;over
Internet and wireless networks have imposed new urgency&lt;br/&gt;and great
challenges for designing next-generation networks&lt;br/&gt;that achieve higher
throughput, better resiliency to adversary&lt;br/&gt;attacks, and stronger
security for sensitive information.&lt;br/&gt;Recently, a new network coding
paradigm has emerged, which&lt;br/&gt;potentially achieves the above goals
simultaneously in an&lt;br/&gt;optimal fashion. Nonetheless, to realize fully
its promised&lt;br/&gt;benefits requires a clean-slate methodology of network
code&lt;br/&gt;design that achieves optimal performance and maintains
low&lt;br/&gt;complexity while reacting quickly to the ever changing
network&lt;br/&gt;environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To that end, the
investigators study coded feedback, which&lt;br/&gt;generalizes the conventional
feedback mechanism that&lt;br/&gt;acknowledges non-coded traffic by
incorporating the unique&lt;br/&gt;algebraic structure of network-coding. This
research first&lt;br/&gt;explores the joint algebraic properties between coded
forward&lt;br/&gt;and feedback packets, which are the basis for the
subsequent&lt;br/&gt;development of new, efficient network protocols for
next&lt;br/&gt;generation network codes. In particular, the investigators
are&lt;br/&gt;interested in the roles of coded feedback that transform
the&lt;br/&gt;non-coding network resource allocation algorithms to
their&lt;br/&gt;coding-oriented counterparts. The rich information carried
by&lt;br/&gt;coded feedback is then used to design protocols that
offer&lt;br/&gt;enhanced global and local error protection and data
security&lt;br/&gt;while self-adapting to network changes. The theoretic
studies&lt;br/&gt;of this program follow closely practical
considerations&lt;br/&gt;including the dynamic channel quality and the
interference&lt;br/&gt;nature of wireless networks and the complexity of the
resulting&lt;br/&gt;protocols. System-level implementation is used to verify
and&lt;br/&gt;further refine the theoretic findings of this program.
The&lt;br/&gt;coordinated approaches of coding theory, graph theory,
and&lt;br/&gt;network optimizations provide valuable
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;training for students with Purdue
University.&lt;br/&gt;