* 0845799
* SGER: Reassessing the Role of Planktonic Amoeboid Protists in Estuarine Microbial Food Webs
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* O. Roger Anderson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2009
* USD 64,039.00

Recent methodological advances have revealed that naked amoeboid protists
(amebas) are much more abundant in the plankton than previously thought. Using a
newly-established set of biovolume relationships, the carbon content of
planktonic amebas in the Hudson River estuary (HRE) was estimated to comprise
3-36% of total planktonic heterotrophic protist carbon, comparable to the
ciliates, a group that has received much more research attention. Amebas are
therefore likely to play an important role in carbon transfer through planktonic
food webs in estuaries, challenging current views of microbial C fluxes through
estuarine plankton. Nevertheless, C-flux through the ameba pool has not been
adequately quantified in any marine system and sampling for amebas in the HRE
has heretofore been restricted to a single, shore-based location in the
mesohaline portion of the estuary. This project will quantify the significance
of naked planktonic amebas to total heterotrophic protist carbon and C flux
through the microbial food web of the HRE. Biomasses of attached and free-living
bacteria and the major groups of heterotrophic protists will be quantified using
microscopy-based techniques. Growth rates of planktonic amebas will be measured
under natural conditions for the first time. Data will be gathered from 5
locations along the HRE salinity gradient over 3 months, providing observations
from a wide range of environmental settings. The outcome will be the first
comprehensive, quantitative understanding of planktonic heterotrophic protist
standing stocks and C fluxes within this important estuary, and the first time
amebas and other major protist groups in the plankton have been adequately
quantified together in any marine system. This project meets SGER guidelines as
a venture into an emerging area using recently-developed expertise to
potentially transform our established view of estuarine planktonic microbial
communities. SGER funding would also be highly leveraged through a companion
project funded by the Wallace Foundation and by the in-kind contribution of time
and expertise to the project by Co-PI, O. Roger Anderson.

Planktonic protists are important links in the food web from bacteria to larger
organisms, including invertebrates and fish. However, because of methodological
impediments, previous efforts to assess the importance of planktonic protists
have overlooked the role of planktonic amebas. Using a combination of well
established and newly-available techniques, this project will quantify the
contribution of amebas to microbial standing stocks and carbon fluxes in the
HRE. This effort has the potential to transform current understanding of
planktonic microbial C fluxes in estuaries. This will be the first study of
planktonic protists in the lower HRE, and the first study to compare microbial
food webs in different regions of the estuary. By providing information on
elemental fluxes through lower trophic levels, the results of this study will be
relevant to environmental management of one of the most populated estuaries in
the US. The HRE provides a model for other estuaries, especially systems with
high particle load. Determining the environmental correlates of ameba standing
stocks, growth rates, and C flux will facilitate transferring the results of
this study to other systems.

This project is closely related to, and highly leveraged by, a high-profile
study of water-quality in the HRE. The water-quality study will have a large,
dedicated web presence and is slated for extensive press coverage in the coming
weeks. The project also presents an opportunity for significant and unique
knowledge transfer related to the identification and enumeration of planktonic
amebas from a senior scientist (Anderson) to a junior colleague (Juhl). In
addition, an undergraduate will participate in the research and use a portion of
the data collected for her Senior research thesis.