* 0845007
* CAREER: Minority Carrier Transport in Wide Bandgap Semiconductor Nanowires: Classical and Quantum Size Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Yi Gu, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2014
* USD 576,813.00

Technical: This project is to study minority carrier transport properties in
nanowires made of wide-bandgap semiconductors. Minority carrier transport is of
special interest and importance, as it controls majority carrier transport in
many devices and is also sensitive to carrier-carrier interactions. In this
project, free-standing wide-bandgap semiconductor nanowires with controlled
dimensions are synthesized using the vapor-liquid-solid growth method. One-
dimensional minority carrier transport, specifically the surface-dependent and
-independent minority carrier diffusion lengths and drift mobilities, is studied
using novel scanning probe microscopy-based techniques with integrated
electrical and optical probing capabilities. The classical size effects are
investigated via the correlation between surface electronic structures under
various surface conditions and effects of surfaces as minority carrier
recombination and scattering centers. The quantum size effects are examined via
the size (diameter) dependence of the minority carrier mobility controlled by
various transport-limiting mechanisms including carrier-impurity, carrier-
phonon, and carrier-carrier (minority-majority) scattering processes. Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. With the importance of
carrier transport in wide-ranging electronic and optoelectronic applications,
the success of this project will provide a fundamental basis for the potentially
transformative nanoscale materials and device engineering efforts. This project
will lay the foundation for future efforts by the PI to develop the approach of
tuning the interplay among electrons, phonons, photons, impurities, and surfaces
via dimension, surface, and impurity engineering in order to achieve an
integrated control over optical, electrical, magnetic, and thermoelectric
properties in nanoscale materials. The research component of this project is
integrated into multifaceted educational and outreach activities. In addition to
providing research training for students at both undergraduate and graduate
levels, the educational efforts aim to enhance general undergraduate physics
education for students with diverse backgrounds, as well as to provide a
"focused concept" laboratory experience for undergraduate physics majors at the
Washington State University. The outreach element of this project aims to
provide continuing, long-term support for science teacher education and
professional development.