* 0845127
* CAREER: Wyoming Applied Analysis & Computing Group: Behavior of Solutions of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Gregory Lyng, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2015
* USD 409,998.00

This award supports a coordinated set of research and educational activities
with the goals of elucidating the behavior of solutions of certain nonlinear
partial differential equations and stimulating the environment for research and
study in analysis, differential equations, and related computation at the
University of Wyoming. This activity centers on the Wyoming Applied Analysis &
Computing Group, a team consisting of undergraduate and graduate students,
University of Wyoming faculty, and faculty from Wyoming's network of community
colleges.

Nonlinear partial differential equations arise generically in mathematical
models of physical phenomena. However, a broad understanding of their properties
remains a fundamental challenge in pure and applied mathematics. The
differential equations that are the focus of this research are physically
motivated, and their features (nonlinearity, multiple space dimensions, multiple
scales) represent some of the central challenges in the analysis of such
equations. The research agenda includes investigation of a recent conjecture
about the formation of violent oscillations in the focusing nonlinear
Schrodinger equation; this conjecture is part of an emerging belief that the
formation of these oscillations may have a universal character. The validation
of the appearance of such universal behavior in differential equations is
certain to drive a wave of new developments in the analysis of nonlinear
phenomena. On a mathematical level, the plan of attack is based on a broad array
of analytical techniques, including Evans functions, singular perturbations,
dynamical systems, spectral theory for linear operators, complex analysis, and
numerical analysis. The anticipated results, if achieved, have the potential to
make an impact on applications and other areas of mathematics. One of the
research projects aims to extend the asymptotic analysis of Riemann-Hilbert
problems arising in the analysis of integrable partial differential equations;
such extensions are expected to be useful in the seemingly unrelated analysis of
orthogonal polynomials and random matrices.

The breadth of mathematical tools required by the research agenda ensures that
the Wyoming Applied Analysis & Computing Group will serve as an ideal training
ground in applied analysis and computation for the next generation of
researchers and students. In addition to collective work on the research agenda,
the group will host an annual two-week immersion into research activities for
select community-college faculty. Additionally, the group's activities will
include participation in the annual "articulation conferences" that are held to
connect the math and science departments at the University of Wyoming with those
at Wyoming's seven community colleges. These activities will strengthen the
mathematical network across the state. The group's recruitment and training
strategy is partially based on the development of a novel calculus course that
treats numerical methods as an intrinsic part of calculus. The course prepares
students to participate in the group at an early stage of their careers.