* 0845618
* CAREER:  Spectroscopic Studies of Ionic Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,01/31/2015
* J. Mathias Weber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2015
* USD 617,500.00

In this award, Dr. Weber from University of Colorado at Boulder, will study
transition metal complex ions with infrared and photodissociation spectroscopy.
The ions will be generated by laser vaporization and supersonic expansion, or by
electrospray ionization. Transition metal anion complexes with hydrocarbon
molecules or CO and CO2 have significance in heterogeneous catalysis in general,
and in CH and CO bond activation in particular. The study of halogen metalates
in a solvent-free environment is expected to improve our understanding of their
intrinsic properties. Frequently, these metalates are precursors for the
formation of metal nanoparticles that play an important role in catalysis.
&lt;br/&gt;In his education plan, Dr. Weber proposes to develop a new approach
to teaching quantum mechanics, relying on student interaction and engagement.
Dr. Weber will liaise with educational specialists and broadly disseminate the
course plan via the internet for others to
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many industrial processes rely
on heterogeneous catalysis. A famous example is the Haber-Bosch process in which
ammonia is generated from hydrogen and nitrogen gases. Ammonia is the main
feedstock for fertilizers upon which much of the world's food supply depends on.
The gases interact with the solid surface of the catalyst that alters the
reaction pathway such that less energy is required to make the reaction occur.
In order to improve catalytic performance and the associated cost and resources
required to run catalytic reactions, a detailed understanding of the chemical
species that form intermittently in the reactions is imperative. Dr. Weber from
University of Colorado at Boulder will use sophisticated equipment to generate
species involved in catalytic reactions, and to study their structure in great
detail. His work is unique in so far as he focuses on negatively charged species
that are difficult to investigate, yet are expected to play an important role in
these processes. &lt;br/&gt;These studies require a solid theoretical
understanding on how to mathematically describe bonding interactions. This area
of chemistry falls into the realm of quantum mechanics, a course that all
chemistry undergraduate students have to pass. It often presents the greatest
hurdle for graduation, as the material is mathematically challenging and
drastically different from classical physics and chemistry. Dr. Weber plans to
develop an interactive course that continuously gauges students' process, and to
share this course with his colleagues via the internet.