* 0845351
* CAREER: Leveraging Online Behavior to Support Knowledge and Memory
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Daniel Cosley, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2015
* USD 563,880.00

This research will examine two related issues: (1) how to motivate people to
contribute more to communities such as open source software and Wikipedia that
produce public goods, and (2) how to strengthen people's self-concepts and
relationships with others by using content they create online to support
reminiscence. This work deeply intertwines computing and social science, using
insight about people's motivation, goals, and behavior to drive models,
algorithms, and interfaces that leverage people's online activity to create
value for individuals and society. The online nature of this activity allows it
to be aggregated into large data sets for modeling (e.g., social network
analysis) and mining (e.g., collaborative filtering); a major theme of the
research is to effectively wring more value out of the activities people already
do.

Understanding why people act online will lead to process models that explain
important features of the data people generate through their actions as well as
new algorithms for exploiting that data. For example, the research will model
how critical events and roles people adopt affect people's contributions over
time in Wikipedia. Such models models will drive algorithms that expose people
to other people, groups, tools, policies, and group norms in contexts the models
suggest will increase people's motivation to contribute.

Understanding users' goals will also lead to new applications for data and more
effective interfaces for presenting it. The research will study how and why
people reminisce through a series of lightweight prototypes that cue memories,
as well as through analysis of online behavior in social media. This work will
lead to algorithms that capture memory-laden content from activity in social
media and interfaces that effectively use that content to support reminiscence.
Preliminary work suggests that spontaneous, mobile delivery of appropriately
chosen reminders promises to increase the value people derive from the content
they create.

More broadly, the process of designing these models, algorithms, and interfaces
will lead to insights about using social science theory in design that can be
captured and shared with practitioners, new methodologies for analyzing complex
social data, and the production of useful behavioral datasets that will benefit
other researchers. Increasing participation in public goods like Wikipedia will
improve the individual experience of members and the social goods they create.
Tools developed in the domain of reminiscing have the potential to improve many
people's lives, especially as the population ages. The education plan provides
for richer research experiences through conference attendance and summer
exchange programs with other labs. It also helps students develop the
interdisciplinary attitudes and skills needed for this work through courses that
look at real systems and the data they provide from both technological and
social perspectives.