* 0845711
* CAREER: Building Virtual Devices with QoS Assurance in a Consolidated Storage Infrastructure
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2016
* Song Jiang, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 01/31/2016
* USD 412,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;A growing and inevitable trend in the use and management of storage
resources is the consolidation of distributed storage into a large data center
to reduce the rapidly growing administration cost and to improve resource
utilization. Despite its compelling advantages and years of efforts on research
and product development, a critical challenge in turning this promising
technology into reality remains to be addressed, which is that the quality of
the I/O services (QoS) cannot be conveniently presented and efficiently
guaranteed for users who outsource their dedicated storages to the shared
system. To this end, a performance interface, or specification of required
service quality, must be able to allow a diverse set of users to easily relate
each of their I/O QoS requirements to their respective application performance
and enable efficient system implementation to meet the QoS requirements.
Currently, the QoS requirements are usually presented in the form of service-
level agreements (SLAs) to bound latency and throughput of I/O requests. SLA is
not suitable for I/O requests from application servers to storage servers
because users have difficulties in using the performance interface and resources
allocation can be misguided by the SLA measures, which do not consistently
reflect users' resource demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this critical
issue, the investigator will develop a reference (or virtual) storage device as
performance interface and will implement consolidated storage service based on
the interface. In this way, a user is guaranteed to receive an I/O service whose
quality is at least as good as that on the reference system regardless of
variations and instantaneous changes of data access patterns. The research
project aims to remove the significant barrier for users and system
administrators to communicate I/O performance requirements and pave the road to
wide acceptance of the storage consolidation technology.&lt;br/&gt;