* 0845275
* CAREER: Modeling Missense Mutation
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Rachel Karchin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 618,941.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award to support the
research of Dr. Rachel Karchin, who holds appointments in the Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Department of Computer Science, Institute for
Computational Medicine, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
and Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. She is a
third-year, tenure-track Assistant Professor. High-throughput genome sequencing
has resulted in vast amounts of data on amino acid residue sequence variation
(i.e. missense mutations). This has presented the opportunity to increase our
understanding of how protein sequence, structure, and function are inter-
related. Further in order to understand the role of the interactions between
individual mutations, accurate modeling methods are needed. This will bring the
field closer towards understanding the genetic basis of natural protein
evolution and to improve efforts to evolve proteins in the laboratory. This
project is developing computational methods for missense mutant function
prediction. These models are resulting in the ability to explore the importance
of biological context in protein response to missense mutation (such as loss or
gain of activity), the generalizability of such responses among different
proteins, and the relative importance of biophysics and phylogeny at these
predictions. Further, an experimental verification of these model predictions is
being tested in a directed evolution system in Escherichia coli.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will contribute to computational research in
public health (genetic components of disease), agriculture, and ecology (plant
and animal susceptibility to pathogens and parasites, resistance to herbicides
and insecticides, response to fertilizers). As part of her CAREER plan Dr.
Karchin will introduce high school students from groups underrepresented in
science, particularly disadvantaged young women, to computational biology. A
unique approach to this activity is a molecular evolution computer game designed
by the PI for high school students in which an agent-based model is employed to
evolve a highly fit population of toy proteins in a virtual environment. Further
information on the products of this award and how to access them will be found
at the PI's lab web site at http://karchinlab.org/.