* 0845236
* CAREER: Development of Novel Methods to Measure Cell Membrane Protein Clustering in vivo: Unraveling the Relationship between Clustering, Ligand Binding and Cell Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Emily Smith, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Cellular System cluster of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division will support the CAREER development
plan of Prof. Emily Smith of Iowa State University. Prof. Smith and her research
group will develop high spatial resolution imaging methods to measure the
dynamic organization of cell membrane receptors. These methods include
fluorescence resonance energy transfer assays that do not require receptor
modification and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy coupled to stimulated
emission depletion imaging. Prof. Smith's work will address the important
question of how the spatial organization of the cell membrane relates to cell
signaling and ligand binding events for two membrane receptors important in cell
signaling: integrins and receptors for advanced glycation end products. Drawing
from concepts of analytical chemistry and molecular biology, the project will
provide excellent training opportunities to graduate students. To support this
training, a graduate course in advanced microscopy techniques will be developed.
Prof. Smith will also establish a high school outreach program to provide hands-
on research experience through a developed low-cost instructional module and
summer internship opportunities for high school students from nearby rural
school districts.