* 0845061
* CAREER:  Modeling, Analysis and Computation of Stochastic Intracellular Reactions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Di Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 410,016.00

The main objective of the proposed research is to&lt;br/&gt;provide simplified
dynamics and design efficient numerical methods for&lt;br/&gt;complex
intracellular stochastic chemical reacting networks. Numerical&lt;br/&gt;schemes
will be developed to simulate systems exhibiting multiple time&lt;br/&gt;and
concentration scales, and to solve transition paths and
transition&lt;br/&gt;rates for systems with metastability. Error analysis of the
schemes as&lt;br/&gt;well as sharper estimates on the transition rates will
be&lt;br/&gt;provided. Applications will be focused on developing and analyzing
a&lt;br/&gt;quantitative model for the Insulin response network,
through&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with biologists at Michigan State University
(MSU). The&lt;br/&gt;education plan includes training of graduate students that
will lead&lt;br/&gt;to Ph.D. theses, developing a graduate level course for
students in&lt;br/&gt;applied and computational mathematics, introducing the
related topics&lt;br/&gt;to undergraduate curriculum, and organizing a workshop
on the same topic.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be crucial to the
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;functional issues of intracellular reacting networks
at the system&lt;br/&gt;level, which is becoming the new focus of genomic
research. &lt;br/&gt;Numerical studies of the multi-scale systems will lead to
new insights into the simulation&lt;br/&gt;schemes for stochastic systems. The
development of accurate and&lt;br/&gt;efficient numerical methods for multi-
scale chemical reaction systems&lt;br/&gt;involves novel analytical approaches
from stochastic analysis. The study&lt;br/&gt;of the fluctuation driven
transitions in metastable chemical reaction&lt;br/&gt;systems will find new
applications for advanced probability theory and&lt;br/&gt;optimization
techniques. The multi-scale and stochastic methods&lt;br/&gt;developed by the
proposed research will find a wide range of&lt;br/&gt;applications in biological
sciences and nano-technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is going
to build mathematical models and design efficient&lt;br/&gt;computer based
simulation algorithms for chemical reactions inside&lt;br/&gt;living cells,
which ususally involve many types of reacting channels&lt;br/&gt;and reacting
species, as well as random fluctuations. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;research is to
simplify and reduce complex models, which will lead to&lt;br/&gt;insightful
conceptualization of the system. The research will be&lt;br/&gt;conducted in
collaboration with biologists and the theoretical results&lt;br/&gt;with be
calibrated with real data generated by experiments in&lt;br/&gt;labs. The
targeted application, namely the modeling of Insulin&lt;br/&gt;response network,
has a significant potential for the promotion of&lt;br/&gt;public health. Type 2
diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance are top&lt;br/&gt;causes of morbidity
and mortality in the United States. In the case of&lt;br/&gt;insulin resistance,
tissues such as muscle, fat and liver become less&lt;br/&gt;responsive or
resistant to insulin. The disorder is also linked to&lt;br/&gt;other common
health problems, such as obesity, hyperlipidaemia,&lt;br/&gt;hypertension etc.
The models and algorithms developed by the PI will&lt;br/&gt;help to dandify the
major reactions and reactants that are maintaining&lt;br/&gt;the normal range of
plasma glaucous in individuals throughout periods&lt;br/&gt;of feeding and
fasting. The research output will help to understand&lt;br/&gt;the mechanism of
the Insulin disorders and the cause of type2 diabetes.