* 0845076
* CAREER: Lagrangian Sensing in Large Scale Cyber-Physical Infrastructure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Alexandre Bayen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/28/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This project includes the development of theory and algorithms, the design of a
system architecture, and the prototyping, testing and large-scale deployment of
two mobile sensing platforms. The two applications are highway traffic
estimation and river flow estimation using GPS-equipped smartphones. The
algorithms run online, gather mobile data and send it to a server, which uses
inverse modeling to estimate the state of the system. It broadcasts information
back to the smartphones and to the internet. A field operational test, called
Mobile Millennium is aimed at reaching thousands of users in California. The
river flow monitoring project is aimed at deploying a hundred drifters in the
Sacramento Delta.

The contributions are in the field of Lagrangian sensing in large-scale cyber-
physical infrastructure systems. "Lagrangian" refers to a form of sensing in
which sensors measure quantities along their trajectories; "cyber-physical"
refers to the flow of information and computing in a system governed by physical
phenomena. The project investigates the following question: how to reconstruct
the state of a distributed system from mobile sensors which cannot control their
motion? The mathematical techniques used include inverse modeling, applied to
partial differential equations.

This project addresses some important issues related to transportation and clean
water. With the free downloadable smartphone software, commuters have real-time
traffic information to increase their travel efficiency. By involving students
from underrepresented minorities, the UC Berkeley Disabled Student Program, and
the Berkeley High School, this research provides a valuable opportunity for
students to develop their interest in engineering.