* 0845901
* CAREER:  Neural Mechanisms of Object Size Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Scott Murray, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 06/30/2014
* USD 850,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When we open our eyes we instantly --
without any apparent effort -- have a detailed three-dimensional (3D)
representation of our environment. However, the subjective ease of vision
actually hides a set of very difficult computational problems that our brains
are exceptionally good at solving. Foremost among these problems is how the
brain deals with the inherent ambiguity in the retinal image. Because vision
entails the projection of a 3D world onto a 2D surface, any given image on our
retina could be caused by an infinite set of possible 3D configurations in our
environment. In this project the investigators attempt to study this type of
ambiguity by focusing on the perception of object size. There is an infinite set
of object sizes and distances that could give rise to any specific retinal image
size. A fundamental challenge to understanding size perception is specifying how
distance information -- which is not explicitly represented in the retinal image
-- is combined with retinal size information to achieve an accurate and stable
representation of object size. The investigators will use functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) and event-related potential (ERP) techniques to
understand the role of 3D context in the neural processing of object size. The
overarching framework of the research is that distance information is combined
with retinal size information in early stages of the visual system. A series of
experiments are proposed that focus on how representations of retinal size in
early visual cortex are affected by 3D context. Specifically, the experiments
will examine the relationship between perceived size and neural activity in
early visual cortex, assessing the influence of top-down effects such as
attention. The experiments will also examine the timing of 3D contextual effects
using time-sensitive ERP measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies
are unique in that they use well-established behavioral and neuroimaging
techniques to reevaluate the processing of size, a fundamental object property,
in the context of 3D scenes. Understanding how this property is computed will
significantly advance our knowledge of how the visual system operates in the 3D
world in which we live. In addition, the research project will fit into a larger
framework of cognitive neuroscience education and training at the investigator's
institution. Specific undergraduate and graduate coursework will incorporate
many of the techniques used in this project, which will help students to acquire
knowledge of the theory and methodologies underlying state-of-the-art brain
imaging research. Finally, the investigator's institution has embarked on a
major expansion of facilities and personnel related to cognitive neuroscience
and brain imaging research. The proposed project will form a major component of
this expansion, the Brain Imaging Innovation Initiative, which is a multifaceted
training and research effort aimed at undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral
students and faculty interested in developing expertise in brain imaging
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;