* 0845559
* CAREER: Toward eliminating malicious code
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Christopher Kruegel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Malicious software is one of the most
pressing security problems on&lt;br/&gt;the Internet. The main reason for the
apparent failure of current&lt;br/&gt;defense approaches is that malware
detection techniques are too&lt;br/&gt;specific. This is most obvious with virus
scanners, which rely on&lt;br/&gt;signatures that are specific to individual
malware instances. However,&lt;br/&gt;also behavioral detection techniques
typically target only specific&lt;br/&gt;features of malicious code. Examples
include the scanning behavior of&lt;br/&gt;worms and the command and control
channels of bots. Unfortunately,&lt;br/&gt;such techniques become obsolete when
malware evolves and the targeted&lt;br/&gt;feature
disappears.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we develop a novel malware
defense system that&lt;br/&gt;overcomes the shortcomings of current approaches.
To this end, we&lt;br/&gt;investigate techniques that specify and model program
behavior at a&lt;br/&gt;level of abstraction that captures general properties
and features&lt;br/&gt;that are fundamental to the execution of programs. In
addition, we&lt;br/&gt;develop a stealth and comprehensive analysis environment
that&lt;br/&gt;automatically extracts the characteristics of novel malware
strains&lt;br/&gt;when they appear, expressing these characteristics in terms of
the&lt;br/&gt;general, behavioral properties. These characteristics are
then&lt;br/&gt;automatically translated into efficient detection models. This
allows&lt;br/&gt;our system to quickly react to and eliminate novel malware
variants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research on novel techniques to eliminate
malware presents rich&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for industrial and societal
impact, and will have broad&lt;br/&gt;impact though education and outreach. We
will introduce a new course&lt;br/&gt;on malware analysis at UC Santa Barbara,
perform outreach activities&lt;br/&gt;through a newly established diversity
center, and cooperate with&lt;br/&gt;well-known players in the anti-malware
industry.