* 0845283
* CAREER:   Understanding the exceptional broad taxonomic functionality of a maize disease resistance gene  and the cognate bacterial effector
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Bingyu Zhao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,036,874.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Host plant resistance is the most
effective, economical, and environmentally friendly way to control plant
diseases. Although significant progress about the interaction of plant NB-LRR-
type resistance gene and the corresponding bacterial effector gene has been made
in the past decades, the mechanism of why certain NB-LRR genes function across
taxonomic species is very intriguing but not much studied. The investigator
identified a maize disease resistance gene Rxo1 which encodes a NB-LRR protein
that could recognize the cognate bacterial effector avrRxo1 and trigger defense
responses in diverse plant species. The investigator will use the Rxo1/avrRxo1
system to address the important topic of Restricted Taxonomic Functionality
(RTF) vs Broad Taxonomic Functionality (BTF) of NB-LRR genes by using a
combination of genetic, molecular biological, and biochemical approaches.
Understanding the mechanism of RTF vs BTF will enable plant breeders to transfer
NB-LRR genes from model species into important crop plants to achieve durable
disease resistance. The project's broader impacts include intensive training
experiences for postdoc, graduate, and undergraduate students in broad topics of
modern plant biology such as plant cell biology, plant tissue culture,
transformation, marker-aided identification of transgenic plants, and gene
expression. The project will also support workshops to train minority high
school students and attract them to a career in modern plant biology