* 0845939
* CAREER: Molecular Analysis of Silica Biomineralization in Diatoms
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Nils Kroger, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,993.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0845939 PI: Kroeger, Nils ORG: Georgia Tech

Title: CAREER: Molecular Analysis of Silica Biomineralization in Diatoms

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Biomineralization is the formation of inorganic materials
under control of a living organism. Among the most prominent examples of
biomineralization are the diatoms, which are unicellular eukaryotic microalgae
producing intricately structured cell walls made of amorphous SiO2 (silica). The
complex 3D-nanopatterned silica shapes of diatoms are formed under genetic
control, thus being spectacular examples for the versatility and precision of
biological morphogenesis, which by far exceeds the capabilities of present day
materials engineering. Understanding the molecular mechanism of silica
biomineralization in diatoms will therefore not only provide fundamental insight
into the mechanism of biological morphogenesis, but also devise novel,
biotechnological routes for the synthesis of silica-based 3D materials with
designed nanoscopic features and functionalities. By taking advantage of the
wealth of data provided by two diatom genome sequences and associated functional
genomics studies, the research in this project aims to identify a large set of
new biomineralization proteins involved in silica formation. The proteins will
be characterized regarding their intracellular locations, chemical structures,
self-assembly properties, and influence on silica formation. This research will
for the first time experimentally address the molecular mechanism of silicon
deposition vesicle (SDV) biogenesis by biochemical isolation and
characterization of receptor proteins that mediate the intracellular transport
of biomineralization proteins to the SDV. This will lay the foundation for
analyzing the control of protein delivery to the SDV and its effect on silica
morphogenesis, and thus represents a first attempt towards investigating the
complex dynamics of silica biomineralization.

BROADER IMPACTS: The unique integration of Biology, Chemistry and Materials
Science in this research project will be utilized as a central theme to enhance
interdisciplinary education and research experience at two critical crossroads
of student education: the high school to college interface and the college to
graduate school interface. At the high school to college interface students from
underrepresented groups are specifically targeted through collaboration with a
local ?Early College Academy? (DECA). It is aimed to enhance interest of DECA
students in science by annual summer workshops on ?Molecular Biology? that
allows them to discover the interdisciplinary and playful nature of science.
Sustainability of this activity is ensured by internships for teachers and high
school students, and by the establishment of a web-based curriculum for the
workshop. At the college to graduate school interface, education in the
Biological Sciences of students from Chemistry and Engineering will be advanced
by developing a novel interdisciplinary seminar and laboratory course that
highlights the cross-connections between these disciplines.



