* 0845899
* CAREER:   The Influence of ppGpp on the Cellular Actions of BipA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Victoria Robinson, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2016
* USD 934,500.00

The selective synthesis of proteins is crucial for the ability of microorganisms
to adapt to, and subsequently overcome, adverse environmental conditions.
Exactly how protein biosynthesis is coupled to stress responses and virulence
pathways in bacteria is not understood. BipA is a member of the translational
family of GTPases and has been shown to be critical to the regulation of stress
adaptation and pathogenic processes in microorganisms. Similar to other
bacterial GTPases, the properties of this protein are determined by guanine
nucleotide binding and exchange, as well as by association with the ribosome. An
examination of the ribosome binding properties of BipA reveal an unanticipated
linkage between BipA and guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp), an alarmone
responsible for adaptation to altered growth conditions in bacterial cells.
Moreover, evidence suggests that BipA acts as an intermediary between the
ribosome and the cellular environment and that its structural and regulatory
properties influence how the ribosome responds to changing cellular conditions.
This research involves using biochemical and biophysical techniques to
understand how BipA accomplishes these tasks at the molecular level. There are
at least two BipA ribosome complexes, 70S:BipA:GTP and 30S:BipA:ppGpp that exist
in vivo. The first goal of this project is to use protein crystallography, cryo-
electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and other biophysical methods to determine the
nature of these complexes, map the interaction surfaces between the various
components and assess conformational changes resulting from binding and
hydrolysis events on the local and global level. The second aim utilizes site
directed mutagenesis, deletion analysis, fluorescence and hydrolysis assays to
assess the contributions of intra- and inter-molecular interactions to the
regulation and activities of BipA. Lastly, a variety of techniques will be
employed to understand the biochemical and physiological consequences of the
interactions involving ppGpp, BipA and the ribosome. Taken together, these
studies will define BipA's molecular mechanism of action and provide a greater
understanding of stress and virulence pathways in
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This project has the
potential to transform our understanding of basic processes regulating protein
synthesis, a fundamental process crucial to the ability of organisms to grow and
respond to their environment. In addition, this CAREER award will support
research and teaching activities at the intersection of biochemistry,
biophysics, molecular genetics and microbiology. Emphasis has been placed on
connecting biophysical techniques and microbiological processes especially in
affording cross-disciplinary research opportunities for students at various
stages of their educational careers. In addition, laboratory modules will be
developed to introduce students to fundamental techniques in biophysics. These
adaptable modules provide the basis of outreach programs connecting with local
colleges and minority students.