* 0845761
* CAREER: MacroLab: a Comprehensive Macroprogramming System for Cyber-physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Cameron (Kamin) Whitehouse, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2015
* USD 431,643.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) allow computer systems to monitor and control the
physical world in a new way that could revolutionize many areas of science and
engineering. However, they are often too complex for non-specialists to use. The
aim of this work is to develop new technology to manage this complexity,
enabling scientists and engineers to use CPSs just like other tools and
instruments. This research takes a comprehensive approach to macroprogramming --
the task of programming an entire network of devices as a single, programmable
substrate. This research exploits global, network-wide information about a CPS
provided by a macroprogram to improve traditional software engineering
techniques such as testing, debugging, analysis, and optimization. New
techniques are being developed that use global information to optimize system
performance, automatically generate test cases, and reduce the state space for
analysis. This work is developing new programming abstractions that allow the
separation of the application logic from quality-of-service requirements and
hardware requirements, improving code portability and reuse. This research will
produce a comprehensive development environment for CPSs called MacroLab. The
new tools developed will greatly simplify the process of their programming and
make them more accessible to non-experts. By taking a holistic view of the
network and its software, MacroLab will manage a range of complex, interacting
issues that would be extremely difficult to manage by hand. MacroLab will be
tested pilot studies, including environmental monitoring. A graduate CPS course
will be developed. MacroLab will be used for course experiments and in senior
capstone projects.