* 0845287
* CAREER: Exploration of Novel Quantum Phenomena and Relativistic-Like Quantum Dynamics in Graphene Nanoelectronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Pablo Jarillo-Herrero, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2014
* USD 525,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award funds
an education and research program aimed at the exploration of new quantum
phenomena in graphene nanoelectronic devices. Electrons in graphene, a single-
atom thick sheet of graphite, behave very differently from electrons in
conventional metals or semiconductors. In particular, their behavior mimics that
of ultra-relativistic particles. This results both in many exciting fundamental
physics phenomena and also unique electronic properties, such as the world's
record electron mobility, with great potential in future nanoelectronic
technologies. This project includes a strong interaction between education and
research, which will result in excellent materials research training for
graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, modern teaching methods, such
as computer simulations will be introduced, in the introductory quantum
mechanics lectures. These simulations will be translated into Spanish to reach
out to the Hispanic community in the US and abroad. Outreach activities, via
laboratory visits and public lectures, will have a special focus on science
communication to the general public and to the media. Recruiting efforts will
contribute to the integration of women, minorities and international students,
especially from developing countries, into the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
Career award supports a project aimed at understanding the conceptually new
behavior of electrons in solids whose effective Hamiltonian is described by the
Dirac equation instead of the usual Schrodinger equation. In particular, the
research objective is to investigate novel quantum phenomena in graphene, a
single-atom thick sheet of graphite, due to its unique relativistic-like
electronic structure. Some of these exciting phenomena include the relativistic
Josephson effect, Klein tunneling or high-temperature excitonic condensation. To
study these phenomena, new nanofabrication methods will be developed to shape
graphene into desired nanostructures and the devices will be probed by low-noise
variable-temperature transport techniques. This project includes a strong
interaction between education and research, which will result in excellent
materials research training for graduate and undergraduate students. In
addition, modern teaching methods, such as computer simulations will be
introduced, in the introductory quantum mechanics lectures. These simulations
will be translated into Spanish to reach out to the Hispanic community in the US
and abroad. Outreach activities, via laboratory visits and public lectures, will
have a special focus on science communication to the general public and to the
media. Recruiting efforts will contribute to the integration of women,
minorities and international students, especially from developing countries,
into the scientific community.