* 0845059
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Cue Integration in Probability-Sensitive Language Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* T. Florian Jaeger, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 06/30/2012
* USD 97,654.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of sentence comprehension
involves incrementally accessing the meaning of individual words and combining
them into larger representations. In this process, readers / listeners use
probabilistic cues to guide their expectations of upcoming words and of the
syntactic roles that the words will play. For example, previous research has
demonstrated that people are sensitive to word frequency (more frequent words or
word meanings are easier to process than less frequent words or word meanings),
syntactic frequency (more frequent rules being easier to process than less
frequent rules) and world knowledge (more likely events being easier to process
than less likely events). However, a complete theory of language processing must
not only identify the cues that people are sensitive to, but also has to specify
a theory of how a reader or listener will combine them. Towards this end, this
project investigates the extent to which readers? syntactic processing
mechanisms fit several cue combination models that are based on different
Bayesian inference methods. Bayesian models provide a formalism specifying how
any set of probabilistic information sources can be optimally weighted and
combined. In this research, each of the cue combination models is applied to a
wide range of language cues which people have been shown to rely on. The models
will then be compared in terms of their fit to human reading-time data. The
project will use existing reading-time data sets from previous experiments, as
well as new reading-time data from language materials consisting of single
sentences in null contexts and in supportive contexts, systematically varying
several cues that have been shown to have measurable reading time effects in
previous literature. This will demonstrate which of the inference methods
provides the most accurate description of the computations that human readers
perform in order to understand sentences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work in
the field of sentence comprehension has established that people use a diverse
range of probabilistic cues when they interpret a sentence. However, several
important questions that remain unanswered include (a) how much each cue matters
in typical texts; and (b) how the cues are combined in the course of
comprehension. The main advance of this research is to use a combination of
experimental and computational modeling methods to answer these two questions.
The techniques and results developed will be broadly useful in at least three
general areas: (1) cognitive science; (2) engineering; and (3) human
applications of language research. First, this project will help researchers by
providing an available database of reading times for a large corpus of English
text, which any researcher will be able to use to evaluate theories of language
processing. In addition, the project will provide open source software that
researchers can use or modify to evaluate related theoretical questions in
language and other fields of cognitive science. Second, the project will provide
a way for computer engineers who research language to investigate the effects
that human readers are sensitive to, indicating potential directions for
fruitful research. And third, an understanding of how language is processed will
in the long run aid in developing better diagnostic tools and treatments for
people with developmental and acquired language disorders.