* 0845868
* CAREER: Towards Room Temperature Formability in Magnesium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Michele Manuel, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL: To combat rising fuel prices and increase the fuel economy in
transportation vehicles, considerable efforts have been made to understand and
enhance the structure-property relationships in magnesium alloys due to their
lightweight characteristics. However, magnesium?s low ductility at room
temperature reduces its formability and its potential for use in several weight-
saving applications. Currently, magnesium sheets are formed at elevated
temperatures, dramatically increasing their cost. For the last 100 years, the
dominant material used for automotive bodies and closures is cold rolled steel,
whose density is three times greater than magnesium but can be manufactured more
economically. Current research efforts in magnesium alloys have largely focused
on maximizing a limited number of material properties such as strength,
corrosion and creep resistance, however, mechanisms for enhancing ductility in
magnesium alloys through novel reinforcement structures have remained largely
unexplored. The specific research goal of this CAREER project is to increase the
room temperature ductility of magnesium alloys through nanoparticle
reinforcement. The central hypothesis is that the presence of nanoparticles in
the metal matrix can affect magnesium?s grain refining ability and enhance
plastic deformation mechanisms. In pursuit of this goal and to test the central
hypothesis, the research objectives of this CAREER project are to 1) determine
the role and measure the effect of microstructural parameters (grain refinement,
nanoparticle size and volume fraction) on plastic deformation mechanisms:
twinning and slip; 2) develop new relationships between complex deformation
mechanisms and nanoparticle reinforced microstructures of hexagonal closed
packed (HCP) metals such as magnesium and 3) formulate and validate a predictive
thermodynamics-based model that connects processing parameters to a
microstructure optimized for formability. The long-term research goal is to
utilize a computational thermodynamics approach to create metal-matrix
composites with unique reinforcement structures that can demonstrate radical,
transformative properties such as self-healing, biomimetic toughening and low
temperature formability. NON-TECHNICAL: The central theme for PI?s education,
service and outreach activities is education through coaching. The long-term
education goal is to use this coaching methodology to increase the awareness and
further the development of a community-centric engineering and science
curriculum that fosters solutions that are user-focused as well as
technologically significant. To achieve this goal, the education objectives of
this project are to 1) expose engineering students, through focused community-
centric design projects, to the need for modern and relevant engineering
solutions that will meet the needs of both local and global communities; 2)
integrate and leverage an established departmental program with a local
elementary school program which promotes teacher confidence while improving
science competency and 3) create industrial and international collaborations to
provide unique networking and learning opportunities for the students and PI.
This integrated research and education CAREER project provides solutions to some
of the greatest technologically relevant societal issues today: 1) light-
weighting vehicles to increase fuel efficiency in order to counter the rapidly
rising price of fuel and energy; 2) utilizing nanoparticles to manipulate and
control the microstructure of HCP metals for enhanced formability; 3) a science
education program for K-12 teachers that provides a multiplicative approach to
addressing the science education needs of a greater number of under-served and
under-represented students and 4) utilizing an innovative coaching model to
educate the next generation of engineers with a broader awareness and
appreciation of their impact on local- and global- communities in a technical,
analytically-oriented education system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Metallic Materials &amp; Nanostructures program in
DMR and the Materials Processing &amp; Manufacturing program in CMMI
Division.&lt;br/&gt;