* 0845823
* CAREER:  Computational Identification of Gene Regulatory Networks in Multicellular Eukaryotes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Sheng Zhong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 709,231.00

(This award is funded through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009: Public Law 111-5).

This is a CAREER award to support the research of Dr. Sheng Zhong, in the
Department of bioengineering at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Dr.
Zhong is a fourth-year, tenure-track Assistant Professor. Understanding cellular
processes, such as development and differentiation, requires understanding how
cells control the rate of protein production, especially gene transcription. A
gene regulatory network (GRN) is a collection of DNA segments in a genome, which
interact with each other and with other substances in the cell, thereby
governing the rates at which genes in a network are transcribed into messenger
RNA. Most computational tools for identification of eukaryote GRNs were
developed for the single cell eukaryote, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's
yeast). The complexity of GRNs in multicellular organisms and especially in
vertebrates is several magnitudes greater than that of the yeast GRNs. The
greater complexity arises from how genes are controlled by complex patterns of
DNA regulatory elements, called cis-regulatory modules; how larger genome size
provides a greater template for cis-regulatory modules to evolve; and the
stochastic process of transcription, which is activated by the interaction of
regulatory proteins and cis-regulatory modules. A new framework for the
identification of GRNs in multicellular organisms is being developed by Dr.
Zhong. Quantitative evolution models and joint models of gene expression and
protein-DNA interaction data are being developed in this project. The project is
advancing the state of the art of systems biology through developing a
theoretical framework of eukaryote GRN evolution, a variety of GRN
identification and analysis methods, prototype systems for analysis of genomic
data, and through discovery of engineering principles in cell biology. Databases
and tools produced under this project will be accessible via the PI?s website at
http://bioinformatics.bioen.uiuc.edu/

As a part of his CAREER plan, Dr. Zhong is training a new generation of
interdisciplinary researchers by engaging undergraduate students in research;
developing new courses and participating in outreach activities with Illinois
middle school and high school students, including a bioinformatics camp for
middle school girls, as one of the Girls Adventures in Mathematics, Engineering,
and Science (G.A.M.E.S) camp program.

