* 0845849
* CAREER:Body-enabled Design Paradigm: A New Pathway for Next Generation Battery-free Wireless Sensor Nodes Powered by Sustainable Energy Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2015
* Deukhyoun Heo, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 04/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a transformative design
paradigm for battery-free wireless sensors powered by renewable energy sources
for biomedical applications, monitoring public infrastructures, environmental
monitoring, and homeland security. This research focuses on creating energy-
efficient wireless sensors and providing power to sensors from sustainable
energy sources with maximum efficiency. The approach is to use the body terminal
of scaled devices in innovative ways to enable a novel energy-efficient body-
enabled design paradigm, forging a new pathway to battery-free wireless sensors
powered by sustainable energy sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, the research has the potential to develop a transformative
design paradigm to significantly reduce power consumption of wireless sensors
and forging reconfigurable energy-efficient power management systems based on
the new design paradigm to maximally harvest energy from energy transducers and
efficiently power the sensors. Combining digitally-assisted architectures and
the design paradigm, new hardware architectures for battery-free energy-
efficient wireless sensors will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project include enabling battery-free wireless sensors for a
variety of important applications. Furthermore, the new design paradigm has the
potential to advance the competitiveness of U.S. industries in communication
markets. The project will improve educational programs through integration of
this research with a new course in sustainable wireless sensors and a senior
design project. The project will increase graduate student training and increase
diversity within through internships for female high school students and summer
camps for students from underrepresented groups. The project will also increase
public awareness of the importance of science and engineering via collaboration
with a local science center.