* 0845722
* CAREER: ACOustic Underwater Sensor NETwork (ACOUSNET) -- Multi-Level Adaptations
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Liuqing Yang, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 05/31/2011
* USD 165,914.00

Underwater sensor networks have extensive applications ranging from natural
ecosystem to security monitoring. The basic task of a sensor network is to
facilitate collection of the sensed data. To this end, existing works assume a
centralized strategy where the sensed data is immediately forwarded to a central
sink from individual sensors. This strategy faces formidable challenges due to
the intricacies of underwater acoustic channels. Based on qualitative analyses
and quantitative calculations, we introduce the idea of distributed storage and
collection for underwater sensor networks. In the ACOustic Underwater Sensor
NETwork (ACOUSNET) project, we establish the transforming framework of
distributed storage and collection of the sensed data. This transform entails
multi-level adaptations to the unique underwater acoustic channels, physical
limitations, desirable network features and network heterogeneity. Our foremost
objective is to establish distributed data storage and collection mechanisms to
optimize the ACOUSNET performance. Due to the very different properties of deep
water and shallow water, we also put different emphasis and design requirements
on them. The backbone of our ACOUSNET is a suite of physical and data link layer
solutions for efficient data transmission. Compared with existing studies on
these issues, our endeavor is unique by taking into account the battery
nonlinearity and the network heterogeneity. Sea trials are essential for
underwater networks since the ocean is very difficult to emulate due to its vast
scale and complexity. The proposed research in this project will be
significantly informed by the data collected in sea experiments under various
conditions.