* 0845829
* CAREER: Studies of Catalytic Carbon Dioxide Reduction, Metallodithiolene Chemistry and Community Outreach to Build the Chemical Workforce
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* James Donahue, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2015
* USD 605,601.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) to
Professor James P. Donahue of Tulane University addresses the synthetic and
thermodynamic challenges of reducing carbon dioxide (CO2). Carbon dioxide is a
greenhouse gas that threatens our social, economic and environmental security
because of its potential to induce climate change through global warming. The
ability to transform even a small percentage of anthropogenic CO2 to chemical
fuels that can be transported and stored would be beneficial. A key
transformation in CO2 reduction, and the most energy intensive step, is the
transformation to carbon monoxide (CO). The Donahue laboratory utilizes unique,
bioinorganic-inspired approaches to catalytic CO2-to-CO reduction. The broader
impacts of this work include the possible development of new insights into how
nature has modified (and presumably lowered) the kinetic barrier that prevents
CO2 from being easily utilized as a chemical feedstock for fuels,
pharmaceuticals, and plastics. Undergraduate students from local small colleges
that do not have access to research facilities are engaged in Professor
Donahue's laboratories. Additionally, the chemistry demonstration series has
been re-instated in New Orleans grade schools. The undergraduates involved in
this project fulfill the requirements of a new public service degree requirement
at Tulane Univeristy while sparking curiosity in chemistry at the grade school
and middle school levels.