* 0845324
* CAREER:    Identification and Characterization of Genes Involved in Asexual Reproduction in Filamentous Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Joseph Flaherty, Coker College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2014
* USD 502,416.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast majority of filamentous fungi
propagate clonally through the formation of asexual spores (conidia). To produce
conidia, fungi must undergo a defined program of morphological development,
which presumably requires the coordinated efforts of many individual genes and
signal transduction pathways. Remarkably, the genetic underpinnings of asexual
development are poorly understood in filamentous fungi. The scientific objective
of this project is to identify and characterize genes critical for asexual
reproduction in Fusarium graminearum, a fungal plant pathogen with global
significance due to its ability to cause devastating diseases of cereal crops
followed by contamination with harmful mycotoxins. The extensive genomic
resources available for this organism coupled with its tractability have made
experiments designed to investigate poorly understood mechanisms a realistic and
compelling choice for integration into undergraduate education. Advances in
genomic tools have permitted analysis of gene expression at the whole-genome
level. Instituting a fungal genomics program at Coker College will strengthen
existing collaborations and foster the continued development of new
partnerships. This project will provide students at Coker College the
opportunity to (1) Develop innovative screens to identify developmental mutants
of F. graminearum, (2) Characterize identified mutants at the molecular level,
(3) Apply comparative genomics tools to identify potential orthologs of target
genes in other organisms, and (4) Design experiments to validate the involvement
of genes identified that impact asexual development in filamentous fungi. To
better understand the genes affected in the mutants identified, RNA will be
isolated and used to interrogate the F. graminearum Affymetrix GeneChip.
Students at Coker will compile a comprehensive data set for understanding gene
expression during asexual development and compare gene expression patterns
between developmental mutants identified to control strains. Inference from gene
expression data may lead to the discovery of specific genes involved in
regulating developmental pathways controlling fungal development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The long-term goal of this project is to
develop a research program in fungal genomics built on undergraduate
participation. To reach this goal, extensive collaborations will be formed with
faculty at research-intensive institutions that will serve to enhance
educational experiences for Coker College students and to increase research
output. Independent laboratory research is essential for students aspiring to
become scientists, medical doctors and science educators. The research project
developed at Coker College focuses on gene discovery in filamentous fungi, with
particular emphasis on elucidating the genetic mechanisms controlling
development of important plant pathogens. The emergence of multiple fungal model
systems combined with recent advances in fungal genomics has greatly enhanced
the feasibility and benefits of incorporating these organisms into undergraduate
research programs. Participation in research stimulates enthusiasm for science
in undergraduates, and provides them a foundation of knowledge and techniques
for future careers in research and education. This project will forge new roles
for undergraduate involvement in research while tearing down barriers that
inhibit collaborations between undergraduate institutions and major research
universities. Achievement of research goals will involve an innovative approach
to mentor undergraduate students undertaking independent projects. To this end,
a multi-institutional mentorship program will be developed involving a team of
faculty members formed to guide each student's research project. A logical
application of the technology and coordination required to facilitate the
mentorship program involves implementing a guest lecture component to the
curriculum at Coker College. Collaborators from research institutions with
specific expertise in various disciplines of molecular biology, biochemistry,
genomics, and host-parasite interactions will be scheduled to speak on a
relevant topic and transmitted to the Coker classroom through a video-
conferencing platform. The project will enhance the biology curriculum at Coker
College, make research experiences available to students who would not otherwise
have the opportunity, and provide expanded opportunities for undergraduate
students to gain valuable experience working with graduate students, post-
doctoral researchers, and faculty members at collaborating institutions.