* 0845537
* Finding their Way: The Developmental Work Trajectories of Non-College Youth
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Doris Entwisle, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2012
* USD 180,997.00

SES-0845537 Karl Alexander Doris Entwisle Johns Hopkins University

The purpose of this project is to understand how youth, especially those at-risk
and not bound for college, build human capital by means other than schooling.
This project views human capital enhancement as a form of learning and examines
its impact on employment, earnings and other adult work outcomes. It draws on an
existing data archive, the Baltimore-based Beginning School Study (BSS), which
has monitored the life progress of a group of typical urban youth since age 6
(in 1982) through age 28. Work trajectories starting at age 6 will be
constructed and then analyzed in relation to a well-specified set of
developmental precursors, including measures of so-called "soft skills." The
trajectories will connect measures of youths' 1) home chores; 2) their early
paid work outside the home (age 14); 3) their paid work during high school; 4)
their employment and vocational training between high school departure and age
22; and, ultimately, 5) their employment outcomes at age 28. Examining
developmental patterns of work-related behavior over the early life course and
then into the third decade of life will inform a number of theoretical and
policy issues related to this strand of human development, including the
underemployment of African American men. Regarding intellectual merit, this
project will contribute to several scholarly traditions: 1. Life-course
developmental research in Sociology, which neglects the workplace as a
developmental context for youth. 2. Vocational development research, which
typically lacks a long-term perspective and takes a narrow view of the non-
college bound. 3. Human capital research, which neglects human capital acquired
through middle school and high school work and soft skills as an integral
component of human capital. 4. Social stratification research and theory, by
illuminating how some disadvantaged youth manage to overcome the odds and
succeed.

Broader Impacts

The research has the potential to inform policy by identifying early life
experiences that help young people born into disadvantaged socio-economic
circumstances attain adult success. Because of its focus on the early
developmental years, the results may identify opportunities for early
intervention, focused, for example, on the cultivation of soft skills that have
value in the workplace and programs to more effectively bridge school and work.