* 0845336
* CAREER: Computational Tools for Evolutionary Analysis of Biological Interaction Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Luay Nakhleh, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2015
* USD 508,104.00

Intellectual Merit

Rapid advances in biotechnologies are amassing biological interaction data, such
as protein-protein and gene-gene interaction networks, at unprecedented pace and
rate, presenting a new powerful resource and allowing the reformulation of old,
yet important, biological questions in a new context. The size and complexity of
these new types of data pose great challenges for experimental and computational
biologists alike. Addressing these challenges has been a primary focus of much
research under the umbrella term of systems biology. However, almost no work has
been done on providing tools for simultaneous evolutionary analysis of genomic
and interactomic data. This project will delineate the signi&#64257;cant impact
such a simultaneous analysis can have on understanding and analyzing biological
interaction networks, and will explore new methodologies for conducting
computational analyses. In particular, two areas will be addressed that will
help shed light on interaction networks and their complexity:

1. Novel genome-interactome evolutionary models. Coalescent theory has been one
of the central models for establishing the relationships among gene genealogies
and species phylogenies. In its current form this theory neither allows for
modeling events that arise in genomic studies, such as gene duplication and
loss, nor has it been used to explain interaction network evolution. This
research will extend coalescent theory to model genome-scale evolutionary
events, and develop a new uni&#64257;ed framework for modeling the simultaneous
evolution of genomic and interactomic data.

2. Novel stochastic modeling and inference using graph grammars. Stochastic
models, such as hidden Markov models and stochastic context-free grammars, have
been used extensively in the analysis of biological sequence data. However, no
equivalent models have been introduced for analysis of interaction networks.
This research will explore new applications of stochastic graph grammars, as
well as ways in which these stochastic models can be used to provide insightful
analyses of these networks.

Broad Impact

Situated at the intersection of cellular, molecular, and evolutionary biology,
this work will have a signi&#64257;cant impact on the development and
applications of computational tools such as stochastic graph grammars and
dissimilarity measures. The project will provide opportunities for training
students in an interdisciplinary area, and will result in the development of new
courses focused on evolutionary analysis of biological networks. The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed work will help successfully recruit
students to computer science from traditionally under-represented groups. The
project methodologies will be implemented in software packages and made
available through open-source mechanisms.