* 0845645
* CAREER: Ultrafast Electronic, Magnetic and Coherent Lattice Dynamics and the Dynamic Structure-Property Relationship in Nanocrystalline Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Dong Son, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 12/31/2014
* USD 410,000.00

TECHNICAL: This CAREER project will investigate ultrafast electronic and
magnetization dynamics and the dynamic modification of material properties
associated with the optically excited coherent lattice motion in transition
metal oxide nanocrystals. So far, studies of the ultrafast electronic and
magnetic properties of transition metal oxides are largely focused on the bulk
surface and thin layer structures. The research will address the ultrafast
electronic and magnetic dynamics of nanometer scale transition metal oxides
using chemically synthesized colloidal nanocrystals as size and composition
tunable model systems. The coupled nature of the coherent lattice motion and
material properties in the electronic and spin degrees of freedom will also be
investigated. For this purpose, time resolved transient absorption and Faraday
rotation spectroscopy will be employed in conjunction with the time resolved
x-ray absorption spectroscopy. For the latter, femtosecond hard x-ray beam line
at the Advanced Light Source as well as the laser based x-ray source will be
used to study the structural dynamics in real space. Combined analysis of
electronic, magnetic dynamics and structural dynamics will provide a unique
opportunity to explore the dynamic structure-property relationship in
nanocrystalline solids on the time scale of the atomic motion in the lattice.
NON-TECHNICAL: The knowledge obtained from this research has broad implications
for understanding the coupling of electronic and magnetic properties with the
local molecular or lattice structure in nanometer length scale. Relevant
potential applications are switching and memory devices and spintronics, where
the dynamic control of the electronic, magnetic and transport properties relies
on the coupled nature of the electronic, spin and lattice degrees of freedom. In
addition, the length scale of several nanometers is similar to that of polymeric
molecular transition metal complexes, which is another interesting class of
materials exhibiting size-dependent material properties. In this regard, our
study in transition metal oxide nanocrystals could bridge our understanding of
the dynamic electronic and magnetic properties of molecules and bulk crystalline
solids both containing transition metal ions with partially filled d-electrons.
The educational component of the research focuses on the curricula development
for the undergraduate physical and analytical chemistry laboratory courses and
the outreach program for high school students. The developed curricula will be
also made available as instruction resources for predominantly undergraduate
institutions. The experimental program aiming at high school students will be
developed to give insight into real research in the physical sciences in order
to foster interests in science and encourage the talented students to consider
science as their career choice. The developed program will be implemented as a
newly added component in the university run youth career
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is being jointly co-funded by the
Metallic Materials and Nanostructures program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Experimental Physical Chemistry program in Chemistry Division.
&lt;br/&gt;