* 0845376
* CAREER: Theories and Applications of Efficient Separator and Randomization
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Bin Fu, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 03/31/2015
* USD 409,157.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Theories and Applications of Efficient Separator and
Randomization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study
efficient separator and randomization theories and technologies with
applications to algorithm design. Separator and randomization are basic tools of
designing algorithms for many applications problems. A separator is often used
to decompose a difficult computational problem into smaller and easier ones, and
then to solve the problem with a divide and conquer strategy. Randomization is
widely used to speed up computation by sampling a small number of cases from a
large number of possibilities. In order to attack challenging computational
problems, such as protein 3D structure prediction, more efficient decomposition
methods are expected to be developed. This project unifies the two approaches of
separators and randomization because of their close connection. This unified
approach helps the development of sublinear time algorithms, which are usually
based on random sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decomposition methods are
studied from low dimensional geometric spaces to high dimensional spaces and to
general graphs and to algebraic computation. Proving the existence of a
separator will get new insights into combinatorial nature of a given problem.
Finding a separator efficiently is also an interesting algorithmic problem
itself and often uses randomized methods. On the other hand, the research on
complexity theory related to randomness is a part of this project, which
includes the research about some lower bounds for randomization methods and the
limitation of derandomization. A potential application of separator theory is
protein folding prediction. A more efficient decomposition method will bring
faster algorithm for this significant problem in science. As this project
combines decomposition with randomization, the results of the research make new
contributions to the core area of computation theory and discover applications
in the field of bioinformatics. Education is an integral part of this project.
Minority graduate students and female graduate students are involved in the
protein 3D structure related algorithm design and web-server implementation. A
randomized computation course for both undergraduate and graduate students is
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;