* 0845550
* CAREER:    Afferent Thermosensory Mechanisms and Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Christopher Lowry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Cushing
* 01/31/2014
* USD 518,000.00

Recent studies in humans have demonstrated that holding a warm cup of coffee, as
opposed to a cold cup of coffee, increases pro-social behavior, without any
conscious awareness by the individual of the effects of temperature on their
behavior. Although the mechanisms involved have not been defined, these findings
suggest that there are mechanisms through which sensation of warm temperature in
the skin can affect social behavior. Preliminary data from the Lowry laboratory
suggest that a subpopulation of neurons in the brainstem that produce the brain
chemical serotonin may be responsible for the effects of temperature on social
behavior. Furthermore, these preliminary data suggest that a temperature-
sensitive protein, temperature-activated transient receptor potential (TRP) ion
channel 4 (TRPv4), may be responsible for sensing temperature changes in the
skin that lead to activation of serotonergic neurons. The PI will test the
hypotheses that (1) the neuronal activity of a subset of serotonergic neurons in
the brain responds to increases in temperature via mechanisms involving TRPv4
activation, and (2) activation of TRPv4 leads to decreased anxiety-related
behaviors and, conversely, increases in social
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;Anatomical, electrophysiological, pharmacological, and
behavioral approaches will be used to investigate the role of a subset of
serotonergic neurons in both sensing temperature and regulating behavior. Warm
temperature is expected to activate a subset of serotonergic neurons projecting
to brain structures involved in regulation of social behavior. This activation
of serotonergic neurons by warm temperature is also expected to be dependent on
activation of the temperature-sensitive channel TRPv4. This research will
provide new information relevant to the effects of thermal stimuli on a highly
conserved neurotransmitter system, the serotonergic system, and on emotional and
social behavior, new information that has application across vertebrate and
invertebrate taxa. This project will provide valuable training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students as well as incorporating outreach and
research mentoring for underrepresented high school students in the nearby
community. &lt;br/&gt;