* 0845676
* CAREER:   Studying Weak Interactions in Biological Systems, Forming Strong Interactions Between Students
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Anne Hinderliter, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2014
* USD 549,173.00

For the delivery of signaling molecules in a cell to occur, the membranes of the
vesicle in which signaling molecules are packaged must fuse with another
membrane. As timing is vital in cellular processes, this delivery of signaling
molecules must be poised to trigger only when the appropriate signal or
combinations of cellular signals transpire. Although this is a critical cellular
event, how this regulated delivery occurs is not well understood. Membranes are
comprised of a great diversity of lipids whose individual lipid-lipid
interactions are weak and interactions within the membrane dictated by the
lipids' chemical structure and its local milieu. These factors govern the
resultant lipid's activity (effective concentration) and hence, how the membrane
is targeted for binding to or partitioning into by proteins. Within this model,
it is hypothesized that intrinsically weak interactions between lipids are
critical for the system to reversibly and rapidly organize the protein clusters
that modulate signaling. This offers a more nuanced regulation of biological
events beyond a system dominated by a few, very strong interactions. These small
interaction energies offer flexibility in how combinations of lipids, in
response to proteins binding, form signaling platforms. This concept is
hypothesized to be the basis for how key proteins involved in regulated delivery
target distinct membranes. The objective of this project is to test the
hypothesis that these key proteins are modulated not by a few strong
interactions but by a necessary ensemble of weak interactions at the membrane.
Testing will involve quantitative analysis and rigorous use of binding theory
and thermodynamic (linkage) relationships by undergraduates from diverse
scientific disciplines. New techniques, both conceptual and experimental, will
also result from this project that will be applicable to many questions of
biological relevance. The classic use of linkage relationships is an example of
problem-based learning where biological processes are simply represented
mathematically and interpreted. Each experiment becomes a case study and the
derivation of equations is no longer restricted to assigned homework or to be
used after years of graduate training. The goal is to demonstrate that
undergraduates and young graduate students can propose, use, explore, and test
these concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The Broader
Impacts of this project include the development of methodologies that will
enhance the persistence, retention, and future success of women in scientific
careers. By improving the educational environment for women, the educational
environment not only for underrepresented groups but for all students will be
improved. The methodologies will have two components, Informal and Formal
Education. The Informal structure for this change is a scientific council, named
Interactions. This council will integrate all issues that are faced by future
science, mathematics and engineering (SME) professionals. Potential topics will
include: social dynamics (e.g. bias), the importance of building a community in
addition to a resume (or CV), the need to apply for research scholarships,
academic scholarships and awards, and how these experiences can shape your
future. Interactions will provide in-house educational meetings and host
motivating role models such as distinguished female scientists, alumni, and
scientists from the region who have gone on to illustrious careers. Interactions
will also foster peer group learning. The existence of peer group learning has
been identified by SME students as having the most immediate and most effective
contribution to increasing persistence of students within SME majors. The Formal
component is a Physical Biochemistry capstone course with laboratory capturing
the convergence of topics across the major and explicitly uniting concepts
through application. The linkage of biochemistry with other disciplines will be
through quantitative literacy where the grammar is Physical Chemistry. A course
focused upon practical outcomes will emphasize female specific advantages in
learning as it is argued that many other learning strategies are inherently
favorable to male learning patterns. Gender differences in learning strategies
will be equalized through multiple approaches to problem solving, and the
commonalities between seemingly diverse topics will be emphasized.