* 0845828
* CAREER:  Highly-available Power Supply through Distributed Generation Technologies:  Reliability Analysis Framework Based on Operation Under Critical Conditions
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Alexis Kwasinski, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to understand the reliability behavior of
microgrid-based ultra-reliable power systems in extreme conditions. This
objective is part of a broader career plan that focuses on improving electric
power supply availability through dc microgrids. The approach involves an
analytic methodology that estimates failure probability and expected failure
duration during hurricanes and earthquakes by relating these events? intensity
with location-dependent infrastructure vulnerabilities. Results are verified
through simulations and compared with past events? outcomes. The analysis uses
telecommunications power plants as a reference technology because of their
similarities with dc microgrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit
resides in the introduction of a reliability framework that uses non-homogeneous
Markov models. Transitions among states are characterized by the time varying
failure and repair rates of each key element in microgrids energy supply
infrastructures. The use of microgrids to achieve high availability constitutes
a radical shift from the paradigm of relying on energy-based backup systems.
This research also advances hurricanes characterization by introducing a new
measure of intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts extend into
improving electric power supply resiliency and national security, potentially
reducing the loss of lives after disasters, and creating interdisciplinary
collaboration opportunities with scientists studying disasters. This project
will leverage the interest on disasters to attract students into the electric
power area and to support the development of a power electronics research and
educational program with participation opportunities for minority students.
Research dissemination and education plans involve outreach goals targeting a
diverse audience, including peers, students, and the community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;