* 0845451
* CAREER:  Mechanisms of Forest Nitrogen Retention Over Seasons, Sites, and Succession
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Christine Goodale, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 536,700.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Current concepts of ecosystem ecology center on the coupling between nitrogen
availability and biotic demand in controlling retention of nitrogen by
ecosystems. Increased nitrogen loss is expected from ecosystems when the
nutritional demands of plants are low, as in old age or during the dormant
season, or when nitrogen availability has increased due to air pollution or
fertilizer use. The proposed work confronts these models using three field
experiments. In the first, nitrogen retention over the course of forest
development in time will be examined through initiation of a long term
experiment where nitrogen is added to abandoned agricultural fields of different
ages in central New York. This will also enable testing the role of age and
nitrogen deposition on forest carbon sequestration. The second derives from the
observation that chronic nitrogen pollution has not led to the increases in
stream water nitrate as expected. One constraint may be that the excess nitrogen
is complexed by dissolved organic carbon produced during recovery that these
ecosystems have undergone in recent years as acid rain was reduced. This will be
tested by evaluating factors that control dissolved carbon and nitrate losses
and by responses of both dissolved carbon and nitrate in experiments in New
Hampshire where acidity is manipulated. The third will address the assumed role
of plant uptake in controlling seasonal stream nitrate loss through a series of
nitrogen additions to a watershed in central New York. This will also enable
contrasts of the role of terrestrial versus aquatic nitrogen retention
mechanisms and determination of the fate of nitrogen in soil organic matter. All
three experiments seek to examine important intersections of forest carbon and
nitrogen cycles, while employing new and existing field experiments, new data
collections, and stable isotopes to develop a more complex understanding of the
plant, soil, microbial and hydrologic factors that affect nitrogen retention.

The global nitrogen cycle has been profoundly altered by human activities.
Impacts of air pollution on downwind ecosystems depend on the fate of the added
nitrogen. Uptake and retention by vegetation may stimulate carbon sequestration,
at least for some forests, while losses of nitrate in stream water may acidify
soils and surface waters and contribute to downstream eutrophication. Retention
of nitrogen in relatively stable forms of soil organic matter could provide a
long term sink for added nitrogen. This project will provide a more complete
understanding of the effects of nitrogen on forest ecosystems and enable better
management of affected forests. Activities as part of an integrated education
and outreach program include collaboration with education specialists from the
Paleontological Research Institution and Museum of the Earth in Ithaca, New
York. This would include public outreach in connection with a visiting exhibit
on forests, development of a K-12 teacher professional development workshop on
forest ecosystems and impacts from air pollution, and development of a graduate
student workshop on skills for partnering with science educators to produce
useful education materials. This research would also establish a local watershed
as a field site for teaching ecology to undergraduates. Together these
partnerships will enable more effective science education and outreach to a much
broader audience.

