* 0845004
* CAREER: Swash Zone Sediment Transport
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2015
* Jack Puleo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2015
* USD 444,229.00

This CAREER project aims to advance understanding and predictive capability of
sediment transport processes occurring in the swash zone through laboratory and
field efforts using a new measurement device for sediment transport in the
bedload layer (very near the at-rest bed level). The swash zone is the area near
the shoreline where wave-driven flows alternately wash up and down the beach
face and ultimately expend their energy. Thus, swash processes are one of the
fundamental mechanisms by which coastal morphological change happens (e.g.
shoreline response to changing sea level). With much of the population living
near the coastline, global sea levels rising at a rate of 3 mm/yr over the last
decade (IPPC WGII, 2007) and nearly 85% of sandy U.S. coastlines eroding
(Thornton et al., 2000), there is a real societal demand for better
understanding of these proceses. Current predictive models are extremely limited
by their inability to accurately characterize the significance of bedload
transport. This limitation is primarily due to the fact that no reliable
measurements of time-dependent bedload transport exist, even though time-
integrated trap data demonstrates that bedload is often the dominant transport
mode (Horn and Mason, 1994). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will approach
the difficult task of quantifying swash-zone bedload transport with the
following steps:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) test and use a novel bedload sensor to
obtain elusive bedload measurements in the swash zone; &lt;br/&gt;(2) quantify
the relative importance of bedload&lt;br/&gt;and suspended load as a function of
beach slope, wave conditions and swash phase to develop new sediment transport
formulations; &lt;br/&gt;(3) investigate the role of sediment advection and
exchange across the&lt;br/&gt;surf/swash boundary in the swash-zone sediment
transport signal; and &lt;br/&gt;(4) utilize laboratory and field data to
reliably parameterize swash-zone sediment transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
result will be an improved understanding of the role of bedload transport in
reshaping the beach face leading to enhanced predictions of coastal morphologic
change and the design of more effective and economical mitigation
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This study will
broaden understanding of the physics of coastal sediment transport and will lead
to significant improvement in the ability to predict coastal phenomena such as
beach erosion and beach nourishment performance. More generally, the measurement
techniques and data sets will greatly improve scientific understanding of
particle-laden boundary layer processes that are of broad interest in the area
of fluid mechanics. Research results will be disseminated to engineers and lay
people through integrated and ongoing outreach activities. The University of
Delaware's Engineering Outreach Office, local school teachers and education
curriculum experts will collaborate and assist in initiating the "beach in a
classroom" outreach program for high school students and teacher training
workshops using a 16-foot portable wave flume. The study will support a minority
undergraduate summer intern in performing research side-by-side with faculty and
graduate students. Recruitment for the internship will be conducted at nearby
HBCU's through collaboration with the NSF-sponsored LSAMP Program.