* 0845954
* CAREER: Micro and Nano Methods to Reveal Cell Sensitivities to Local Stiffness
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Shengyuan Yang, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Micro and Nano Methods to Reveal Cell Sensitivities to Local
Stiffness&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;A class of three-
dimensional micro force sensors and a class of substrates with integrated micro
force sensors will be developed to measure the cell sensitivities to local
stiffness; A class of continuous substrates with stiffness patterns at micro-
and nano-meter scales will be developed to study cell sensitivities to local
substrate stiffness (SS); A class of substrates with magnetorheological and
magnetic fluids will be developed to study cell response to changing SS; Based
on the obtained experimental results, a detailed biophysical model will be
established at the molecular level to describe the dynamic cell mechanosensitive
mechanism and process to SS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Cell
adhesion, spreading, migration, and differentiation have been found to be
extremely sensitive to the stiffness of the substrates on which the cells were
grown. But the mechanism through which the cells sense the SS locally and how
the cells integrate the local SS information and transfer this information into
biological behaviors remain largely unclear, which motivated and the issues will
be addressed by this proposed research. The successful completion of this
project will significantly enhance our understanding of cell mechanosensitivity
and mechanotransduction, cell behaviors in tissues, and tissue development. Like
the widely used patterning the surface topography and chemistry, the concept of
micro- and nano-patterning the stiffness of the substrates, introduced in this
project, opens a new paradigm and is transformative for the study of cell and
tissue mechanobiology and engineering and its applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results to be drawn from the proposed
research provide fundamental knowledge for us to realize micromechanical control
of cell and tissue development, which has crucial applications in tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine. The developed micro and nano methods can
be used in or extended to any other studies involving measurements of mechanical
properties and interactions, examinations of interfacial phenomena, and
fabrications of patterned surfaces. The educational plan will promote the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering, quickly
disseminate the research advances to broad audiences, result in some of the core
curricula and facilities for the new Biomedical Engineering Graduate Program at
Florida Tech, and boost cross-disciplinary research and education. Lectures and
demonstrations will be given in public venues; Summer camps and short training
courses will be organized and a significant number of seats will be reserved for
students from underrepresented groups, and three new graduate courses will be
offered at Florida Tech; An informal club named ?Closer Interaction? will be
established for the students, faculty, and staff from the engineering and
biological departments at Florida Tech.&lt;br/&gt;