* 0845512
* CAREER:   Structural Requirements for miRNA Processing and Export
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Mirko Hennig, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2015
* USD 800,000.00

The most stunning development of the last decade in the field of RNA biology and
biochemistry was the discovery of phenomena collectively described as RNA
interference (RNAi). These mechanisms regulate gene expression through the
actions of microRNAs (miRNAs), a family of evolutionarily conserved and
endogenously expressed non-coding RNAs. Important aspects of mature miRNA
biosynthesis remain poorly understood; this CAREER project will address several
fundamental questions using an alliance of NMR structural and biochemical
investigations to fill major gaps in our knowledge of the intriguing miRNA
world. The long-term objective of this project is to understand the principles
of miRNA processing at the molecular level, in particular the fundamentals of
early primary (pri-)miRNA recognition by the microprocessor complex. Ultimately,
the goal is to test the overall hypothesis that so far unknown miRNA structural
characteristics exist that define the underlying determinants of microprocessor
substrate specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Knowledge of the
structure of miRNAs and their complexes with cellular factors involved in
processing is central to understanding gene regulation. Unraveling specific
structural features of pri-miRNAs would allow for a more accurate prediction of
bona fide miRNA precursor sequences. In turn, a comprehensive understanding of
miRNA biosynthesis and function would facilitate optimization of gene
inactivation strategies mediated by artificial, small interfering (si)RNAs. This
CAREER project describes research at the interface of structural biology,
biochemistry, and genetics and provides ample opportunities for collaborative
research exposing undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
fellows to the interdisciplinary nature of modern research. The main educational
goal is to establish a comprehensive NMR based Structural and Functional Biology
(NMR-SFB) training program that exposes students to ongoing, cutting-edge
research, integrated within the Center for Structural Biology at MUSC. A key
outreach effort, the 1st NMR Summer Camp, was established in May 2008. The
Summer Camp will be repeated annually; the long-term goal is to attract and
develop the next generation of scientists with a passion for cutting-edge NMR
and Structural Biology in South Carolina, with special emphasis on SC's four-
year colleges and minority-serving institutions.