* 0845701
* CAREER: Sublinear Algorithms --- Theory and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Sofya Raskhodnikova, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 12/31/2015
* USD 408,000.00

The amount of existing and newly appearing data accumulated by scientific,
governmental and business organizations around the world is daunting. As data of
all types gets easier to obtain and cheaper to store, data sets are becoming
increasingly large. Consequently, there is a need to perform computational tasks
on massive data sets: comparing genomes, compressing media files, searching
through and clustering large sets of documents, studying the Internet graph, and
compiling census data, to name just a few. This research project has its roots
in the following question, fundamental to several fields:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
Can we still compute something useful about a data set when reading all of it is
prohibitively expensive? In other words, what can we do in time sublinear in the
length of the input?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For most interesting problems, an
exact algorithm provably has to read the entire input, and thus requires at
least linear time. However, sublinear algorithms hold the promise of extremely
efficient approximate computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award integrates
research activities aimed at broadening the scope and extending the
applicability of sublinear algorithms, with educational activities aimed at
building a strong theoretical computer science group at Penn State and broadly
disseminating new findings. It pursues three general directions for
investigating the power of sublinear algorithms: (1) designing and analyzing new
sublinear algorithms for concrete tasks that are used in a variety of
applications and require new techniques, (2) building the foundations for a
coherent theory of sublinear computation, with the focus on generic techniques
for algorithm design and analysis, and new models for data access, (3)
exploiting the special structure of problems solvable with sublinear-space
algorithms in contexts (e.g., data privacy), where extreme efficiency is not a
requirement per se, but helps to guarantee other properties, such a robustness
to small changes in the data. A theme common to all three directions is to
encompass new problems and models of practical relevance.&lt;br/&gt;