* 0845099
* CAREER: Theoretical Approaches to Single-molecule Biophysics
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2014
* Olga Dudko, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 793,583.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to understand the fundamental physical
principles that govern the structure formation and functioning of biological
macromolecules at the single-molecule level. The strategy is to use the great
explanatory power of non-equilibrium physics to tackle otherwise intractable
problems in molecular and cell biology, and conversely to motivate new physical
concepts through the exploration of biological processes at the level of
individual biomolecules. The research plan includes four interrelated projects:
(1) Revealing mechanisms of living cell processes from single-molecule
manipulations. The project addresses the challenging task of extracting novel
information from experimental outputs. (2) Analyzing the effect of experimental
variables on single-molecule manipulations. The project will establish the ways
to disentangle the factors in the experimental setup from the information about
the biomolecule of interest. (3) Formulating multistate theory of single-
molecule force spectroscopy. This project will enable the study and prediction
of new phenomena that can emerge at higher levels of complexity. (4)
Understanding the role of multidimensional free energy landscapes in the
mechanical unfolding of complex biomolecules. This approach will help design
experiments that examine secondary and tertiary structure in complicated
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research plan will build a foundation
for achieving the PI's long-term goals of extending single-molecule biophysical
theory to the cellular level and accessing the machinery of a living cell. The
foundation for excellence in education will be built upon the following
contributions. (1) Incorporating research activities into undergraduate courses,
which are designed to mimic the processes an investigator undertakes in writing
a publishable research paper and defending the content of their manuscript with
peers. (2) Innovations in teaching that have the potential to transform how
people learn science. These include the use of Personal Response System
clickers, the most powerful and flexible student response system available, as
well as making increasing use of computer simulations for creating interactive
"virtual" physics experiments. 3) Bringing underrepresented groups into the
research pipeline at the undergraduate level. California State University San
Marcos will be the lead partner in efforts to extend leading-edge biological
physics into the curriculum at teaching universities. As outreach remains a
significant challenge for the physics community, advantage will be taken of the
widespread interest in living systems to ensure this challenge has been met. The
PI believes that biological physics must become a mainstream course in all
physics departments. The designed innovative curriculum, integrated with
research, training and outreach activities, will enable training of a new cadre
of scientists equally competent in advanced physics and computation as in
biochemical reactions, experimental protocols and biological databases. This
approach will be used as a means to create a national and international
awareness of biological physics and physics frontiers research, and to make UCSD
the world leader in combining the principles, language and tools of physics with
those of biology, so as to engender a revolution in our understanding of living
processes. This project is jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Physics of Living
Systems program in the Physics Division.