* 0845273
* CAREER:   Molecular Interactions of the Mitochondrial Iron-Chaperone Frataxin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Laura Busenlehner, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 697,501.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Iron in its
unbound state is potentially toxic to organisms; therefore, sophisticated
mechanisms are in place to traffic this essential metal ion, especially in the
mitochondrion. The mitochondrial iron chaperone protein frataxin binds reactive
iron and delivers it to proteins involved in iron-sulfur cluster synthesis
(ISU), heme synthesis (ferrochelatase), and iron regulation (aconitase). It is
unclear what factors control frataxin specificity for iron and for each iron-
acceptor protein. This interdisciplinary project will determine the mechanism of
mitochondrial iron trafficking by human frataxin using biochemical,
bioinorganic, and structural techniques. Through characterization of frataxin
interactions with metals and iron-accepting protein partners, this research will
(1) define the structural and functional mechanisms of frataxin recognition for
the three iron-accepting proteins using amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass
spectrometry, and (2) elucidate factors mediating specific iron transfer from
frataxin to each partner protein using UV-visible, fluorescence, and electron
paramagnetic spectroscopies. This research contributes to much needed insight
into the interplay and overlap between iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis and heme
biosynthesis through the common intermediate frataxin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project provides long-term
research and educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students,
including minorities, at the interface of biology and chemistry. The research
will promote the acquisition of critical thinking skills and problem solving,
which is of great societal benefit. Student education also extends to the
classroom where many of the research techniques will be incorporated into a new
interdisciplinary protein chemistry course that infuses theory, methodology, and
application of basic and cutting-edge biochemical methods into our undergraduate
and graduate curriculum. In support of diversity in science, a yearly symposium
will showcase the scientific impact of researchers from under-represented groups
and provide an important vehicle to positively impact the diversity and quality
of science in the region. The symposia will increase the appreciation of
diversity in the region, serve as outreach to under-represented groups, and
strengthen relationships with regional minority-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Molecular &amp;
Cellular Biosciences Division and the Division of Chemistry.