* 0845825
* CAREER: Modeling Complexity in Plankton Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Christopher Klausmeier, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 835,660.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecosystems are incredibly complex
because they include many species interacting with each other in a spatially and
temporally varying environment. One tool ecologists use to cope with this
complexity is mathematical modeling. Despite the fact that mathematics is the
natural language to describe complex systems, most biologists typically receive
little mathematical training. The two goals of this project are to enhance the
mathematical training of the next generation of ecologists and to advance our
theoretical understanding of communities of plankton, the microscopic plants and
animals at the base of most aquatic food webs. The main educational component of
the project is the continuation of a successful three-week summer program in
mathematical ecology at the Kellogg Biological Station (KBS). This program
serves undergraduate and graduate students from across and outside the US. The
PI will also host visiting Research Fellows to his lab for short-term research
projects and improve a graduate course in theoretical ecology at MSU. Together,
this educational program will reach 48 students in the summer program and 12
research fellows, and will improve the training of graduate students at MSU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research component of this project uses mathematical
models to investigate how vertical spatial structure and seasonal variability
determine the structure and dynamics of lake and ocean plankton communities. Due
to their small size, rapid growth, and relative simplicity, plankton are an
ideal model system for community ecology. They are also important globally,
playing key roles in coupled biogeochemical cycles, and locally, as drivers of
water quality. The work on plankton will extend the researchers? previous
theoretical work to include more complex food webs, diverse behavioral and
physiological strategies, and the interaction of spatial and temporal forcing.
Together, this research will advance our understanding of the structure and
dynamics of plankton communities.