* 0845721
* CAREER: New Foundations for Many-core Architecture Analysis, Modeling and Management
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 427,816.00

Processors with tens or possibly hundreds of cores will be a reality within the
next few years. To ensure that multi-core performance will scale with the
increasing number of cores, innovative processor architectures are increasingly
being deployed in hardware design. However, achieving the desired performance
and efficiency on these large and complex architectures becomes a daunting task.
This CAREER research project will construct new foundations for many-core scale
architecture analysis, modeling and optimization, including: (1) informative and
scalable methods to capture architectural characteristics across many-cores and
hardware components; (2) fast and accurate predictive models to forecast the
complex behavior of many-core architecture substrates with widely varied
configuration parameters and execution conditions; (3) hardware and software
mechanisms for efficient mining of architecture characteristics at large scales;
and (4) global and cooperative resource and thermal management techniques for
many-core architectures.

The scalability and sustainability of future many-core processors crucially
depends on efficiently and intelligently managing an increasingly large and
complex hardware investment. The novel resource management techniques and
architecture/OS support will open the door for a new class of optimizations that
cannot be effectively achieved using conventional methods. The integrated
education and outreach plan will help the PI to educate a broad spectrum of
citizens and students. This includes expanding computer architecture curriculum
with new modeling and optimization techniques, interacting with teachers at
minority-serving high-schools to boost students? interest in science and
engineering, and collaborating with the computing industry to integrate the
developed technologies into real-world processor design flow.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."