* 0845476
* CAREER:Network Coding for Media Transmission and Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2009,04/30/2016
* Thinh Nguyen, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2016
* USD 454,066.00



CNS - 0845476 Nguyen, Thinh Oregon State University CAREER: Network Coding for
Media Transmission and Storage

This research seeks to advance Network Coding (NC) theories and practices for
multimedia transmission and storage in best-effort networks. NC has been shown
to be a promising approach to enhance networking performance. However, many
benefits of NC will not likely be realized fully when they are used naively with
the existing wired and wireless infrastructures. This research consists of two
primary efforts, aimed to develop theories and methodologies for optimally
incorporating NC to a large body of existing coding, signal processing,
networking and communication techniques. The first effort will investigate the
NC-based techniques for efficient multimedia delivery from the Internet to
receivers in a wireless access network such as Wi-Fi or WiMax. This effort will
focus on the optimal integration of NC to the network stack, from media
compression techniques at the application layer, to packet schedulers at the
link layer, to channel coding and modulation methods at the physical layer, in
order to improve quality of wireless multimedia networking applications. The
second effort will explore a scalable, NC-based, Peer-to-Peer architecture for
multimedia storage and delivery. The focus will be on developing network
protocols and NC-based data replenishment techniques to support high quality
video streaming.

These two efforts will provide an in-depth understanding of when, where, and how
to apply NC techniques for multimedia networking applications. The specific
research goals are 1) to understand and quantify the effects of the interactions
among network layers and NC techniques, 2) to develop theories and methodologies
for jointly optimizing NC techniques with the existing infrastructures, and 3)
to develop software platforms for enhancing wireless multimedia networking
applications, and for building robust, scalable, distributed multimedia storage
and streaming systems.

Broader Impact. Integral to the research will be efforts to increase enrollment
and retention of electrical engineering and computer science students through
exciting projects and class materials, to promote inter-community collaborations
among researchers in the fields of networking, signal processing, and coding
theory through a series of workshops, and to create societal wealth through
innovations via industrial collaborations and start-up ventures.

