* 0845934
* CAREER: Research and Education of Adsorption and Desorption of Air Pollutants on Engineered Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,08/31/2015
* David Ramirez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 409,530.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0845934&lt;br/&gt;D.
Ramirez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered nanomaterials have unique chemical and
physical properties that make them desirable for widespread applications
including environmental remediation, energy conversion, catalyst support and
biomedical use. Despite their benefits, questions need to be answered about the
impacts of such nanomaterials on human health, safety and the environment.
Principal objectives of the proposed research are to investigate the
transformations of engineered nanomaterials as they interact with hazardous air
pollutants in the environment and to determine the efficiency of air pollution
control devices to adsorb and desorb pollutants associated with engineered
nanomaterials. Systematic research methods and innovative mathematical models
based on quantitative-structure activity relationships will be developed to
characterize the adsorption and desorption of hazardous air pollutants on
engineered nanomaterials. This research project consists of the following main
tasks: (1) to characterize the adsorption of hazardous air pollutants on
engineered nanomaterials including C60 fullerenes, single- and multi- wall
carbon nanotubes, and silica; (2) to examine the effect of humidity and
nanomaterial morphology on the atmospheric adsorption and desorption of air
pollutants on nanomaterials; (3) to model single- and multi-component sorption
based on quantitative-structure activity relationships; and (4) examine the
effect of concentration of pollutant associated nanomaterials on their removal
efficiency using filtration and adsorption systems. The proposed research plan
will be one of the first efforts to evaluate the efficiency of filtration and
activated carbon adsorption systems, typically used in industry, for removing
specific engineered nanomaterials in the gas phase. The research described in
this proposal is novel and potentially transformative in that, if successful, it
would lead to new technology for the evaluation of the impacts of hazardous air
pollutant-associated engineered nanomaterials on human health, safety and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a new Hispanic faculty member in the
Environmental Engineering Department at Texas A&amp;M University at Kingsville
(TAMUK), a Hispanic-serving institution, the PI will recruit and mentor students
from underrepresented groups, and to establish multidisciplinary research and
education programs on atmospheric transformations of engineered nanomaterials at
TAMUK with national and international collaborations.