* 0845407
* CAREER: Theory and Application of Small-Sample Error Estimation in Genomic Signal Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Ulisses Braga Neto, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/2015
* USD 400,000.00

NSF Proposal #0845407&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Theory and Application of
Small-Sample Error Estimation in Genomic Signal
Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Ulisses Braga-
Neto&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic Signal
Processing (GSP) is the engineering discipline that&lt;br/&gt;studies modeling
and statistical issues related to biological signals&lt;br/&gt;measured by high-
throughput technology, such as gene-expression&lt;br/&gt;microarrays or protein-
abundance mass spectrometry. Research in GSP&lt;br/&gt;typically involve the
discovery of reliable molecular markers for&lt;br/&gt;disease diagnosis and
prognosis, using pattern recognition or machine&lt;br/&gt;learning approaches.
Such approaches rely on the accuracy of error&lt;br/&gt;estimation for
classification and prediction. This is particularly&lt;br/&gt;critical due to
the small sample sizes that are common in GSP&lt;br/&gt;applications. Novel
robust small-sample error estimation methodologies&lt;br/&gt;in GSP are needed
in order to enable reproducible scientific discovery&lt;br/&gt;that leads to
genuine medical advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has as its goal
solving significant computational and&lt;br/&gt;statistical problems that exist
in small-sample error estimation.&lt;br/&gt;Among the open problems that will be
addressed are (1) to obtain exact&lt;br/&gt;and approximate representations of
the joint sampling distribution of&lt;br/&gt;the estimated and true errors for
linear continuous classifiers, which&lt;br/&gt;will lead to better-performing
error estimators and practical tools to&lt;br/&gt;assess significance of
results; (2) to study error estimation for&lt;br/&gt;discrete classifiers,
including the binary coefficient of&lt;br/&gt;determination (CoD), using both
analytical and complete enumeration&lt;br/&gt;approaches; (3) to develop the
methodology of bolstered error&lt;br/&gt;estimation, addressing the application
in high-dimensional spaces and&lt;br/&gt;with adaptive kernels, with an emphasis
on feature selection; (4) to&lt;br/&gt;apply these error estimation techniques
to the problem of biomarker&lt;br/&gt;discovery for diagnosis and prognosis in
cancer and infectious&lt;br/&gt;diseases, in partnership with medical
collaborators at Translational&lt;br/&gt;Genomics (TGen), the Johns Hopkins
Medical School, and the Oswaldo&lt;br/&gt;Cruz Foundation, Brazil
(FIOCRUZ).&lt;br/&gt;