* 0845033
* CAREER:   Biomolecular Interactions that Regulate the Cellular Response to DNA Damage
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Penny Beuning, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2015
* USD 994,655.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project seeks to understand the role of the DNA damage response protein
UmuD in managing DNA polymerases via its direct interactions with DNA
polymerases and their accessory factors. DNA is under constant attack from
harmful agents from both within and outside the cell. Such agents can cause
damage to the DNA and can result in mutagenesis. Bacterial cells possess a
global response that is induced when cells experience stress, including damage
to their DNA. Among the genes whose expression is elevated as part of the
response are specialized DNA polymerases that can copy over damaged DNA, and
their manager protein UmuD. In addition to its interactions with DNA
polymerases, UmuD also interacts with the beta processivity clamp, which is a
protein that dramatically increases the efficiency of DNA replication. UmuD also
seems to interact with an alternate form of the beta processivity clamp. This
research project will probe the cellular consequences of these protein-protein
interactions in the response to DNA damage. Protein-protein interactions and the
composition of complexes will be probed with complementary biophysical
techniques. Moreover, because the mutagenic activity of specialized DNA
polymerases is thought to contribute to mutagenesis, this research will provide
insights into the general process of mutagenesis and natural selection. The
broader impacts of this project include extensive opportunities for integration
of students into the research laboratory. A new course in Chemical Biology has
been developed, which includes research-related laboratory exercises related to
ongoing research in the Department. A summer program will provide research
experiences for undergraduates from diverse backgrounds. The summer research
program will also provide structured professional development opportunities for
students such as building communication skills in science and the responsible
conduct of research. The interdisciplinary approach of the project will lead to
insights into the fundamental nature of the DNA damage response, mutagenesis and
bacterial evolution. The cross-cutting nature of the work also provides an
excellent training opportunity for students.