* 0846996
* CAREER:  Thin shells - problems in nonlinear elasticity and fluid dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Marta Lewicka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2013
* USD 200,232.00

Lewicka&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0846996&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A unifying theme in this
project is the asymptotic behavior&lt;br/&gt;of given equations as the domain
approaches a "degenerate" region&lt;br/&gt;in the limit. The considered problems
are nonlinear variational&lt;br/&gt;or partial differential equations, and the
degeneracy in question&lt;br/&gt;can take various forms: loss of dimension, loss
of regularity, or&lt;br/&gt;unboundedness. The first set of questions relates to
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory of nonlinear elasticity, which studies
large&lt;br/&gt;mechanical deformations of three-dimensional elastic bodies.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator undertakes a long-term research program, with
the&lt;br/&gt;scope of: deriving lower-dimensional shell theories through
the&lt;br/&gt;methods of Gamma-convergence and understanding their
connections&lt;br/&gt;with the geometry of the mid-surface, analyzing
the&lt;br/&gt;(infinitesimal) isometries of surfaces and the effects
of&lt;br/&gt;rigidity on the derived theories, studying nonlinear
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;such as buckling and blistering for a given shell
under&lt;br/&gt;compression (one application is related to plant growth).
The&lt;br/&gt;second set of questions in this project relates to
fluid&lt;br/&gt;dynamics. Boundary irregularities of various structures
and&lt;br/&gt;scales are considered in the limit when the boundary
behavior&lt;br/&gt;becomes degenerate. Other problems concern traveling fronts
in&lt;br/&gt;combustion in unbounded channels, and the dynamics of
solutions&lt;br/&gt;with large initial data under the Navier boundary conditions
in&lt;br/&gt;thin three-dimensional shells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Because
elastic thin (or otherwise "degenerate") objects of&lt;br/&gt;various geometries
are ubiquitous in the physical world, the&lt;br/&gt;precise understanding of
laws governing their equilibria has many&lt;br/&gt;potential applications. For
example, many growing tissues&lt;br/&gt;(leaves, flowers, or marine
invertebrates) exhibit complicated&lt;br/&gt;configurations during their free
growth and one would like to&lt;br/&gt;reproduce them with man-made means. A
related long-standing&lt;br/&gt;problem in the mathematical theory of elasticity
is to rigorously&lt;br/&gt;predict theories of such lower-dimensional objects
starting from&lt;br/&gt;the nonlinear theory of full three-dimensional objects.
For&lt;br/&gt;plates, a very recent effort has lead to rigorous
justification&lt;br/&gt;of a hierarchy of such theories, depending on the
magnitude of&lt;br/&gt;the applied forces and resulting in stretching,
crumpling,&lt;br/&gt;bending, or a combination of these. For shells (when
the&lt;br/&gt;mid-surface is curved), despite extensive use of their ad
hoc&lt;br/&gt;generalizations in the literature and engineering
applications,&lt;br/&gt;much less is known from the mathematical point of view.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator identifies several nonlinear problems in
continuum&lt;br/&gt;mechanics of solids and fluid dynamics, naturally posed
in&lt;br/&gt;specific degenerate domains, with the intention of
rigorously&lt;br/&gt;understanding the behavior of the system based on
general&lt;br/&gt;principles. At the heart of the program are
interesting&lt;br/&gt;connections between calculus of variations,
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations, geometry, material science, fluid dynamics,
numerical&lt;br/&gt;analysis, and even biology. They have a potential to
deliver&lt;br/&gt;useful observations in e.g. structural mechanics,
while&lt;br/&gt;integrating the goal of exposing scientific results to a
broader&lt;br/&gt;community at various education levels. &lt;br/&gt;