* 0846274
* CAREER: Design and Characterization of Aptamer-Amphiphiles for Selective Binding
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Efrosini Kokkoli, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 402,002.00

0846274&lt;br/&gt;Kokkoli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Aptamers are
short single-stranded oligonucleotides. They are chemically produced, have the
capability of binding with high affinity and specificity a variety of different
targets, and have been shown to be useful as therapeutic agents and diagnostic
tools. Their affinities are often comparable to those observed for monoclonal
antibodies, and are significantly higher compared to those of peptides. As
aptamer-amphiphiles, aptamers attached to a hydrophobic tail, they can assemble
with other amphiphilic molecules into a variety of different structures. Their
assembly with lipids to form aptamer-functionalized liposomes will be desirable
in biotechnological applications, such as, targeted drug delivery. The PI
proposes to study aptamers as aptamer-amphiphiles and, in particular, aptamer
sequences that bind fractalkine (an adhesion molecule expressed only at sites of
infection or inflammation, such as cancer), and hypothesizes that the
orientation of the aptamer headgroup, and the use of a spacer between the
hydrophobic tail and the headgroup, will affect the assembly behavior of the
molecule, and the secondary structure of the aptamer, thus subsequently
affecting its binding affinity for its target. To test this hypothesis the
following research tasks have been set: In Research Task 1, the goal is to test
the biological affinity of the designed aptamer-amphiphiles, free in solution,
and incorporated in liposomes, thus evaluating which designs bind to
fractalkine. The PI will characterize the aptamer-amphiphiles in Research Task 2
with different techniques (CD, melting curves, cryo-TEM, SAXS, and SANS) that
will evaluate the secondary structure of the aptamer, and assembly behavior of
the amphiphiles. These results will enable a connection between the biological
function of aptamer-amphiphiles with their structure and corresponding phase
behavior. This research will advance knowledge and understanding as it will not
only furnish favorable amphiphilic properties (headgroup orientation, spacer
design, secondary structure, assembly behavior) for the design of aptamer-
amphiphiles, but will provide a fundamental understanding of why these
properties are beneficial. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: -Technical
Impact. The PI proposes the design and characterization of a novel tool,
"aptamer-amphiphiles", based on the expectation that by changing their
structural segments one can control their morphology, surface chemistry, and
function. A comprehensive characterization of secondary structure, amphiphilic
and self-assembly properties, and the link between these properties and the
engineering of targeted delivery vehicles is proposed here for the first time.
The research activities represent transformative research as they may lead to
the genesis of a new field of research on "aptamer-amphiphiles" (a new term in
the literature) that will merge rational amphiphile design principles,
chemistry, biology, and engineering in order to provide advanced systems for
targeted drug delivery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Societal / Educational Impact.
Fractalkine is an attractive new target for the development of anti-angiogenesis
and anti-cancer agents. By choosing aptamers that bind to fractalkine as the
model system, the proposed work outlines a logical approach that can be applied
to the future design of aptamer-amphiphiles that can functionalize nanoparticles
and increase the particle's specificity and affinity for fractalkine, thus
having great therapeutic potential and significantly benefiting society.
&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan is strongly integrated with the research plan.
The PI is collaborating with "DragonflyTV" (a science series that presents
middle school students doing real science, supported by NSF and produced by Twin
Cities Public Television (TPT), and seen on Public Broadcasting Service (PBS)
stations nationwide) with the goal of enhancing scientific and technological
understanding among children and adults. Furthermore, the PI has participated,
and continue to participate, in outreach activities organized by TPT with the
goal of attracting women in sciences and engineering (a long term goal for the
PI), and is currently collaborating, and will continue to do so in the future,
with MRSEC. Through MRSEC the PI will be hosting during the summer high school
teachers, and minority undergraduates from a nationwide pool of applicants,
through a well established network of high schools, and minority undergraduates
from a number of Minority Serving Institutions.