* 0846330
* CAREER: Environmentally Significant Reforming Reactions Studied Using a Novel Catalytic Shock Tube.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Marco Castaldi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* George J. Antos
* 06/30/2013
* USD 320,837.00

0846330 Castaldi

The proposed work uses an innovative technique to investigate the chemical
kinetics and mechanisms of catalytic reactions by combining a high pressure
shock tube normally used for homogeneous reaction analysis and adapting it to
study heterogeneous reactions. This technique will resolve the mechanistic
uncertainties that have evolved using conventional continuous flow techniques
and through their resolution lead to potentially significant impacts on energy
generation and the quality of the environment.

The new technique incorporates a catalyzed short contact time (SCT) reactor
substrate into a high pressure single pulse shock tube. The combination of a SCT
reactor and shock tube enables the study, by detection of intermediates, of the
mechanism of complex heterogeneous reactions over a catalyst for very well
defined times and conditions in the absence of transport effects that plague
conventional techniques. The mechanistic understanding arising from the unique
conditions of the shock tube will facilitate a smooth transition in scale-up
from the lab to industrial applications where high pressures are necessary for
increased process throughput.

One example of the mechanistic information that will be the focus of the
proposed work is the resolution of the routes to synthesis gas (an alternate
energy source) during the Catalytic Partial Oxidation (CPOX) of methane. One
hypothesized route is through a partial oxidation step which must be terminated,
for syn-gas production, before complete oxidation. This route can be established
by detection of CO and H2 before CO2 formation. An alternative route is through
complete oxidation to CO2 followed by secondary reforming to syn-gas which can
be evaluated through measurements of the relative rates of the co-formation of
CO2 and CO/H2.

Another mechanistic problem to be addressed arises in the catalytic reforming of
the green house gas CO2 with methane. Although the atmospheric pressure, water
free mechanism of this process has been established its relevance to practical
process conditions has not. Process conditions would probably require the use of
steam to suppress carbon formation on the reforming catalysts and elevated
pressure to increase throughput. A catalytic process operating at elevated
pressure with water addition will almost certainly involve a different mechanism
than the one already established. Detection and quantification of key oxygenated
intermediates, such as methanol and formaldehyde, by the new technique of
combining a SCT reactor with a high pressure single pulse shock tube will
establish the mechanism and guide practical reactor design.

Broader impacts and Societal Benefits 1) Elucidation of the mechanism of
catalytic partial oxidation of methane to synthesis gas for its use as an
alternative energy source in environmentally friendly processes. 2) Optimization
of methane reforming of carbon dioxide potentially leading to the reduction of
these greenhouse gases. 3) Development and evaluation of a novel short contact
time reactor/single pulse shock tube methodology for studying catalytic
reactions important to maintaining a clean living environment. 4) Development of
catalytic methods at high pressures for increased process throughput. 5)
Investigation of alternate catalysts for CPOX and CO2 reforming. 6) Education of
graduate students in the cross disciplinary fields of catalytic chemistry,
environmental science, high pressure shock tube experimentation and reaction
engineering.