* 0846213
* Safe Specimen Storage for Plant and Fungal Collections in Peril at the University of Arizona Herbarium (ARIZ)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Philip Jenkins, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2013
* USD 350,197.00

A National Science Foundation award to the University of Arizona Herbarium
(ARIZ) under the direction of Michelle McMahon will support installation of
mobile storage units and provide proper museum storage for more than 50,000
important plant and fungal specimens. The majority of collections awaiting
incorporation and protection are identified yet are not filed in the main
collection due to lack of space, making them unavailable for research or public
service. Material stored outside of museum cabinets is under constant threat
from insects, despite vigilant freeze-fumigation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specimens awaiting incorporation include scientifically significant
collections from preeminent botanical and mycological researchers in the
southwestern US and northwest MÃ©xico, as well as unique collections that are
global in scope (e.g., morning glories and endophytic fungi). Installation of
compactors and associated cabinets will also increase space for public
activities, including permanent and rotating displays and workshops on topics
such as translational taxonomy, phylogenetics and floristics. The herbarium will
continue to recruit students, including those from underrepresented groups, to
assist in research, public outreach, reorganizing over 400,000 plant and fungal
specimens, and incorporating the valuable backlog into the main collection. This
award will allow the highly active UA Herbarium to continue to grow for years to
come.