* 0846245
* CAREER: Engineering and Integration of Polymer Electronic Materials for Alternative Energies
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2015
* Kenneth Lau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 11/30/2015
* USD 531,700.00

0846245&lt;br/&gt;Lau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: With the
increasing need for clean, alternative energies, the sun represents a vast
sustainable source. Polymer-based solar cells are seen as an answer that would
permit more widespread solar harvesting. However, the performance of polymer-
based solar cells has been less than optimal. In bulk heterojunction devices,
inefficiencies result from the mismatch of high band gaps of conjugated polymers
with the solar spectrum, and generally poor charge generation and charge
transport due to structural and morphological defects. Efforts at lowering band
gap and improving material properties have been met with challenges in liquid-
based processing, such as polymer intractability, solution-induced changes,
restrictive synthesis routes, and solvent incompatibilities. In dye-sensitized
devices that utilize nanocrystalline titania, inefficiencies result from poor
infiltration of polymer electrolytes into the mesoporous titania due to poor
wettability and liquid viscosity with polymer solution processing. New
processing methods which overcome these problems while preserving the ability to
carry out materials design and synthesis could lead to significantly enhanced
solar cell performance. This CAREER project aims to bring a new paradigm to
polymer thin film processing, and build on the scientific, educational and human
resources needed to bring greater solar energy awareness and adoption. The
research program aims to make use of initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD)
technologies to design, synthesize and integrate polymer electronic materials as
viable photovoltaic devices. In a single step, iCVD will enable the chemical
synthesis and physical deposition of a solid polymer thin film on a substrate by
thermally initiating the polymerization of a monomer vapor. By circumventing the
liquid phase, solvent-related issues will be avoided. More importantly, iCVD
will provide significant freedom in performing advanced materials design through
copolymerization, click chemistry and tailored monomers. The specific research
aims are to (1) engineer polymer electronic materials as viable photovoltaic
materials, (2) integrate polymer electronic materials to create efficient and
robust photovoltaic devices, and (3) establish critical processing relationships
and reaction mechanisms to enable optimization of solar cell
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Integrated with the research
is an educational program which aims to train future scientists at the graduate
and undergraduate levels in photovoltaics technology, and engage Philadelphia
high school students and teachers through energy education and solar test
stations that will provide students with opportunities to evaluate the long term
performance and stability of fabricated solar cells. Additionally, the program
will immerse promising high school students from area high school partnerships
and Drexel's summer mentorship program in a research experience on materials
processing that intends to strengthen interest in science and technology.
Minority, underprivileged and underrepresented students will be actively
recruited. Further, a new thin films processing course with a focus on
photovoltaics and electronics fabrication will be established to further the
undergraduate and graduate energy curriculum. Ultimately, this project is
motivated by the long term goal of discovering novel environmentally responsive
and responsible solutions. Efforts from this work will deliver solutions,
knowledge and resources for energy independence, and help build a sustaining
scientific program in materials design and processing that will extend beyond
alternative energies into emerging areas of biomedicine, fuel cells, energy
storage and flexible electronics.