* 0846960
* CAREER: Ultra-sensitive Real-time Acoustic Resonant Liquid Mass Sensor for Tag-free Disease Diagnostic Screening
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Jae Kwon, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this reseasrch is to develop an innovative real-time acoustic
resonant mass sensing platform in liquid environments. The approach is based on
a new sensitive and real-time mass sensor, which will be characterized with
various biomasses and coatings over various sensing diaphragms. Furthermore, the
biomass testing will be extended to a real medical application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed research include:
1) increase in the detection capacity of the FBAR by orders of magnitude by
maintaining high Q in the liquid; 2) utilization of a sensing diaphragm to
implement the novel concept of effective mass loading in the liquid by
separating liquid damping effect from the operating frequency of the sensor; 3)
improvement of Q by reducing energy loss; 4) reliable adaptability in wide range
of operating temperatures; and 5) utilization of the ultra sensitive liquid mass
sensor for disease diagnostic screening applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such
rapid, simple and cost effective liquid mass sensors have the potential to
transform the field of early disease detection and to make significant impact on
various clinical and healthcare applications. As another broader impact, a new
educational effort with interactive pedagogical approach will be implemented
with an emphasis on reliability issues of micro-devices and systems. The
education program will focus on increasing participation of underrepresented
minorities, providing high school students with early exposure to (and career
development opportunities in) micro/nanotechnology.