* 0846780
* CAREER: Mechanics of Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Contraction - Subcellular Structure-Function Relationships
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Nathan Sniadecki, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2014
* USD 460,585.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to (1)
advance a conceptual framework for the mechanics of contraction in vascular
smooth muscle (VSM) cells through nano-mechanical testing and computational
modeling and (2) to create an educational program that incorporates nano-
biomechanics and biomaterials with mechanical engineering learning. VSM cells
form the middle layer in the walls of blood vessels and their contraction
regulates vascular tone. The proposed experiments will characterize the
structure-function relationships of the protein assemblies that form the
contractile apparatus in VSM cells. The research will develop nano-biomechanical
techniques that can measure the forces produced by the contractile apparatus
under different loading conditions, external strains, and structural
organization. The findings will be incorporated into a computational
mechanochemical model based on first principles that ultimately arrives at the
fundamental relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from this research
will improve the analysis and design of biomaterials and tissue-engineered
constructs used in cardiovascular repair by determining their effect on VSM
contraction. The transformative aspect of this proposal is a methodology for
cell mechanics that considers the role of subcellular mechanical factors. This
methodology will be general enough to be translated to other smooth muscle and
nonmuscle cell types. This proposal will build a learning pathway between
engineering and the biomedical disciplines through an integrated research and
teaching approach that will enrich the curriculum at the University of
Washington. The planned outreach efforts will attract underrepresented K-12
students to engineering by exposing them to the unique interfaces that exist
between biology and engineering. To complement this outreach, a virtual
organization focused on biology and engineering at the nanoscale will be
established in order to integrate the research and education of this proposal
and to promote collaborations in the field of nano-biomechanics. &lt;br/&gt;