* 0846175
* CAREER:   The Role of Phenotypic Plasticity in Adaptive Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Cameron Ghalambor, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2015
* USD 903,847.00

It has long been recognized that the observable characteristics or traits of an
organism (i.e. its phenotype) are determined by the interaction of genes and the
environment. Phenotypic plasticity refers to the extent to which a given set of
genes produces different phenotypes depending on the environment. Yet, because
this environmentally induced variation is not inherited, phenotypic plasticity
has historically been considered unimportant in the evolutionary process. Recent
research and new technological advancements in the measurement of gene
expression, suggest that phenotypic plasticity may actually be an important
mechanism facilitating adaptive evolutionary change. The research proposed here
will use populations of Trinidadian guppies known to be adapted to different
environments as a model system. Using a combination of field transplant and lab
breeding experiments, the researcher will examine the short term and long term
consequences of plastic changes in both the phenotype and gene expression. This
study represents the first attempt to document the role of plasticity in the
adaptive evolution. The researcher will integrate the work on phenotypic
plasticity in guppies with an education and outreach plan. This plan includes
the development of more effective undergraduate teaching methods, increased
participation in research by underrepresented groups, and professional
development and training for K-12 educators.