* 0846337
* CAREER: Sculpting Electric Machines for Unidirectional Motion
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Dionysios Aliprantis, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2014
* USD 406,000.00

The objective of this research is to study the improvement in electric machine
operation when unidirectional motion is taken into account, since the vast
majority of generators and motors rotate in a single direction. The approach is
to precisely sculpt the stator and rotor surfaces, thus affecting the
electromagnetic field in the air gap so that the production of electromechanical
torque is increased. The transformative value of this approach rests in its
generality, being applicable to rotating machines of any power rating, material,
or type. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve analysis using the
electromagnetic finite element method embedded inside an optimization loop, by
adapting shape sensitivity-based design methods. This work is important because
(1) it will advance our understanding of electromechanical energy conversion;
(2) it will lead to generic methodologies for obtaining optimal machine designs;
and (3) it involves multidisciplinary research in electric machines, power
electronics, numerical computation, and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will result in lighter-weight, more efficient, and more cost-effective
solutions for electromechanical energy conversion for virtually all generation
and motion applications. Hence, its overall environmental and economical impact
will be tremendous. The project will contribute to the education of power
engineers at the undergraduate and graduate levels, and a conscious effort will
be made to recruit underrepresented students. Additionally, the PI will
establish mentoring relationships with local high-school students. A series of
distance education courses, short courses, and seminars will be developed.
Finally, the research insights and results will be integrated into a textbook on
optimal electric machine design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;