* 0846320
* CAREER: Development and Application of Compact Helicon Sources
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Raymond Sedwick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 536,363.00

0846320&lt;br/&gt;Sedwick &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at developing
key science to improve helicon radio-frequency (RF) plasma generation used for
propulsion or semiconductor manufacturing. Its key hypothesis is that fields of
permanent magnets can be shaped optimally through the application of the
Meissner effect of superconductors. If successful, the results of the research
will provide a unique capability for study and implementation of a compact,
high-efficiency, and high-density source for RF plasmas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These plasmas are of significant commercial interest
because of their unusually high ionization efficiency - typically an order of
magnitude higher or more than other capacitively or inductively coupled RF
plasmas. However, making helicon sources compact and efficient is difficult
because of the need for an axial magnetic field to establish helicon wave
propagation. Stronger fields provide higher densities, but the power required to
maintain the field offsets the gains in ionization efficiency. For the case of
propulsion, such sources could make possible the use of water or ammonia as a
propellant, providing compact storage, ease of ground handling, and high
propulsive efficiency while still providing high specific impulse. For
semiconductor processing, the high-density plasmas can be formed from chemical
etchants (such as sulfur hexafluoride) to accelerate the deep reactive-ion
etching (DRIE) process in harder materials such as silicon
carbide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to shape and control these magnetic
fields in a compact geometry also provides a unique capability for design of
laboratory experiments that will allow study of the effects of field geometry
(specified axial gradients, periodic and non-periodic perturbations) on, for
example: 1) wave reflection/transmission, 2) absorption of RF power and 3)
plasma acceleration. Another research element afforded by the inductive nature
of the RF coupling that will be investigated as a result of this capability is
the formation of plasmas using non-noble gases. Specifically of interest is the
non-equilibrium composition of partially dissociated polyatomic molecules, and
how they could be optimized or otherwise impacted under variations of the
discharge parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational broader impacts of the
research will include: 1) an expansion of undergraduate and graduate student
research experiences in this field; 2) the development of course material that
integrates the proposed research into a specialized graduate elective and a
component of the undergraduate curriculum; 3) the development of international
research experiences for undergraduates (IREUs) that will start with colleagues
at the Australian National University and 4) development of outreach programs
for high school students designed to excite and intrigue that age group. Plasmas
can be mesmerizing, and are also a component of many modern high-definition
televisions, something to which all high-school students can relate. The
hardware used in the proposed research is uniquely well suited for development
of a number of laboratory demonstrations designed to promote active learning.
These demonstrations will include taking a substance through all four states of
matter, introducing atomic structure through a substance's spectral radiation
and demonstrating the magnetic shielding properties of a superconductor.