* 0846814
* CAREER: Stability and Material Properties of Nanowires for Reliable Design of Nanoelectronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Carmen Lilley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2014
* USD 505,529.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project is to invent new procedures for producing
stable nanowires, thousands of times smaller than the diameter of a human hair.
Stable nanowires would promote next-generation technologies to improve US
healthcare, new industry creation, and global competitiveness. However,
nanowires with the required electrical stability are not yet available. This
research will improve the useful lifetime of existing nanowires from a few weeks
or months to as much as ten years, so that they can be safely integrated into
microscale or nanoscale electronic systems. The research plan therefore calls
for (1) empirical and theoretical modeling of nanowire electrical properties and
(2) testing a material design approach of fabricating composite nanoscale
material systems.&lt;br/&gt;Nanowires are a crucial enabling technology for
virtually all of the envisioned future applications of nanotechnology, whether
primarily electrical, electro-mechanical, or even electrical and organic, in
areas from healthcare to improved computers. The university research is closely
coordinated with the development of grade 6-12 instructional strategies, tools,
and materials that promote the desired student developmental progression in
nanoscale science. Recruiting and mentoring of underrepresented minority
students, in which the Principal Investigator is actively involved, will result
in broadening participation in engineering and science. All participants in this
program, whether at secondary or university level, will become aware of the need
for US technological innovation. University level students will also be trained
to enter the workforce in various areas of nanoscale science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;