* 0846792
* CAREER: Stimuli-Responsive Dynamic Macromolecular Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Brent Sumerlin, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2012
* USD 387,200.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research capitalizes on the robust
nature of reversible bond formation between diols and boronic acids for the
preparation and investigation of self-assembled and responsive macromolecular
material. Two particular systems will be investigated: (1)stimuli-responsive
block copolymer assemblies and (2)dynamic covalent self-assembled materials. In
the first system, diblock copolymers with a permanently hydrophilic block
(e.g.,poly(ethylene glycol) or polyacrylamide) and a responsibe boronic acid
containing acrylamido or styrenic block will be prepared by combination of
controlled radical polymerization and other efficient postpolymerization
transformations. In the absence of diol and at pH&lt;pKa of the boronic acid
moieties, the organoboron segments will be dehydrated and insoluble, leading to
self-assembly of the amphiphilic block copolymers into micelles and vesicles.
Introduction of diols will lead to a reduced pKa of the boronic acids, and the
resulting anionic boronate ester formation will cause a solubility transition
and aggregate disassembly. Investigations will elucidate the critical diol
concentration, pH, and temperature necessary to induce aggregate dissociation,
and insight will be gained into the kinetics governing assembly and
sissociation. The second class of materials relies on boronic acid-diol
esterification to construct covalent macromolecular architectures via self-
asembly of (co)polymers with either terminal or pendant diol and boronic acid
functionality. Molecular brushes, stars, and other branched chain topologies
will be constructed via boronic or boronate ester formation in the bulk state
and in organic or aqueous solutions. Hydrolysis of the boronate esters will lead
to reversible dissociation of the topologically complex macromolecules into
individual linear polymer components. Under the equilibrium conditions inherent
to reversible covalent systems, introduction of a second diol-containing polymer
that forms a more stable boronate ester complex will lead to an exchange of
macromolecular building blocks. The selectivity requred for efficient exchange
will be implemented by designing polymers with dramatically different
complexation potentioals. Thus, after macromolecular dissociation,
reconstruction in the presence of a competing equilibrium will result in
exchange of polymer building blocks to yield a new materials. The ability to
reshuffle constituents through assembly-disassembly will also be employed to
induce dramatic architectural rearrangements in solution (e.g., brush to star
transitions). This research seeks to redefine the traditional concept of
stimuli-responsive polymers to include macromolecular constructs that change
both their chemical functionality and overall chain topology in response to
environmental stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By preparing nanoscale objects that undergo
rupture and reconstruction when exposed to changes in their local environment,
fundamental insight can be gained into many of the mechanisms governing the
controlled delivery of therapeutics and the behavior of new self-healing and
adaptive materials. Because these studies require a diverse set of skills from
materials science, chemistry, and engineering, students and junior scientists
involved in this research are provided with a truly interdisciplinary set of
skills that can enhance the workforce necessary to accelerate development of new
advanced and sepciality materials market. An outreach component of the research
is desinged to directly address many of the mandates of the American
Competitiveness Initiative by establishing collaborations with local community
colleges and independent K-12 school districts to facilitate the inclusion of
underrepresented minority students for internship positions within the
Department of Chemistry at Southern Methodist University.