* 0846827
* CAREER:  Biologically Inspired Artificial Skins with Continuous Carbon Nanotube Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Jonghwan Suhr, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to investigate viscoelasticity of continuous carbon nanotube polymer
composites under compression and explore their potential utility as biologically
inspired artificial skins. The soft-tissue like behavior of such continuous
composites recently observed by the PI shows strong potential of using
engineered nanotube architectures for building biologically analogous systems
such as artificial skins. Since the underlying mechanism of the intriguing
properties in the composites is not understood, it is essential to study the
fundamental science of the viscoelastic characteristics of the continuous
nanotube composites as well as their anisotropic properties. This knowledge will
enable us to further investigate and fabricate fundamentally new nanotube
hierarchical structures with an aligned nanotube growth method so as to
establish novel solutions to ultimately create bio-mimicking artificial skins.
They will offer lightweight, flexibility, mechanical robustness, and outstanding
reversible properties including excellent damping that can reduce friction drag
and result in energy efficiency.

If successful, this research will create the bio-inspired artificial skins of
practical significance for a broad range of industrial applications such as
aircraft that is far more fuel efficient or renewable wind energy system that is
environmentally benign. It will meet the rapidly growing national need that is
to preserve our energy resource by increasing energy efficiency. The research
will provide the emerging engineers opportunity to understand and learn emerging
technologies, environmental considerations, and the need to relate scientific
discovery to realistic applications and societal development. A high school
level introduction to engineering course will be developed and offered in
collaboration with the local high school. Both undergraduate and graduate
students will benefit through classroom instruction and involvement in research.
The wind turbine blade design featuring the artificial skins will be included in
a mechanical engineering senior capstone course as a design project for
efficient power generation.