* 0846015
* CAREER:    Computational Methods for High-Throughput Sequencing and Population Genomics Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Yun S. Song, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2015
* USD 663,958.00

CAREER (DBI): Computational Methods for High-Throughput Sequencing and
Population Genomics Analysis

This is a CAREER award to support the research of Dr. Yun Song in the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, and Department of Statistics,
University of California, Berkeley. Dr. Song is a second-year, tenure-track
Assistant Professor. High-throughput sequencing technology has entered a new era
and obtaining whole genome sequence information will soon become routine. In one
important area of research, the whole-genome description of DNA sequence
variation will help us understand the biological mechanisms through which
genetic polymorphisms affect phenotypes. In order to understand these
mechanisms, the PI is developing tools to improved all aspects of data
acquisition, error rate reduction and reduction of the cost of high throughput
sequencing by increasing the throughput per run. The PI has used the innovative
approach of working closely with the Solexa/Illumina high-throughput sequencing
data and the source code for this project. This kind of research is important
for setting a high standard for the commercial sector to meet in the future.
Further, this project is developing reliable computational methods to annotate
genomic variation, including structural variation, and applying them in a large-
scale Drosophila resequencing project. Finally, scalable informatics tools for
population genomics analysis is being developed. This work is enabling accurate
inference of selection and demography on the whole-genome scale in multiple
populations and is being applied in a novel approach to the study of human
migration patterns.

As a part of his CAREER plan, Dr. Song is integrating research by developing a
new undergraduate course in computational biology for students in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science. Furthermore, he is developing effective, open
source software packages for the larger community. Finally, the PI is developing
bioinformatics modules for courses for students in a minority-serving charter
school in the Oakland area. Adam Roberts, a graduate student from Dr. Song?s
research group, is teaching at the charter school full time in order to
integrate these modules into the curriculum before beginning his own graduate
research.

