* 0846285
* CAREER: Arithmetic of Cohomological Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Francesco Calegari, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The investigator studies the relationship between Galois
representations and automorphic forms using tools from homology, commutative
algebra, and group theory, in the context of the Langlands program. A major
innovation in the investigator's recent research is the use of non-commutative
Iwasawa theory to study p-adically completed cohomology associated to
automorphic forms of cohomological type, in particular, those forms that are not
necessarily associated to Shimura varieties. One such class of automorphic forms
are modular forms over an imaginary quadratic field. In this case, the
associated symmetric space quotients are hyperbolic manifolds of real dimension
3, and thus, the study of such forms is not amenable to the usual techniques of
algebraic geometry. Modular forms over imaginary quadratic fields can be thought
of geometrically as cohomology classes of certain local systems on arithmetic
3-manifolds. &lt;br/&gt;From a topological viewpoint, the cohomology of
arithmetic 3-manifolds continues to be a subject of intense study. The tension
between the number theoretical and topological perspectives makes this a fertile
area for interdisciplinary research. The ultimate goal of the investigator's
research is to formulate and prove a general reciprocity statement relating all
Galois representations to the cohomology of arithmetic groups, generalizing the
reciprocity conjecture of Langlands. A more specific goal is to establish
conditional modularity theorems over imaginary quadratic fields, adapting the
method of Taylor--Wiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Langlands
reciprocity conjecture predicts a one-to-one correspondence between two classes
of disparate objects: Galois representations, which describe certain symmetries
of algebraic numbers, and automorphic forms. &lt;br/&gt;Associated to each
Galois representation is an automorphic form, which is like the DNA of the
corresponding Galois representation: many properties of the Galois
representation can be determined directly from the automorphic form. One
strategy for establishing this correspondence is a counting argument: show that
the number of automorphic forms (of any fixed&lt;br/&gt;type) equals the number
of corresponding Galois representations. Wiles used this strategy to prove a
special case of the Langlands reciprocity conjecture, from which Fermat's Last
Theorem follows. Wiles' proof relies on certain auxiliary geometric
constructions (Shimura varieties) that are not always available, and hence, any
general argument requires a more robust method for counting automorphic forms.
The investigator proposes such a method: by decomposing automorphic forms into
their (mod-p) constituents and then gluing the pieces back together. This
process (p-adic completion) relates the old counting problem to questions in
topology, in particular, to well-known conjectures of Thurston. The
investigator's research along these lines is helping to foster new
collaborations between number theorists and low-dimensional topologists, which
may lead to advances in several open questions in both fields. The investigator
plans to organize several workshops for graduate students and postdocs designed
to train young number theorists in this rapidly changing interdisciplinary
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;