* 0846479
* CAREER:  Smart Molecular Design for One-Dimensional n-Type Nanostructures: Controlling Electronic Properties and Morphologies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Dong-Chan Lee, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2015
* USD 484,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Well-defined nanostructures of organic semiconductors are
important not only for future nanoelectronics, but also for improving the
performance of current organic optoelectronic devices. There are two critical
issues in modern organic optoelectronics: the scarcity of useful n-type
semiconductors and poor charge transport in solution-processed films. This
proposal presents a novel approach for addressing these two critical issues
using one molecular design procedure.&lt;br/&gt;Creating one-dimensional (1D)
nanostructures via intermolecular รฐ-orbital overlap is a promising approach for
achieving enhanced charge mobility. With the guidelines obtained from the PI?s
previous experiments in generating 1D nanostructures from certain asymmetrically
substituted electron-deficient bisphenazines, three types of novel 1D n-type
nanomaterials are proposed: i) T-shaped heteroaromatic building blocks with
controllable electronic properties and self-assembly morphologies using
peripheral substituents, ii) dimers and trimers of the T-building blocks
connected through รฐ-conjugation, and iii) dimers and trimers of the T-building
blocks connected with electron-withdrawing partners. The main objectives of this
research are to develop a fundamental understanding of the structure-property
relationship in terms of the tunability of the electron-deficiency, and to
enhance the controllability of the 1D nanostructure morphologies derived from
the new n-type materials.&lt;br/&gt;Organic photovoltaic devices will be
fabricated using the n-type nanomaterials as a constituent of the
heterojunction, providing a large donor/acceptor interface area for exciton
dissociation and enhanced charge transport through the pathway created by the
nanostructures. The proposed work covers both fundamental aspects as well as
device applications. The feedback from device performance will guide future
upgrades in the materials? design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
It is necessary to utilize vast solar sources to overcome energy challenges of
tomorrow. Organic solar cells can provide light-weight, flexible, and cheaper
devices. However, an obstacle to improve device performance is lack of one of
the crucial components (n-type semiconductors). The purpose of this project is
to develop novel organic nanomaterials for organic solar cells (and other
electronic devices) to overcome this obstacle through novel molecular designs,
and thus help making organic solar cells play a significant role in the future
energy portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;This project includes an outstanding opportunity for
educational outreach involving a local high school. The PI is in a unique
position to utilize his research for motivating young students in their early
education with eye-catching visualization and real research experiences.
Throughout the project period, the PI will initiate a partnership with local
high schools in the Clark County School District, launching a summer high school
student internship and a high school teacher summer research program. In
addition, the combination of synthetic chemistry, molecular assembly,
nanoscience, organic materials, and optoelectronic device application will
provide an excellent intellectual stage for graduate and undergraduate students
to learn about interfacial chemistry which has growing importance as a
contemporary science.&lt;br/&gt;