* 0846725
* CAREER: Enhanced Catalytic Phenomena via Surface Plasmon Resonant Excitation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0846725 &lt;br/&gt;Cronin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Stephen Cronin at the University of Southern
California is supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Engineering Directorate (with co-
funding from the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematics and
Physical Sciences) to develop an understanding of the effect of plasmon
resonance on catalytic performance. Two main postulates will be explored: (i)
the effect of plasmon-induced electric field on chemical activity, and (ii) the
effect of plasmon-induced heating on catalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approach:
The PI will produce arrays of metal nanostructures on top of and embedded in
both active (e.g., TiO2) and non-active supports. Irradiating these
plasmonic/catalytic nanostructures with a laser at their plasmon resonance
frequency will generate immense plasmonic charge and high temperatures needed to
drive the catalytic process. The plasmon-induced charge is orders of magnitude
larger than that created by standard optical absorption and therefore has the
potential to dramatically improve the efficiency of these catalytic processes.
Also, the local heating of the nanoparticles generates large temperature
gradients, which in turn create new pathways by allowing different chemical
processes to occur side by side. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalytic activity of
these samples will be studied in an automated micro-reactor system that rapidly
evaluates catalytic nanostructures and permits thousands of experimental
conditions to be tested on a single chip. The system measures in situ
diagnostics of the reaction byproducts using mass spectrometry and Raman
spectroscopy, allowing direct correlation between structural properties and
catalytic performance. High throughput screening of various catalytic and
geometric configurations will enable us to investigate several fundamental
questions about the enhanced catalytic mechanism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental Questions Addressed in this Proposal:
&lt;br/&gt;- Is the catalytic enhancement heat mediated, electric field
mediated, or otherwise? &lt;br/&gt;- What is the role/importance of the large
temperature gradients created by nanoplasmonic heating? &lt;br/&gt;- How does
the bandgap energy and doping level affect the catalytic activity? &lt;br/&gt;-
What is the critical thickness of the metal oxide film that enables the plasmon-
induced charge to diffuse to the catalytic surface? &lt;br/&gt;- How does
surface binding of reactants, byproducts, and free radicals affect the catalytic
activity and selectivity? &lt;br/&gt;- What is the theoretical optimum
enhancement in catalytic activity achievable through surface plasmon resonant
excitation? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to expand the
understanding and applicability of plasmonic processes into the field of
chemistry. By systematically addressing these fundamental questions, the PI will
be able to identify which particular aspects of the plasmon enhancement will be
most useful and which chemical reactions will benefit most from it. The area of
plasmon assisted catalysis is rich with new and interesting phenomena that
remain poorly understood. Plasmonic excitation opens up additional degrees of
freedom in the search for new chemical pathways, for example, for the production
of tricyclic ozone. The systematic studies put forth in this proposal will
likely provide an understanding of unexplored catalytic phenomena and introduce
novel concepts that are widely applicable to the larger scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The outreach program to Los Angeles area
high school teachers will expose underrepresented students to the results and,
more importantly, the excitement of this proposed research and other cutting-
edge research at universities in the Los Angeles area. In this effort, the PI
will develop a long-term, working relationship between USC and its neighboring
high schools. Research projects for undergraduate students will introduce them
to the creative and intuitive nature of scientific research, thereby giving them
the confidence and inspiration to pursue careers in science and engineering. The
novel curriculum, which integrates creativity into a new nanoscience course,
will produce skilled and knowledgeable students able to address the next
generation of challenges in nanotechnology. The general scheme of incorporating
in-class brainstorming sessions into traditionally technical curriculum can be
applied to a wide range of subjects in the physical sciences and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of catalysis in modern industrial chemistry
cannot be overstated, impacting nearly every aspect of our economy. The
successful completion of this proposed work will lead to a number of future
studies with scientific and industrial relevance. The improved catalytic
processes investigated herein may be applicable to other fields of science and
engineering to enhance various important chemical and electrochemical phenomena.
Alternatively, these plasmonic nanoparticles can be incorporated onto a chip to
drive endothermic reactions with sunlight for energy storage. The localized
nature of plasmonic heating and electric field enhancement is ideal for creating
an integrated fuel source for hydrogen and methane fuel cells, without having to
heat up the entire device. In the face of the global energy crisis, this work
will provide new inroads in the critical search for novel and efficient chemical
processes.