* 0846052
* CAREER: Data-aware Distributed Computing for Enabling Large-scale Collaborative Science
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Tevfik Kosar, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 05/31/2011
* USD 152,771.00

CAREER: Data-aware Distributed Computing for Enabling&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale
Collaborative Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tevfik Kosar, Louisiana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications and
experiments in all areas of science are becoming increasingly complex and more
demanding in terms of their computational and data requirements. Some
applications generate data volumes reaching petabytes. Sharing, disseminating,
and analyzing these large data sets becomes a big challenge, especially when
distributed resources are used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project proposes a new distributed computing paradigm
called ?data-aware distributed computing?, which will include a diverse set of
algorithms, models, and tools for mitigating the data bottleneck in distributed
computing systems; and will support a broad range of data-intensive as well as
dynamic data-driven applications. As part of this project, research and
development will be performed on three main components: i) a data-aware
scheduler which will provide capabilities such as planning, scheduling, resource
reservation, job execution, and error recovery for data movement tasks; ii)
integration of these capabilities to the other layers in distributed computing
such as workflow planning, resource brokering, and storage management; and iii)
further optimization of data movement tasks via dynamically tuning of underlying
protocol transfer parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be integrated
to literally all levels of education which will include science projects,
seminars and summer camps on data-intensive computing with K-12 students (where
99% is minority); curriculum development, mentoring, and international
student/intern exchange programs for undergraduate and graduate students; summer
internships and workshops specifically for HBCU community including faculty
members. &lt;br/&gt;The tools and software developed in this project will be
available to public via open-source distribution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;