* 0846002
* CAREER: Dynamic Run-Time Optimization of Parallel, Adaptive and Hybrid Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2016
* Edgar Gabriel, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2016
* USD 409,576.00

CAREER: Dynamic Run-Time Tuning of Parallel, Adaptive and Hybrid
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of today?s High Performance
Computing systems mandate significant efforts by end users and application
developers to tune their code for each platform. Processor and node
architecture, network interconnect and the software stack all expose a
significant number of parameters which influence the performance of an
application. These parameters are furthermore often correlated, which further
complicates the predictability of the performance of any application. The most
popular tuning approach as of today applies a static tuning for the most time
consuming operations of the code, i.e. the performance of different versions of
the same operation is evaluated for certain problem sizes and the best
performing version is chosen for the subsequent executions of the application.
However, this approach is not practical for adaptive applications. These
applications vary the problem sizes at run-time, e.g. by locally refining the
computational mesh based on certain error criteria. Thus, the problem sizes are
typically unknown in advance and therefore expensive operations cannot be tuned
for the relevant problem sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
run-time tuning of parallel, adaptive applications utilizing either a
distributed memory parallel programming model such as MPI or a hybrid shared
memory/distributed memory parallelization strategy using OpenMP and MPI. The
focus of the project is on introducing novel run-time selection algorithms which
incorporate knowledge gathered from previous executions, algorithms from
factorial design theory for very large parameter spaces and advanced algorithms
from machine learning. The project also targets the development of a
recommendation system, which presents a human readable form of experiences
gathered from an optimization run in order to reuse them in other applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal tackles one of the most pressing and
fundamental problems in High Performance Computing. Code portability and
maintainability on one side and performance on the other side often seem to be
contradicting goals. The project develops the fundamental knowledge required to
develop performance portable parallel code and thus avoid the necessity to
maintain multiple versions of the same code for different platforms.&lt;br/&gt;