* 0846668
* CAREER: Explorations of Complex Social and Psychological Phenomena through Multiscale Online Sociological Experiments, Empirical Studies, and Theoretical Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Peter Dodds, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 677,856.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to improve our
understanding of complex social phenomena that emerge when people interact via
web-based technologies. The research projects explore: (1) Collaborative
creativity, problem solving, and decision making via multiscale, game-based,
online sociological experiments; (2) The dynamics of emotional content in human
communication through online experiments and by studying a wide body of texts
including blogs, microblogs, and online discussion forums; and (3) Collective
social phenomena in complex networks (e.g., contagion phenomena) via theoretical
models and empirical work. The experimental designs include both tightly
constrained samples and less constrained web-based samples, which will enable
the researcher to explore some open, controversial questions about web-based vs.
more conventional sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's experiments will
center around the development of a sophisticated online experiment platform,
which will both facilitate the rapid construction of experiments and will also
be useful for educational activities. Once prepared, the platform is intended to
be available for wide use by researchers studying social phenomena. The
experimental and empirical work will also generate rich, extensive data sets
that will be maintained for other researchers to
explore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include development of a series
of interrelated, transdisciplinary courses on complex systems which will form a
core part of the graduate curriculum of the University of Vermont's Complex
Systems Center. Course material, including hypertext lectures, will be open-
licensed and made available online for others to use in graduate and
undergratduate settings. Material will cover a broad spectrum of areas including
the distribution of wealth, success, and popularity; the spread of diseases and
ideas; search for information; system efficiency, robustness, and fragility; and
the large-scale movement of people and materials.