* 0846684
* CAREER: Nanoscale Opto-Mechanical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The objectives of this CAREER program are to understand and engineer opto-
mechanical interaction at the nano-scale, to realize devices and systems that
are capable of directly converting optical energy into mechanical motion, and to
develop reconfigurable optical devices that combine nanophotonics with
NEMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits include development of novel
reconfigurable nanoscale opto-mechanical systems whose optical properties can be
controlled by changing their mechanical configuration, using electrical or
optical control signals. The latter will be achieved using the optical
binding/anti-binding and/or radiation pressure. The discoveries made within the
scope of this CAREER program will have an impact on different disciplines and
find applications in telecom, life sciences and quantum
information/communication. Examples include reconfigurable interconnects,
tunable lasers, frequency up- and down- converters, novel sensors that combine
mass sensing and optical spectroscopy, and so on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the work lie in education and outreach. The interdisciplinary
nature of this CAREER program will provide powerful and unique educational
opportunities for students at all levels. Undergraduates, and under-represented
minorities in particular, will be involved through PI's participation in
Research Experience for Undergrads program. PI will prepare lectures designed to
reach a large public audience through presentations at the Museum of Science at
Boston. Much larger audience will be engaged via youtube.com where podcasts of
public lectures and various laboratory experiments will be available. The PI
will also bring his expertise to ongoing Harvard outreach programs and engage
the business-oriented public such as the Harvard Industrial Outreach Program