* 0846430
* Learning in the Sighted and the Blind through Different Sensory Modalities: Structure and Dynamics of Cortical Reorganization
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Lora Likova, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Learning in the Sighted and the Blind through Different Sensory Modalities:
Structure and Dynamics of Cortical Reorganization

This project focuses on the emerging area of the neuroscience of art learning.
It addresses the important issue of how the brain learns complex skills,
specifically the drawing process, through two different sensory modalities.
Visual art, and drawing in particular, engages an orchestrated system of
cognitive elements extending beyond mere visual perception. This brain system
involves an array of cross-cognitive interactions for advanced learning in
diverse sensory environments. However, there is a lack of systematic studies of
the neural mechanisms of learning in visual art, or of the cross-cognitive
transfer of such learning, and thus its neural substrate remains unknown. This
exploratory neuroscience project will focus on understanding the fundamental
dynamics of learning-based brain plasticity and the transfer of training effects
between modalities and drawing genres. By using high-resolution functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), we will be able to systematically explore a
rich set of interrelated questions about how learning takes place in the brains
of both the sighted and of the blind as they are being trained to draw. This
project will promote advanced knowledge in this new domain of research through
its novel paradigm, through the state-of-the-art fMRI-compatible drawing system
able to both capture the drawing motion in the scanner and provide quantitative
on-line feedback, and through the innovative methods for non-invasive analysis
of the neural dynamics in the human brain. The proposed studies will provide
transformative insights into the general principles of learning in both the
blind and the sighted, and into the commonality and specificities of the neural
process for learning through the visual or tactile modalities. The results will
significantly enhance the understanding of the neural mechanisms of spatial
cognition in blindness, specifically the mechanisms of brain plasticity that are
of major importance for the future of both visual prostheses and educational
strategies. The knowledge gained from this project can radically influence the
development of new school and museum programs, as well as that of cognitive
modeling and computational studies on spatial learning.

