* 0846586
* CAREER:Engineered Nanoscopic Objects via Controlled Creation and Rearrangement of Amorphous Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Sankar Nair, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2014
* USD 401,985.00

0846586 Nair

Intellectual Merit: The long-term objective of this career plan is to develop
and demonstrate a generalized enabling framework of principles for the design
and reaction engineering of ultra-small metal oxide objects of complex
morphology and structure. Specifically, the PI proposes to understand and
manipulate the novel mechanisms and thermodynamics that govern the liquid-phase
engineering of a unique class of single-walled mixed oxide nanotubes (with
exceptionally small lengths of 20-100 nm and diameters 2-4 nm) and single-walled
nanoshells (with diameter < 5 nm), all with complex and ordered internal
structures. The ability to engineer the shape, size, structure, and composition
of nanoscopic metal oxide objects at very small length scales - using only the
minimum quantity of matter necessary - is highly attractive (but thus far
elusive). A number of emerging applications could exploit the range of novel and
drastically tunable electronic, optical, catalytic, transport, and mechanical
properties arising from the unique shape, size, and structural complexity of
these objects. Such a development would underscore the full potential of
advanced chemical processing approaches for nanoscale science and technology,
and can overcome limits imposed by current materials and processes. The PI's
recent work has led to a proposed long-term molecular engineering strategy
(summarized as 'amorphous nanoparticle condensation and rearrangement') that
offers intrinsic advantages over current templating or catalytic approaches, and
produces ultra-small metal oxide objects with complex structures. During the
five-year CAREER grant, the PI proposes to elucidate the first generalized
mechanistic and thermodynamic framework governing the formation of single-walled
metal oxide nanotubes and nanoshells, through a unique combination of materials
synthesis, advanced liquid-phase and solid-state characterization tools,
molecular simulation, and analytical theory. Towards the end of this period and
in the longer term, he will apply this enabling framework to guide the
engineering of new classes of nanoscopic objects that can impact a wider range
of technologies pursued by diverse researchers and also impact current thinking
in bottom-up nanotechnology based on oxide materials. This framework also has
potential implications in understanding natural processes whose hypothesized
mechanisms have several common features with his approach, such as the
biomineralization of silica and other inorganic oxides, and the evolution of
ordered objects (e.g., nanotubes, nanoshells, and proto-zeolites) in natural
environments.

Broader Impacts: This career plan, along with infrastructure built by the PI in
recent years, will effectively integrate research and education at multiple
levels - from the high school student to the professor - and create long-term
impact on a number of people. This CAREER grant will be a cornerstone of a
partnership between Georgia Tech (GT) faculty and the Gwinnett School of
Mathematics Science and Technology (GSMST), a STEM-focused charter high school.
The PI, his graduate and undergraduate students, visiting students, GSMST
teachers, and GT K-12 outreach experts will collaborate to develop a set of
laboratory and classroom modules that will be integrated in novel high-school
courses on Nanotechnology and Alternative Energy. This collaborative approach -
under development via a pilot project - will expose a total of ~150 high school
students per year to cutting-edge engineering and science learning; retain and
encourage such students in pursuit of STEM careers; and create an enjoyable and
productive experience for GT and GSMST participants with a level of activity
that does not affect research productivity. The PI will translate the exciting
research insights into the GT classroom by incorporating them into his
undergraduate/graduate course in nanoscale chemical engineering. The project
involves five GT undergraduates and five external students by collaboration with
the NSF-SURE program which brings minority-group students to GT for research
every summer. The results will be disseminated via publications and
presentations, and also have continued potential for dissemination to the
general public by the science and technology news media. Overall, this career
plan is designed to help build a substantial cadre of well-trained personnel in
technology and science research, education, and application; who can be readily
absorbed by US industry (including the growing nanotechnology industry) and
academia.