* 0846865
* CAREER:Biologically Inspired Concepts for Reconfigurable Antennas and Multifunctional Smart Skins
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Gregory Huff, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to explore new paradigms for multifunctional
agility in reconfigurable antennas and multifunctional smart skins through a
biologically inspired concept. The approach is to examine the blending of
structural shape-shifting and electromagnetic reconfiguration found in the
Cephalopoda class of marine animals to develop structurally embedded micro-
fluidic networks transporting functionalized dispersions of nanoparticles in
antennas and frequency selective surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to contribute innovative and potentially transformational concepts in
electromagnetic agility and a paradigm shift in reconfigurable antennas through
the structural integration of pressure-driven mechanisms and a decreased
reliance of wired devices from the radiating aperture of system. These adaptive
capabilities and their linkage between structural and electromagnetic properties
can lead to many attractive communication and multifunctional capabilities for
industrial processes, scientific exploration, and many other systems operating
in electromagnetically harsh environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful
development and practical implementation of these electromagnetically agile
enabling mechanisms will significantly impact future systems that require a high
degree of multifunctionality. This will likely have a significant impact on
society through advanced technologies and by stimulating new avenues of
supporting research. Investigating the synergy between biological mechanisms and
engineered systems will attract undergraduate students into research and help
retain their interest in both science and engineering. This project creates
exciting educational topics that will be used by the PI in conjunction with the
educational resources and many opportunities for outreach at Texas A&amp;M
University to engage individuals from all walks of life, underrepresented
groups, and technical fields of interest.