* 0846494
* PECASE:  Coherent Interactions Between Photons and Quantum Dots Using Photonic Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2015
* USD 412,000.00

Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have been extensively researched as a promising
alternative to single atoms for the study of quantum physics and development of
quantum technology. In this research program the PI will use photonic crystal
structures to modify and enhance QD properties, allowing coherent interactions
between a QD and a photon field. Such interactions are essential elements of
photonic quantum information processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The PI aims to design, fabricate, and optically characterize nanophotonic
devices to coherently control and probe the quantum mechanical wavefunction of
quantum dots on ultra-fast timescales. The devices will be composed of photonic
crystal cavity-waveguide structures that have the ability to localize light to
within a cubic wavelength. This localization creates strong interactions between
a QD and an optical field, which will be used to investigate opto-electronic
devices with improved performance, study basic physical properties of QDs, and
create entanglement between QDs and photons. In addition, QD-photon entanglement
will be studied as a method for creating optical interconnects between spatially
separated QDs to develop integrated quantum
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The proposed research will help
develop new fundamental concepts in the control of semiconductor nanostructures
at the quantum level, as well as coherent light-matter interactions. The
proposal also includes an extensive educational outreach effort. The PI has
recently developed an undergraduate summer internship program which enables
University of Maryland students to participate in leading research. He will
expand this program to include local high school students.&lt;br/&gt;