* 0846385
* CAREER: Exploiting Collective Behaviors in Coupled Micro- and Nanosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Jeffrey Rhoads, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 12/31/2013
* USD 424,859.00

Project Abstract: CAREER: Exploiting Collective Behaviors in Coupled Micro- and
Nanosystems

Though micro/nanomechanical resonators have been shown to offer distinct
potential in applications ranging from resonant mass sensing to probe-based
microscopy, their broad implementation is currently impeded by the
comparatively-low throughput associated with isolated resonator implementations.
While uncoupled resonator arrays have been proposed to overcome this throughput
constraint, the signal processing and hardware requirements attendant to this
approach largely negate its utility. An alternative, and in many ways more
attractive, approach, is to realize improved throughput through the active
exploitation of collective behaviors arising in coupled micro/nanoresonator
arrays. This approach has the added benefit of potentially yielding improved
performance metrics and/or inherent signal processing (e.g. input/output order
reduction).

The proposed project, incorporating analytical, experimental, and educational
outreach activities, seeks to investigate collective behaviors that arise in
micro/nanoresonator arrays, which are locally- or globally-coupled through
elastic, electrostatic, or electromagnetic mechanisms, in order to significantly
improve their performance in emerging applications such as resonant mass
sensing, electromechanical signal processing, and micromechanical
neurocomputing. The research effort will initially focus on the development of
multi-physics, distributed-parameter models of representative
micro/nanoresonator arrays. These models, incorporating nonlinearities and
asymmetries amongst other pertinent effects, will be systematically discretized
and analyzed using standard perturbation methods. Using the results of these
analyses, localized and synchronous behaviors will be identified, predictive
design tools will be developed, and promising array designs distilled. Coupled
microresonator arrays based on these designs will be subsequently fabricated and
tested, using the fabrication and characterization suites available to the PI at
Purdue University's Birck Nanotechnology Center, to verify predicted dynamic
behaviors. Ultimately, the work will develop a refined understanding of the
collective and emergent behaviors associated with coupled micro/nanoresonators
and, with this understanding in hand, will actively exploit these behaviors to
circumvent the aforementioned throughput constraint, improve overall device
performance, and spur the development of novel MEMS/NEMS devices based upon
coupled array architectures.

To ensure broad impact, the proposed research effort will be hierarchically
integrated with an educational effort that is founded upon the existing cyber-
infrastructure of the nanoHUB - the web portal of the National Science
Foundation's Network for Computational Nanotechnology, as well as Purdue
University's Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program. The PI
will develop and deploy on the nanoHUB (i) a comprehensive software tool for the
simulation of collective behaviors emergent in coupled micro/nanoresonator
arrays; (ii) a new K-12 module on emergent micro/nanoelectromechanical systems
(MEMS and NEMS), which emphasizes the engineer's role in micro/nanotechnology;
and (iii) course materials and lectures associated with a new course on the
Mechanics of Micro- and Nanosystems. These materials will be assessed using the
nanoHub's existing qualitative and quantitative evaluation tools, as well as
module-specific evaluation mechanism (e.g. interactive self-tests integrated
within the K-12 module). As a whole, the PI anticipates that hundreds of
scientists and students worldwide will utilize these resources to further their
understanding of micro/nanosystems at either an introductory or research level.
The educational effort will also incorporate a number of undergraduate research
experiences arranged through Purdue University?s SURF program. These summer-
long, intensive experiences will specifically target under-represented students.

