* 0846750
* CAREER: Observer Design for Intelligent Visual Tracking
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Patricio Vela, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 399,951.00

Proposal Number: 0846750&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project described in this proposal seeks to
improve the stability and robustness of computer vision algorithms used in
closed-loop systems. The research Endeavour examines the role control theory may
play in enhancing closed-loop computer vision algorithms. The concept of
understanding the interplay between control and computer vision is achieving
prominence as vision is increasingly sought for automating
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
sensor, the imaging system can be wrought with noise, either through the actual
sensing process or through the geometry of the imaged scene (e.g., through
clutter, occlusions, variable hypotheses, etc.). Thus, the vision task can be
interpreted as a signal processing task in the presence of noise and
uncertainty. By deriving observers for visual tracking systems that seek to
estimate both target location and target boundary, the PI proposes to
systematically derive a highly stable and robust visual tracking algorithm. The
research Endeavour involves the definition of a probabilistic shape state and
associated measurement models; the derivation of a full state observer for
dynamic objects and environments; and the use of machine learning to impose soft
and hard geometric constraints on the measurement model. The main difficulties
lie in the richness of the visual field coupled with the noise inherent to all
visual sensors, and the fragility of imposing constraints on the measurement
model when the target itself is both flexible and corrupted by imaging
noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application of
the proposed work will reduce the amount of human labor involved in many
monotonous, repetitive, or time-intensive tasks. Efforts will be specifically
driven by two application areas: workforce tracking for safety analysis of
airport ground operations, construction site operations, surface mining
operations, and microscopic cellular tracking and analysis. Both of these
application areas are related to the health and well-being of the populace, have
the potential to save lives, and will have a positive economic
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;