* 0846489
* CAREER: Optofluidics - Fusing Microfluidics and Photonics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* David Erickson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 04/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0846489 Erickson

To develop a research area called "Optofluidics", the PI will perform both
theoretical and experimental investigations into the fusion of microfluidics and
optics. While the idea of fluid-optical devices can be traced back as far as the
liquid mirror telescopes of the 18th century, microfluidics presents a unique
opportunity for creating microscale analogues of these early devices. A series
of fundamental studies will develop a new form of microfluidic transport
exploiting the electromagnetic energy in photonic devices to capture, transport
and separate particles. Additionally, the PI will create a new class of
reconfigurable photonic system of microfluidic devices to transport, switch and
modify light. These efforts require numerical/analytical modeling examining the
coupling between hydrodynamics and electromagnetics, an experimental aspect to
verify these models, and an implementation focus aimed at providing a "proof-of-
concept" demonstration of a practical technology. Optical force transport has
several advantages over other microscale techniques (e.g. electrophoresis,
dielectrophoresis, and pressure) including opposite transport scaling laws,
significantly higher separation resolutions and insensitivity to
surface/solution conditions. By exploiting waveguides to deliver the
electromagnetic energy, the PI shows that the fundamental limitation preventing
widespread adoption of optical transport in microfluidic devices can be solved.
A technology development thrust will also be pursued for a waveguide-based
separation device for viral identification. This second thrust will develop a
largely new application area for microfluidics and a new approach to
reconfigurable photonics based on transport of electromagnetic energy within
microfluidic streams, exploiting the same handling techniques developed for
transporting chemical samples on-chip to shuttle light around. The PI plans
development of a web-deployed "FluidicsWiki" organized around the central theme
of micro and nanofluidics to allow user-edited content and thus the site can
dynamically evolve with the field. The overall goal is to synchronously
disseminate both summaries of recent research and educational tutorial content
from and to the entire community. A planned series of academic and community
outreach activities include organizing a biennial conference on optofluidics,
conducting seminars on microfluidic technology for K-12 teachers, and explaining
the benefits of nanotechnology to the public at the New York State Fair.