* 0846937
* CAREER: Fundamental Research Leveraging Nanoparticle-Induced Crystallization in Semicrystalline Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Frank Fisher, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to study the crystalline morphologies
that naturally form (or can deliberately be formed) during the processing and
manufacturing of semicrystalline polymer nanocomposites. These studies will in
turn inform efforts to leverage nanoparticle-induced crystallization to directly
address two pervasive issues related to the processing of these materials: 1)
the ability to quantitatively assess the level of nanoparticle dispersion within
the polymer, and 2) the ability to judiciously tailor the nanoparticle-polymer
interface in a manner that does not inherently damage the structure, and hence
degrade the properties, of the embedded nanoreinforcement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will enable
new approaches to address two far-reaching impediments to the manufacture and
optimization of semicrystalline polymer nanocomposites, an emerging technology
being widely pursued to impart enhanced multifunctional behavior and properties
to this technologically important class of polymers. The proposed research
program is coupled to an educational initiative that will develop, pilot, and
disseminate pedagogically-inspired, simulation-based learning modules which
utilize modern engineering software tools to assist undergraduate students in
visualizing various fundamental concepts covered within the mechanical
engineering curriculum. In pursuing the proposed research and educational
efforts the PI will: 1) enthusiastically recruit and mentor undergraduate and
graduate students working in these areas, 2) collaborate with local high school
teachers and the Center for Innovation in Engineering and Science Education at
Stevens to adapt related materials for use within the K-12 STEM curriculum, 3)
actively participate in outreach programs to broaden the number of students
exposed to engineering and nanotechnology, and 4) develop and strengthen
national and international collaborations in these areas. The PI has a proven
track record of recruiting from student populations traditionally under-
represented in STEM careers.