* 0846719
* CAREER:  Environmental Impacts of Nanomaterials in Engineered Water Systems: Biological and Physical Effects on Microorganisms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Mary Jo Kirisits, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2016
* USD 429,722.00

0846719&lt;br/&gt;Kirisits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials are
being produced globally - the worldwide market for products incorporating
nanotechnology is estimated to be $2.4 trillion dollars by 2014. Nanomaterials
have a tremendous range of beneficial uses including controlled delivery of
therapeutic agents, efficient conversion of solar energy to electrical energy,
and effective removal of micropollutants from water. In spite of their many
beneficial applications, nanomaterials may have unintended adverse effects on
natural and engineered systems. The principal objective of this proposal is to
develop a comprehensive understanding of the effect of a variety of
nanomaterials on bacteria, particularly those found in engineered systems
pertaining to drinking water, wastewater, and water reuse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research tasks will be conducted to test the
following four hypotheses: (1) &lt;br/&gt;bacteria develop increased tolerance
and resistance to nanomaterial insults, (2) &lt;br/&gt;nanomaterial insults
change microbial community structure, (3) biofilm bacteria respond differently
than planktonic bacteria to a nanomaterial insult and (4) biofilm mechanical
properties are affected by nanomaterials. In this research, six common
nanomaterials &lt;br/&gt;carbon fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, nanoscale cerium
oxide, nanosilver, nanoscale titanium dioxide, and nanoscale zero valent iron
will be examined for their effects on pure bacterial cultures and on mixed
microbial communities representative of drinking water, wastewater, and water
reuse applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan includes shadowing
a high school class of predominantly minority students through 4 years, creating
a program to increase interactions between graduate engineering and science
students, and organizing a student symposium on nanomaterials in the
environment.