* 0846892
* CAREER: Integrative Behavioural and Neurophysiological Studies of Normal and Autistic Cognition Using Video Game Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Matthew Belmonte, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 700,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Why do some children in susceptible families become autistic when others do not?
How can understanding what goes wrong in autistic brain development help us to
understand what goes right in normal brain development? And how might this
knowledge lead to interventions that maximize developmental potential in every
child? Brain cells, like telephone networks, communicate on more than one scale:
though most communications are local within a neighborhood of cells, some cover
long distances between widely separated brain regions. In order for the correct
long-distance connections to be made, the local connections have to be working
properly. Although a small problem in local connections might not cause much
disruption in the laying down of long-distance lines, larger local abnormalities
may cause a chain reaction of larger disruptions in long-distance connectivity.
This project evaluates the hypothesis that the way brain cells function together
locally within brain regions may be genetic, whereas a secondary abnormality in
long-distance connections between brain regions may be what emerges during brain
development to make a person autistic. If this is the case, then by using
behavioral therapies, drugs, and/or other future treatments it might become
possible to drive a wedge between genes and outcome, preventing susceptible
children from developing severe autism. To test this hypothesis of abnormal
neural connectivity, this project combines magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to
show brain structure and high-density electroencephalography (EEG) to show brain
function while children perform experiments that are embedded in the engaging
environment of a video game. In this game-based format, children with autism (as
well as non-autistic siblings and unrelated, unaffected children) take the
experiments home on a laptop computer and learn at their own pace and in their
own time, free from time constraints and other sources of anxiety. Having
learned the game (and the experiments embedded within it), children are given
the opportunity to come to the laboratory for EEG and MRI. Behavioral data from
the game and anatomy and physiology from the laboratory are then combined to
differentiate behavioral and neurobiological traits that differ categorically in
people with autism from those that differ only in degree between autistic and
non-autistic family members. In addition to answering scientific questions
directly, this project trains undergraduate computer science students in the
growing area of "serious games" -- that is, therapeutic computer games designed
as vehicles for skills development or treatment delivery, provides research
opportunities to students in an advanced undergraduate course on the
neurobiology of autism, and provides graduate and postdoctoral training
opportunities in cognitive neuroscience as it relates to the study of autism.

Autism's severe disabilities, combined with a lack of understanding and
appropriate accommodation, rob people with autism of the chance to be fully
integrated and productive members of society, disrupt the family environment for
parents and siblings, and incur an economic cost of up to $35 billion annually
in the United States alone. Yet when one considers the entire autism spectrum,
including Asperger syndrome and the many cognitive differences (in some cases
superiorities) in relatives of people with autism, the line between autistic and
normal development begins to seem a very subtle one. How can developing children
be steered across that line? Answering this question depends on an integrative
style of inquiry that will be essential to twenty-first century science. Autism
research has shown that neural abnormalities are networked throughout the brain
and not limited to any single piece of tissue, that autism is seldom produced by
one gene alone but rather arises from networks of many interacting genes, and
that autism involves abnormalities (deficits or superiorities) in a web of
skills from low levels such as detail perception and muscle control to high
levels such as speech and social cognition. Putting all the pieces together in
these complicated biological networks depends on cooperation among networks of
scientists whose combined backgrounds and insights amount to more than a sum of
individuals. This project aims to further such a culture of scientific
collaboration by producing open-source software, open-access publication of
results, and free availability of all experimental data and methods. The hard
problem of autism research pulls in many branches and disciplines of science and
provides an integrative bridge between them. In this regard, the project drives
scientific innovation, and helps to understand the diversity of human cognition
in general.