* 0846541
* CAREER: Tailoring Free Volume in Nanocomposite Gas Separation Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Nancy Lape, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2015
* USD 406,239.00

0846541&lt;br/&gt;N. Lape&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Chemical
and Biological Separations program supports work by Professor Nancy Lape at
Harvey Mudd College to improve gas separation membranes by tailoring free
volume, and therefore gas separation properties, of inorganic/polymer
composites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing environmental awareness and
rising energy costs, traditional gas separation methods such as absorption (for
CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 separations) and cryogenic distillation (for N2/O2
separations) are becoming less attractive, while demand is increasing for
solvent-free, energy-efficient membrane separation processes. Unfortunately,
membrane processes are entirely dependent on the availability of high-
performance (sufficiently high permeability and high selectivity) membrane
materials that are not currently available. Recent research in nanocomposite
films has shown promising gains in this area: the addition of impermeable
nanoparticles to an ultra-high free volume polymer can actually increase
permeability relative to the pure polymer while maintaining or increasing its
selectivity. This runs counter to predictions based on the Maxwell model, long
proven for micron-size particles, of permeability decreases upon the addition of
impermeable particles. The improvements have been shown to be the result of free
volume increases in the polymer, but the mechanism behind this free volume
increase, while typically attributed to the formation of interfacial voids, is
not understood. Additionally, it is unknown how this permeation enhancement
depends on particle size, polymer chain rigidity, and other interfacial
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award aims to address this deficiency
by performing a systematic investigation of the following three factors: (1)
primary particle and aggregate size, (2) polymer chain rigidity, and (3)
interfacial effects using a four-pronged approach: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a)
Composite membrane formation. A variety of materials and techniques will be used
to prepare composite films including a range of particle sizes from nanoscale to
microscale to examine the transition between Maxwell-type behavior and
permeability enhancement; a range of polymer chain rigidity including rubbery,
conventional glassy, and ultra-high free volume glassy polymers; and a range of
particle surface treatments to examine interfacial effects. Permeation in
previously unstudied membranes will be synthesized and examined using surface-
initiated atom-transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP) which eliminates
interfacial void formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(b)Gas permeation tests.
Permeation tests on all pure polymer and composite films will be run to
determine the permeability and selectivity of various
gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(c) Characterization. All films will be
characterized using positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) and
density measurements to examine free volume size and distribution and
transmission and scanning electron microscopy (TEM and SEM) to examine particle
dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(d) Molecular Modeling. The molecular-level
configuration, interfacial effects, and theoretical free volume of pure polymers
and polymer/inorganic nanocomposites will be modeled to illuminate the changes
in molecular-level architecture that give rise to changes in free volume. While
the literature abounds with molecular modeling (MM) results for pure polymers,
nanocomposites are an almost entirely unexamined area for
MM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main educational goals of this project are centered
on two aspects: Course and Educational Method Developments and an Integrated
Undergraduate Research and Multi-Tiered Mentoring Program. To address the first
aspect, Challenge-Based Instruction Modules will be developed and disseminated
for use in courses. Also a new course aimed at chemistry and engineering Harvey
Mudd College (HMC) undergraduates in Polymer Chemistry and Engineering is
planned. The new course will include experimental modules in the area of the
proposed research. The research will be carried out entirely by undergraduate
and high school researchers. The undergraduates will benefit from a multi-tiered
structured mentoring program in which they are mentored by the PI, alumni, and
each other, and will be trained as mentors for high school students. Technical
results and the models developed for undergraduate and high school student
research and mentoring will be widely disseminated via publications and
presentations.