* 0846089
* CAREER:   Female meiotic drive in Mimulus:   a model for understanding the causes and consequences of selfish chromosomal evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2015
* Lila Fishman, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2015
* USD 638,537.00

Natural selection is expected to efficiently remove detrimental traits from
animal and plant populations; yet, traits such as infertility persist in natural
populations. Persistence of detrimental traits such as infertility may be caused
by "selfish" behavior of chromosomes during meiosis, that is, chromosomes that
carry harmful traits also carry genes for their own preferential inheritance.
This research investigates the cellular and genetic mechanisms, evolutionary
history, and fitness consequences of a selfish chromosome in the model
wildflower Mimulus guttatus. The projects include cytogenetic determination of
whether selfish chromosomal transmission (termed meiotic drive) is caused by
divergence in chromosomal structure and/or function, crossing experiments to
investigate the genetic basis of differences in the strength of meiotic drive,
field measurements of the lifetime effects of carrying selfish chromosomes on
reproduction, and surveys of the distribution of selfish chromosomes among
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because research on Mimulus will allow tests
of theories about the persistence of selfish chromosomes natural populations,
these studies will provide rare insight into a poorly understood, but
potentially ubiquitous (and highly influential), biological process. In
addition, the project will develop, for broad dissemination, a set of laboratory
modules using Mimulus as a model to teach fundamental concepts in genetics and
evolution. Postdoctoral scholars, graduates, and undergraduate students will be
engaged in generating these educational materials, as well as trained for
careers in biology through participation in the research.