* 0846408
* CAREER: Higher Teichmuller Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2015
* Anna Wienhard, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2015
* USD 320,195.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0846408&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Anna Wienhard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
project is to further develop the&lt;br/&gt;emerging field of higher
Teichmueller theory. Higher Teichmueller&lt;br/&gt;spaces are connected
components of the variety of representations&lt;br/&gt;of the fundamental group
of a surface into semisimple Lie groups,&lt;br/&gt;which share essential
properties with Teichmueller&lt;br/&gt;space. Classical Teichmueller space plays
an important role in&lt;br/&gt;various fields of mathematics due to its rich
structure and the&lt;br/&gt;fact that it is a smooth cover of the moduli space
of Riemann&lt;br/&gt;surfaces. For higher Teichmueller spaces many
potentially&lt;br/&gt;interesting structures are yet to be discovered and the
relation&lt;br/&gt;to the moduli space of Riemann surfaces still needs to
be&lt;br/&gt;clarified. The proposed research focusses on identifying
the&lt;br/&gt;geometric objects (similar to hyperbolic surfaces in the case
of&lt;br/&gt;classical Teichmueller space) which are parametrized by
higher&lt;br/&gt;Teichmueller spaces. These objects will then be used to
define&lt;br/&gt;algebraic, geometric and dynamical structures on
higher&lt;br/&gt;Teichmueller spaces, and we expect that they will help
to&lt;br/&gt;construct a natural map from higher Teichmueller spaces
to&lt;br/&gt;classical Teichmueller space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teichmueller
space is the space of all geometric surfaces with a&lt;br/&gt;fixed
combinatorial type. Because it parametrizes all surfaces,&lt;br/&gt;Teichmueller
space is a fundamental mathematical object which&lt;br/&gt;also plays an
important role in theoretical physics. Every point&lt;br/&gt;in Teichmueller
space corresponds to a tiling of the Euclidean&lt;br/&gt;plane, the two-
dimensional sphere or in most cases the hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;plane by one
polygon and its images under subsequent reflections&lt;br/&gt;in the sides.
(Nice pictures inspired by such tilings appear in&lt;br/&gt;M.C. Escher's work.)
The combinatorial type of the surface is&lt;br/&gt;determined by the number of
vertices of the polygon and the&lt;br/&gt;gluing data, but the geometry of the
surface depends on the&lt;br/&gt;length of the sides and the angles at the
vertices of the&lt;br/&gt;polygon. Teichmueller space is the example of a moduli
space of a&lt;br/&gt;pattern (the tiling) with rich symmetries (the reflections
in the&lt;br/&gt;side of the polygon). Such moduli spaces can be
efficiently&lt;br/&gt;studied via the group generated by the symmetries of
the&lt;br/&gt;pattern. Higher Teichmueller spaces are moduli spaces of
more&lt;br/&gt;complicated patterns in higher dimensional spaces. However,
the&lt;br/&gt;symmetry group of these patterns is the same as the
symmetry&lt;br/&gt;group of the tilings associated to classical
Teichmueller&lt;br/&gt;space. Therefore one expects higher Teichmueller spaces
to&lt;br/&gt;parametrize geometric objects which are not surfaces
themselves,&lt;br/&gt;but closely related to surfaces. The proposed research
focusses&lt;br/&gt;on identifying these geometric objects and studying their
finer&lt;br/&gt;structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes various
activities to involve graduate&lt;br/&gt;students in research and teaching, as
for instance a yearly&lt;br/&gt;mathematical retreat for graduate students to
study, explore and&lt;br/&gt;present a mathematical topic in a group, and small
workshops with&lt;br/&gt;mini-courses which allow graduate students to get
insight into&lt;br/&gt;the working of modern research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;