* 0846502
* CAREER: Lab-on-a-Chip Systems of Photopatternable Multifunctional Nanocomposite Materials for Cell Detection and Manipulation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Tingrui Pan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00





CAREER: Lab-on-a-Chip Systems of Photopatternable Multifunctional Nanocomposite
Materials for Cell Detection and Manipulation This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Objective The
objective of this research is to deliver nano-biomaterial solutions with both
electrical and biochemical activations for investigating cellular responses at
bio-nano interfaces. The approach is to develop photopatternable multifunctional
nanocomposite materials and lab-on-a-chip techniques to interface and manipulate
cellular objects. High-throughput single-cell capture-and-sense and hybrid
electrical-and-biochemical gradient activations will be implemented by the
enabling technology. Intellectual Merit The proposed nanocomposite material will
offer unique combinational features of photosensitivity, electrical
conductivity, specific bio-affinity, and non-biofouling property in one micro-
processable formula. Integrated with the lab-on-a-chip microfluidics, it
provides a generic bioengineered platform to detect and manipulate the specific
cells in an intricate biological environment. Further investigations on cellular
responses to the unified bioelectrical and biochemical signaling will
potentially lead to innovations of diagnosis and therapeutics in various
pathological processes. Broader Impact Technical developments and biological
discoveries from the research activities will be fully integrated with the
proposed educational efforts. A series of dedicated educational workshops will
be disseminated to nation-wide science teachers on ?bringing nano-bioengineering
technologies into K-12 laboratories?, in collaboration with the International
Baccalaureate program. Furthermore, an international outreach initiative with
Asian and European universities will continue evolving under the program,
including annual research symposium and summer collaborative projects.