* 0846341
* CAREER: Coupled Quantum Degrees of Freedom in Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Jason Petta, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 03/31/2015
* USD 525,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** &lt;br/&gt;Advances in material fabrication and
experimental techniques have made it possible to create nanostructures whose
quantum properties can be manipulated in controlled ways. These new capabilities
have extended the ideas of quantum mechanics to structures larger than a single
atom and are creating the potential for fundamentally new technologies for
computation and communication. To determine the potential for such applications
it is necessary to gain a fundamental understanding of interactions between the
electrons in a nanostructure and other quantum mechanical properties of that
structure. These quantum mechanical properties include the vibrations (known as
phonons) and/or the magnetic properties of the nuclei (known as nuclear spin) in
the nanostructure. This CAREER award supports a project that will carry out
studies to gain this understanding. Research and education are seamlessly
integrated throughout the project. To better educate the public, a nanoscience
display will be constructed for the Liberty Science Center in Jersey City, NJ.
High school and undergraduate level research projects will be supported through
involvement in the Partners in Science program and the REU program. The
undergraduate Experimental Physics Seminar at Princeton will be reformatted to
better emulate a realistic research environment. Students in this course will be
required to form teams and propose an experiment that will take place throughout
the remainder of the semester. This hands-on laboratory format is critical for
teaching students how to operate in a realistic research setting and will foster
cooperative learning. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows associated with
this CAREER project will learn some of the most advanced experimental techniques
used today in studying the physics of systems that are on the nanoscale or
slightly larger. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a project focusing on studies of
fundamental interactions between coupled quantum degrees of freedom in
nanostructures. A series of experiments will be performed to probe electron-
phonon coupling and electron-nuclear spin interactions in semiconductor quantum
dots and multiple quantum dot systems. The understanding gained could have an
impact on future technologies using quantum dots. Research and education are
seamlessly integrated throughout the proposal. Activities include outreach to
the general public, involving high school and undergraduate in research
projects, and the development of a sophomore level seminar on experimental
physics. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows associated with this CAREER
project will learn low temperature experimental techniques, nanofabrication, and
high frequency measurement; all skills that will provide an excellent
preparation for future careers in academia or industrial research.