* 0846738
* CAREER: Elastic Averaging - Nature's Design Paradigm for High Performance Flexure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Shorya Awtar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project is to develop a new flexure system design
methodology inspired by elastic averaging, which is seen in nature. Flexures are
jointless elastic structures that derive motion from material compliance, which
results in high precision, design simplicity, and lower costs. The traditional
design methodology for the synthesis and optimization of flexure systems is
based on Exact Constraint principles, which unnecessarily restrict the solution
space by not recognizing the unique advantages of distributed compliance. This
research will create a mathematical and scientific foundation for Elastic
Averaging, a paradigm inspired by nature?s effective use of distributed
compliance in enabling highly over-constrained structures that are inherently
robust and high-performing despite local defects. The research deliverables
include: 1) Characterization of constraint behavior in flexures by modeling
structural non-linearities; 2) Quantification of key performance attributes such
as mobility, error motions, stiffness variation, and manufacturing sensitivity;
3) A synthesis procedure for generating constraint maps in response to a flexure
system design specification; and 4) A closed-form analytical framework that
allows the prediction of performance and design tradeoffs in flexure systems,
thus enabling optimization and sensitivity studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the proposed flexure mechanism design methodology will pave the path
for significant design innovations in several applications including multi-axis
nanopositioning systems used in precision metrology, enhanced-dexterity
minimally invasive surgical tools, and compliant seals for improving
turbomachinery efficiency. The design methodology resulting from this research
will be disseminated by means of a new professional tutorial for engineers and
researchers, and an online reference atlas of flexure systems. This proposal
also includes plans for undergraduate and graduate curriculum development at the
University of Michigan.