* 0846189
* CAREER: Design and Synthetic Applications of New Multicomponent Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jared Shaw, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 581,386.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professor Jared T. Shaw at the University of California at Davis. He
will develop a new paradigm of reactivity that will enable the design and
discovery of multicomponent reactions (MCRs). MCRs are reactions that form
complex products from simple starting materials in a single operation, which can
only emerge from a careful balance of reactivity that allows the successive
bond-forming events to proceed in sequence. Among these reactions, the most
valuable are those in which each of the components can be varied independently
of the others. Professor Shaw has discovered a new four component reaction (4CR)
that forms gamma-lactams in high yield with two or three stereogenic centers in
high diastereoselectivity. Importantly, this "green" reaction takes place in a
benign solvent and produces water as the only reaction by-product. This new 4CR
forms the basis for a larger research program in this area that is described in
the proposal. The studies that are proposed will demonstrate that the reactivity
pattern observed has predictive value in the discovery of new reactions. The
following outcomes of the proposed line of research are (1) new reactions of
unprecedented efficiency for the assembly of heterocyclic compounds with
multiple stereogenic centers, and (2) new approaches to the synthesis of complex
natural products centered on MCRs for the assembly of core
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MCRs and the synthesis of natural products
targets will form conceptual nodes that can connect different areas of science
as well as different sectors of society. Because MCRs offer the opportunity for
rapid synthesis of molecules with interesting biological or physical properties,
the PI will solicit collaborative projects from other departments that can be
executed using this strategy. This approach will allow undergraduate students to
learn how to make organic molecules and, more importantly, why their efforts are
important to other disciplines. Professor Shaw will work with a high school
class on the design and installation of an exhibit at the UC Davis arboretum
that highlights the chemical components of medicinal plants native to
California. The arboretum will provide an ideal setting for educating the public
on the origin of chemical compounds used in medicines and inspire enthusiasm in
further study of natural compounds through synthesis. The research and education
plans described in the proposal will unite MCRs and chemical synthesis for the
purpose of advancing the frontiers of science, educating the next generation of
scientists, and connecting with the general public.