* 0846433
* CAREER:Towards engineering transport properties of nanoparticles for magnetically-mediated hyperthermia applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Diana-Andra Borca-Tasciuc, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 425,000.00

0846433 Borca-Tasciuc

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Magnetically heated nanoparticles are considered extensively in cancer
hyperthermia research. However, current efforts are focused either on developing
new magnetic nanoparticles or assessing their therapeutic effects, without a
clear understanding of the physical mechanisms and key parameters that control
heat generation and dissipation.

Intellectual merit. Key parameters controlling heat generation and dissipation
in nanoparticle suspensions subjected to magnetic heating will be identified.
Among the focal points of the study are the molecular coatings applied to the
nanoparticles, and their effect on heat generation rate and temperature rise.
Theoretical models for power generation will be developed to account for effects
previously neglected such as interactions between particles. Biological systems
(cell cultures) will be investigated in order to assess the degree to which
extracellular and cellular media may change the heating efficiency of
nanoparticles. These studies will show how nanoparticle positioning within the
cell (i.e. within the nucleus versus the lipid raft on the cell membrane)
affects cell death rate. New systems, based on functionalized gold-based
nanoparticles which exhibit superparamagnetic behavior, are investigated for
hyperthermia applications. A novel concept of molecular heat pipes will be
explored to determine the potential of engineering the heat transport in
bioconjugated nanoparticle systems.

Broader impact. This research will advance the field of magnetically-mediated
cancer hyperthermia and may lead to novel biomedical procedures such as
molecular surgery and nanoparticle based gene therapy. Moreover, a course
focused on magnetic nanoparticles and their applications in medicine will be
developed, employing an inquiry based learning methodology. A series of outreach
activities, including international and research experiences for undergraduate
students, summer research experiences for teachers, as well as presentations and
hands on activities for high school students, will target increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering.