* 0846758
* CAREER:  Identification and integration of persistent behavioral biases into online search and purchase models
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Laurie Garrow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hantula
* 01/31/2014
* USD 410,000.00

Discrete choice models are the backbone of empirical analysis in many fields.
These models are grounded in random utility maximization theory and generally
require that fundamental properties, including stable and transitive
preferences, be observed. Recent work by behavioral economists suggests that
these properties may not be valid in all decision making contexts, and that
failure to properly account for these and other behavioral biases may lead to
poor forecasting accuracy. The objectives of this CAREER proposal are to: 1)
integrate behavioral biases into discrete choice models to enhance our
fundamental knowledge of individual and firm decision making; 2) investigate
whether behavioral biases found to be important in current market conditions
persist in future market conditions; 3) develop and validate theories of
individuals, search and purchase behaviors; and, 4) develop probability modules
for Georgia high school teachers based on state-mandated problem-based learning
techniques that use datasets representative of engineering problems encountered
in practice.

The research findings will be applied and tested in the airline industry, which
affords ideal conditions for testing behavioral theories under a wide variety of
market conditions. This is due to the ability to both track menus and decisions
made by travelers in a developed industry that has flexible capacity. This
proposal creatively integrates data from multiple online sources and complements
this with online experiments conducted with the airline industry. The ability to
analyze large volumes of data from naturally occurring online markets provides
the opportunity to uncover new empirical insights that will drive the
development of theoretical models.

The developments from this CAREER proposal will explicitly integrate
individuals, search and purchase behaviors with firm decision-making. This
approach results in a theoretical foundation that is unique from that of other
researchers and reveals that demand and behavioral bias assumptions are not
trivial and can result in forecasts opposite those predicted by classic models.
The most important broader impact is the potential to change the nature of
online markets to make them more interactive with customers, which will result
in both increased profits for firms as well as better product and service
offerings for customers.