* 0846582
* CAREER: Geometry of Directed Folding and Soft Packing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Christian Santangelo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 411,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports an integrated theoretical research and education program to study
the controlled formation of complex, three-dimensional structures. Analytical
and numerical methods will be used for two related research topics. The first
topic will involve a study of the folding of a thin membrane into three-
dimensional shapes by controlling the differential in-plane swelling of the
membrane. The second topic will focus on the development of a strong-segregation
theory for the assembly of prototypical hard core/soft corona particles. This
theory will relate the various structures observed in simulation phase diagrams
to geometrical invariants and be used to predict the phase diagram in three
dimensions of soft corona particles interacting through isotropic and
anisotropic interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects study structure
formation in two model systems in which geometry and frustration play a crucial
role. The first project seeks to understand how to exploit membrane buckling as
a design motif. New geometrical tools will be developed to understand how
competition between bending and elastic strain results in three-dimensional
shapes. The second project will develop a theory to predict structure in soft
corona particle assemblies by relying on universal, geometrical quantities.
These projects explore how the fundamental constraints imposed by differential
geometry control and limit the packing of continuous two-dimensional objects and
other soft materials in three-dimensional space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award also supports educational activities, including the training of
graduate students, the involvement of undergraduate students in theoretical
research, and the development of a short workshop on soft materials that will be
used as a recruitment tool during regular visits to predominantly-minority
serving colleges and universities. This latter program will be coordinated with
the larger efforts of the North Eastern Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports an integrated theoretical research and education program to study
how to control the structure of soft materials. Soft materials are often
composed of large molecules that may have many possible orientations leading to
possibilities for materials and tiny structures to have complex shapes. The PI
aims to study the interplay between the interactions among molecules and
geometry to develop ways to control the shapes of soft materials. The research
supported by this award will have an impact on materials design by introducing
new theoretical techniques for the prediction of how three-dimensional
structures can be constructed from soft materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award also supports a number of educational, including the training of
graduate students, the involvement of undergraduates in theoretical research,
and the development of a short workshop on soft materials that will be used as a
recruitment tool during regular visits to predominantly-minority serving
colleges and universities. This latter program will be coordinated with the
larger efforts of the North Eastern Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (NEAGEP).