* 0846662
* CAREER: Investigation of Regional Land-Atmosphere Interactions in Semi-arid Cities Using the WRF-Noah-Urban Canopy Model
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Steven Margulis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 478,830.00

CAREER: Investigation of Regional Land-Atmosphere Interactions in Semi-arid
Cities Using the WRF-Noah-Urban Canopy Model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terri Hogue,
University of California, Los
Angeles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future climate extremes will significantly impact
populations in semi-arid regions, exacerbating regional water supply problems
and increasing energy demand. Metropolitan regions currently support around 50%
of the world?s population and 80% of the population of North America. Many of
these urban centers are in semi-arid or arid regions that are particularly
sensitive to climate extremes (heat-waves, anomalous precipitation, droughts,
etc.). With probable declines in precipitation, increasing probability of
extreme events, and already depleted stocks in many large storage systems (e.g.,
Colorado River), there are serious water policy issues that require
sophisticated modeling of climate-surface interactions to better understand and
predict future impacts. The adaptability of water resource management strategies
to potential climate extremes is limited by a reliance on the predictive
capabilities of current General Circulation Models (GCMs) which are poorly
resolved at the regional scale. Objectives of the current proposal are to
advance high-resolution modeling and understanding of land-atmosphere
interactions in semi-arid cities, and ultimately, facilitate improved climate
predictions in these critical and highly-populated regions. Proposed work will
center on the development of a high-resolution, land-atmosphere-urban canopy
model that is integrated (forced and calibrated) with an extensive set of
ground-based observations as well as remotely-sensed products of surface energy
and water fluxes. The coupled land-atmosphere model will be run over two large
urban domains, Los Angeles, CA and Phoenix, AZ for a range of atmospheric
conditions (normal heat conditions, extreme heat waves, anomalous precipitation,
etc.). Studies on the sensitivity of the urban climate to surface ?greenness?
will also be undertaken to evaluate the related benefits and tradeoffs of
evaporative cooling (water demand) versus urban heat (energy demand). The
ultimate goal is to build a transferable regional-scale model capable of
predicting the impacts of anthropogenic and climate disturbance on water-
stressed landscapes. The proposed project makes substantial use of advances in
remote sensing platforms and provides for potential data assimilations
mechanisms that can be readily integrated into comprehensive management and
solution systems for metropolitan regions. The integration of observational
networks and environmental curriculum at Los Angeles school districts,
facilitated through the NSF UCLA SEE-LA GK-12 program, will help foster
environmental awareness and build the foundation for an educated workforce
capable of engineering solutions and mitigating impacts. Public outreach and
education are critical to reducing the impact of humans on the Earth?s surface,
and the integrated activities proposed in this CAREER award will help build a
scientifically literate and informed citizenry, while also answering critical
water and energy demand questions for large population
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;