* 0846392
* CAREER: Analyzing and engineering multi-gene cooperation to generate cell lines for therapeutic protein production
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Clifford Wang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0846392&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectua
l Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As cell biologists, geneticists, or engineers,
one routinely over-expresses a gene in a cell, observes the cell, and compares
its behavior to the parent. Yet multiple genes, not one, often determine cell
phenotypes. One example is the sustained proliferation characteristic of
immortalized mammalian cells. A mutation that changes the expression of a single
gene or activity of a single protein rarely suffices to immortalize a cell;
instead, multiple genes generally need to be mutated. This project investigates
how multiple genes contribute to the phenotypes of immortalized cells:
proliferation, apoptosis, senescence, and serum-independent growth. This project
also aims to determine how different gene expression levels affect these
phenotypes. In other words, the experiments address both combinatorial and dose
effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
technology provides a powerful tool to generate cell lines with properties
optimized for the production of therapeutic proteins. Using this experimental
and analytical platform, this project will generate cell lines that exhibit high
proliferation rates in low serum or serum-free media. Expression of various gene
combinations will be evaluated for the ability to improve or create cell lines.
Gene candidates include known oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and cell cycle
regulators, as well as genes identified previously by retroviral mutagenesis in
mice. The long-term goal is to generate human plasma B cell lines for the
production of monoclonal antibodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty, graduate
students, and undergraduates from the Department of Chemical Engineering at
Stanford University will adopt a class of freshmen at Cupertino High School.
This class is enrolled in a program named AVID (Advancement via Individual
Determination). The program identifies students with poor class performance, but
good attendance and minimal disciplinary problems. The program has no selection
criteria based on race or gender, although the majority of students are
economically disadvantaged, underrepresented minorities who will be the first in
their families to attend college. The four-year program aims to help these
students graduate from high school and go to college.