* 0846454
* CAREER: Nano-Tip Sensor for Rapid Detection of Dissolved DNA for Environmental Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jaehyun Chung, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Nano Tip Sensor for Rapid Detection of
Dissolved DNA for Environmental Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;One of the critical challenges in environmental monitoring is
the detection of dissolved DNA rapidly. Unlike chromosomal DNA in normal cells,
the extracellular DNA dissolved in lakes or soil provides critical information
of pathogens and toxins, which is of great interest in the field of
environmental molecular biology. The current methods, however, are not able to
directly detect the dissolved DNA, which causes the loss of the pathogenic
information. The objective of the proposed research is to demonstrate a
nanostructured tip detecting dissolved DNA without amplification and
labeling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed work lies in the fundamental study about the enhancement of specific
and nonspecific binding kinetics of DNA onto a nanotip using an electric field,
surface chemistry, and capillary action. The electromechanical concentration
mechanism in conjunction with surface chemistry eliminates cumbersome sample
preparation steps and accelerates molecular binding kinetics. In addition, the
nanoscale dimension of a tip renders highly sensitive electrical detection of
low concentration DNA. This unique mechanism of a nanotip sensor allows for
molecular manipulation in terms of physical size, surface chemistry, and
electrical properties. Thus, the slight modification of the tip sensor enables
rapid screening of other bacterial cells and viral particles through immunoassay
or on?]tip enrichment. Therefore, the proposed work will cultivate a new era of
the next generation transformative technology for environmental monitoring and
disease diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Through
the proposed work an unprecedented screening system can be achieved. The
screening capability of a nanotip sensor can directly identify bacteria and
genes, which impacts environmental monitoring and disease diagnostics. Rapid
detection (e.g. 10minutes) avoids the loss of the genetic information, which
will potentially reveal the paths of DNA in ecosystem. This sensor can also be
applied to detect circulating DNA for disease diagnostics. Thus the proposed
work directly impacts healthcare monitoring. The proposed education program will
leverage the existing programs in the Mechanical Engineering (ME) Department and
the Center for Nanotechnology (CNT) at University of Washington. The educational
plan will benefit undergraduate, graduate, community college, minority, K?]12,
and foreign students through course development, a field practice for lake
water, virtual laboratory, outreach activities, and sharing plans of research
and education materials.&lt;br/&gt;