* 0846468
* CAREER: Characterizing, Understanding, and Integrating Complex Problem Solving in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2009,02/29/2016
* Kurtis Paterson, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 02/29/2016
* USD 479,975.00

This CAREER project will research how engineering students?s learn complex
problem solving. With global competitiveness and the rapid pace of technological
change, engineers must learn to adapt to complex and rapidly changing problem
solving environments as well as remain effective in innovation. Undergraduate
research and industry experiences provide a strong basis for our students to
learn these essential, problem-based, and globally competitive skills. Yet,
although such experiences offer many benefits and enable engineering students to
begin the practice of solving real-world complex problems, there are two main
pitfalls: (a) lack of research and empirical studies on students? learning
outcomes as a result of participating in these experiences, and (b) the majority
of engineering students do not get exposed to these experiences during their
undergraduate education (this is particularly true for undergraduate research
experiences, which only the best students get selected to participate in). Our
overarching goal is to characterize and understand complex problem solving in
real-world engineering settings as a means of integrating these essential
problem solving skills in engineering education settings. Guided by six research
questions, it is anticipated that: (a) classification of real-world research-
and industry-based problems will lead to a understanding and characterizing
complex problem solving domains and processes, (b) students? learning outcomes
(cognitive, affective, social, and professional) will be assessed in order to
understand how different problems enable different outcomes and cognitive
abilities, (c) innovative instruments and assessment tools, that can be
transferred across institutions, programs, departments, and experiences, will be
developed, and (d) strategies for implementing complex problem solving in
engineering education will be investigated and presented. We will employ a
mixed-methods approach to effectively classify undergraduate research and
industry problems as well as assess engineering students? learning outcomes
(including performance and achievement motivation, self-efficacy, problem
solving and critical thinking skills, professional identity, adaptive expertise
and cognitive flexibility) during these two highly promoted experiences.
Grounded on the results and findings of the research, the well-integrated
educational component will involve the development, implementation, and
evaluation of instructional material focused on transferring complex problem
solving, based on research and industry experiences, in three settings: (1)
undergraduate courses within JMU?s engineering program, (2) high school level
engineering course for female students, and (3) K-12 education focused on
students and teacher educators.&lt;br/&gt;