* 0846835
* CAREER:  Radiation Response and Stability of Nanostructured Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Lin Shao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) proposal are to discover atomic-scale details
governing nanomaterials? response to irradiation, and to explore the
possibilities of property-tuning to achieve extremely radiation tolerant
materials for high temperature reactor designs. The scientific goals of the
project are to (1) obtain a fundamental understanding about the roles of
boundaries in radiation damage development of nanograined materials; (2) study
the stability limit of boundaries under extreme radiation environments; (3)
evaluate the importance of boundary instability to defect sink efficiency; and
(4) discover the keys in nanoscale design of radiation tolerant materials. The
project will focus on SiC and T91 alloys, which represent important materials
for reactor core structures. Starting with materials synthesis with different
grain sizes, systematic ion irradiation and post irradiation characterization
will be performed. The project will use atom probe tomography to provide the
most comprehensive analysis of 3-dimensial atom distribution. Ion irradiation
and in situ transmission electron microscopy will be used to observe the
dynamics process of defect creation. &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project will
break new ground in understanding the basic physics of radiation damage in
nanoscale materials and will contribute to reliable, affordable, and clean
nuclear energy. Furthermore, the knowledge obtained through the project will
impact the fabrication and application of a wide range of devices, sensors and
detectors used in extreme radiation environments. Examples include fabrication
of nanostructured materials, which requires ion implantation for doping,
prediction of functional failures of nanoelectronics in space applications, and
development of radiation detectors in particle physics and in homeland security
applications. The project will also have broad impact with its educational and
outreach plans to (1) increase participation of undergraduate students and
minority students in emerging materials research; (2) develop curriculum for a
new Master of Science program in nuclear materials; (3) create e-learning
resources to integrate research, teaching and curriculum development, and to
promote public learning in frontiers of nuclear materials science; and (4)
develop the Center of Ion &amp; Materials Research and use it as a platform for
interdisciplinary research and teaching in ion beam related materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;