* 0846577
* CAREER:  Predictive Simulations of Dilute-Dense Multiphase Flows and Application to Mixed Avalanches
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Andreas Haselbacher, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2012
* USD 59,094.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0846577 Haselbacher

The research objective of this proposal is to use predictive simulations using
innovative numerical methods and minimal empiricism to understand the physical
processes that govern mixed flow/powder snow avalanches (MA). MA consist of a
dense core and saltation layer of large snow particles beneath a dilute
turbulent powder cloud of small snow particles. The education objectives of this
proposal are to develop an innovative course on predictive simulations in
science and engineering and to develop a simulation-based computer game to teach
fluid mechanics concepts to middle and high school kids.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed predictive simulations have the potential to
transform our understanding of dilute dense multiphase flows in general and
mixed avalanches in particular. The transformative impact of the simulations
derives from the dangerous nature of and difficulties encountered in full scale
experiments with naturally occurring or artificially triggered MA and the
limitations associated with experiments at smaller scales. The improved
understanding gained from the proposed research will result in more accurate
predictions of the size, run out lengths, and hazard maps of highly destructive
mixed avalanches and hence protect human lives and infrastructure. Dimensional
analysis is used to construct a computationally tractable model of a full scale
MA that retains the relative scaling of the important physical processes. The
predictive simulations are based on a creative and rational approach of coupling
existing simulation tools for the dense core, saltation layer, and the powder
cloud to give an innovative integrated multiphase flow simulation capability
that also greatly advances the state of the art in avalanche simulations.
Subscale simulations will be used to reduce and quantify uncertainty at the
model scale. The PI is uniquely qualified to perform the simulations given his
background in computational multiphase fluid dynamics and large scale high
performance computations. The collaboration with one of the worlds leading
institutes for research on avalanches, the Swiss Federal Institute for Avalanche
Research, ensures access to unique experimental data on full scale and model
scale avalanches to validate the integrated simulation code and assess its
predictive capability. The PI has access to resources at local and national high
performance computing centers to carry out the proposed simulations.

Broader Impacts: The integrated research and education plan described in this
proposal will have the following broad impacts. First, the innovative advanced
course on predictive simulations in science and engineering will train a new
generation of scientists and engineers in using simulations as virtual
experiments. Predictive simulations will benefit society because they allow
critical decisions to be made with confidence for systems that cannot be studied
using theory or experiments. Second, the simulation based computer game will be
developed in collaboration with science teachers from Oak View Middle School in
Newberry, FL that caters to a large percentage of financially disadvantaged
kids. The computer game will be disseminated over the Internet and has the
potential to reach a very large number of middle and high-school students,
excite them about pursuing a career in science and engineering, introduce them
to the power of predictive simulations and help provide them with the skills to
excel in tomorrows economy based on ideas. Third, an undergraduate student will
assist in the research on predictive simulations and the development of the
computer game and therefore gather valuable experience with modern computational
methods. The results obtained as part of the integrated research and education
plan will be published in the relevant literature.