* 0846533
* CAREER:  Advancing Grid Integration of Diverse Renewable Energy Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Ted Brekken, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,973.00

CAREER Proposal #0846533&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to perform the fundamental
research necessary to advance the electric power grid integration of diverse
variable renewable energy resources. The approach is separated into three tasks:
first, building the tools to describe and analyze variable renewable energy
resources; second, using those tools to model how variable renewable resources
interact with the electric power grid and discover barriers to high penetration;
third, taking the knowledge gained from the previous tasks and research means of
removing barriers to high grid-penetration of variable renewable
resources.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This research is on the
cutting edge of the challenge of matching a well-established, dispatchable-
resource, fossil fuel paradigm to a new, flexible, variable renewable power
generation paradigm. The challenges and solutions to integrating large amounts
of variable sources to the grid are not well understood. This project performs
the fundamental research necessary to understand these limitations and also
explores and creates novel, effective methods for removing these
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This research will impact the
energy systems field by discovering the advantages and challenges that lie
within large-scale renewable energy conversion and electric power generation.
The broader impacts also extend to the larger society, as increasing renewable
energy conversion and electric power generation will allow the eventual
displacement of fossil fuel based electric power generation. The engine of this
project will be the research students, who will gain a keen understanding of the
importance of renewables. The education and outreach components of this research
will disseminate information to leading educators through faculty workshops. The
public will be served through a series of free short courses and lectures on
energy issues.&lt;br/&gt;