* 0846044
* CAREER: Optimization and Design of Next-Generation Cognitive Mesh Networks: From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Bechir Hamdaoui, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* wenjing lou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 409,877.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Cognitive radios and multi-antenna systems are two recent components that each
offers a great potential for improving spectrum efficiency. The former enables
opportunistic spectrum access (OSA), while the latter enables multiple-input,
multiple-output (MIMO) capability. This project develops theoretical and
practical frameworks for wireless mesh networks when they are both MIMO-enabled
and OSA-capable.

The objective of this research is three-fold. First, it takes a bottom-up,
cross-layer approach to understand, model, and characterize the optimal end-to-
end network throughput while accounting for physical-layer limitations and link-
layer contention constraints. Second, the project develops efficient networking
algorithms by investigating new paradigms that shift away from traditional ones
to suit these OSA-capable, MIMO-enabled networks. Third, this project implements
the thus-developed techniques in a real, experimental wireless mesh network that
is built from off-the-shelf commercial components. This demonstrates both the
feasibility and the effectiveness of the developed concepts.

This project provides scientific solutions to the spectrum scarcity problem. The
results are disseminated via publications, software releases, and seminars. It
involves undergraduate students in research activities during their class and
independent study projects; (ii) creates the opportunity for K-12 and minority
students to work on real-life problems and excites them to pursue engineering
careers, and enriches teaching and learning curricula by integration into new
course development.