* 0846811
* CAREER: Multi-Scale Computational Evaluation of Wind Load on Buildings
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Girma Bitsuamlak, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 01/31/2014
* USD 400,219.00

The research objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
program project are to develop and validate new multi-scale modeling approaches
appropriate for evaluating wind loads for low- and high-rise buildings. In
particular, the project will seek to produce new computer/numerical models at
larger and smaller scales needed to characterize the approaching wind flow
specific to a particular location/terrain and to evaluate wind effects on a
building with its immediate surroundings. To define the geometry of the large-
and small-scale-numerical models, high resolution digital maps produced by
recent technology as well as computer aided design tools will be utilized. The
numerical models will be validated through detailed full-scale (by using the
Wall of Wind, a unique full-scale testing facility at Florida International
University - FIU) and model-scale wind tunnel experiments. Once validated, the
project will provide a capability for evaluating wind loads on buildings for
high wind speed cases (such as Category 4, 5 Saffir-Simpson hurricane scales).
High resolution data coupled with animation, and other visual capabilities of
the numerical model are expected to contribute to effective utilization of
complex information. The results of the project will be used to improve building
codes to advance safer, yet economical houses and for work with the insurance
industry and government to develop mitigation implementation strategies and
improved loss estimation models. It will enhance our preparedness and resiliency
to hurricanes through designing of new wind-resistant buildings and hardening of
existing house-stock.

Research results will be disseminated through web-enabled open-databases,
conference presentations, journal publications, workshops, and through our
partners such as FLASH (Federal Alliance for Safe Home) and My Safe Florida
Home. The validated computer models will be developed in an open-source
environment to facilitate further research and design studies. The project will
involve undergraduate and graduate students from various disciplines and will
provide advanced training. FIU primarily serves minorities and the project will
have tremendous impact on increasing the number of underrepresented students.