* 0846751
* CAREER: Biochemical and Biomechanical Interaction within the Endothelial Cell - Basement Membrane Co-Regulatory Unit
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Alisa Morss Clyne, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 12/31/2014
* USD 501,591.00

0846751 A. Morss-Clyne

Endothelial cell injury is considered the initiating event in atherosclerotic
plaque development and cardiovascular disease, the leading cause of mortality in
the United States. In a healthy blood vessel, endothelial cells regulate
vascular function in a complex three-dimensional environment. Cells dynamically
integrate biochemical and mechanical stimulation from the flowing blood at their
apical surface and the basement membrane at their basolateral surface.
Disruptions in the biochemical environment, such as elevated glucose, and
disturbances in the mechanical environment, such as low shear stress, contribute
to endothelial cell dysfunction and subsequent cardiovascular disease. People
with diabetes develop accelerated atherosclerosis at low shear stress locations,
suggesting that biochemistry and biomechanics may interact through common
signaling pathways.

The research objective of this project is to use glucose-induced alterations in
endothelial cells and basement membrane to investigate integrated biochemical
(growth factor) and biomechanical (shear stress) interactions within the
endothelial cell basement membrane co-regulatory unit. This research will be
conducted in a three-dimensional experimental system, in which shear stress can
be applied to endothelial cell populations (microfluidics) or single cells
(dielectrophoretic device) on defined basement membrane substrates.

This research integrates biochemistry and biomechanics in the vascular wall. The
project will develop quantitative relationships describing how growth factors
are regulated in mechanical conditions, how basement membrane properties are
altered by shear stress and high glucose, and how these basement membrane
changes affect the endothelial cell mechanical response. Understanding of
integrated, three-dimensional vascular biology will be enhanced, and this new
knowledge can then be used to develop targeted pharmaceutical therapies that
decrease cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, this integrative
model of cell and extracellular matrix can be translated across diverse cell
types to improve the physiological relevance of a wide variety of in vitro
studies. In the United States, cardiovascular disease accounts for 65% of deaths
in people with diabetes. With diabetes prevalence and disease duration on the
rise, research into the pathophysiology of cardiovascular disease and diabetes
could alleviate this predicted healthcare burden.

The PI will integrate research with educational programs that explore current
challenges at the interface of engineering and life sciences and create
connections among students, faculty, and the community. The educational
objective of this project is to inspire students, especially women and
underrepresented minorities, to explore engineering careers by providing
biomedical discovery opportunities coupled with intergenerational mentoring.
Outreach programs will use one of the most fascinating engineering systems, the
human body, to demonstrate to students from diverse backgrounds how engineers
can help solve societal challenges.