* 0846898
* CAREER: InN nanowire based multifunctional nanocantilever sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,10/31/2015
* Goutam Koley, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2015
* USD 612,998.00

CAREER: InN nanowire based multifunctional nanocantilever
sensors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER research is to design,
fabricate, and utilize InN nanowire (NW) based multifunctional V-shaped
nanocantilever (VNC) sensors for detection of analyte molecules in ambient
conditions, and investigation of electrical signal propagation in neurons. The
approach to attain this goal involves: (i) Design, growth, and characterization
of V-shaped InN NWs, (ii) Fabrication of VNC sensor arrays utilizing the
V-shaped NWs, (iii) Investigation of structural and electromechanical properties
of the VNCs, (iv) Multimodal molecular detection using the VNC sensors, and (v)
Investigation of electrical signal propagation in neurons. Success of this
project will lead to the development of technologies that can have overarching
impacts in the diverse fields of defense, homeland security, environmental
monitoring, medical diagnosis, drug discovery, scanning probe microscopy, and
neuro-medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project activities
are anticipated to lead to the development of a viable and inexpensive
fabrication approach for NEMS sensors that at present relies heavily on
expensive electron-beam or ion-beam lithography. The novel transduction method
based on deflection induced gating offers an innovative solution that addresses
the critical issues of scalability and large scale integration in MEMS based
integrated circuits. The multimodal detection technique to be utilized in this
project can significantly enhance the reliability of analyte detection scheme.
With their small size, low power consumption, and high sensitivity, the VNC
sensors can be easily integrated with emerging technologies such as energy
harvesting and radio frequency identification devices giving rise to
miniaturized next generation systems and components capable of working remotely
over very long durations. The approach for the measurement of electrical signals
in neurons using an array of VNC probes can lead to significant advancement of
neurology and neuro-science, by opening up non-traditional means for rapid and
nanoscale characterization of neuronal signal propagation in-vivo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In the educational and outreach
activities, the PI plans to involve at least one undergraduate and one high
school student to work on this project every year throughout its duration.
Separately, he will also recruit one minority high school or undergraduate
student to work on the project by participating in the SCAMP program of the
university. The project activities entail collaborative and interdisciplinary
research between one science and three engineering departments, which will
significantly broaden the scientific and technical knowledge of all the students
involved. The research results and activities will be disseminated to a broader
audience through lectures in the South Carolina Citizen?s School of
Nanotechnology program, development of a research website, and development of a
graduate course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;