* 0846331
* CAREER: A Unified Framework for the VLSI Design of Algebraic Soft-decision Reed-Solomon Decoder
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Xinmiao Zhang, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 01/31/2014
* USD 434,882.00

The objective of this research is to first design efficient very large-scale
integrated (VLSI) system architectures for algebraic soft-decision Reed-Solomon
decoders. Then, through studying how the architectures change with design
parameters, further optimizations will be carried out to develop a unified
framework for the VLSI design of algebraic soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoders.
The approach is to optimize the decoding algorithms and VLSI architectures
interactively, such that the most efficient decoder architecture can be designed
for given application requirements.

With respect to intellectual merit, the proposed research serves as a bridge
connecting advanced theory and practice. The key potential for innovation in
this research is the delicate interplay among algorithmic transformations and
novel VLSI design techniques. Unlike traditional design approaches in which the
VLSI architectures are determined by the algorithms, interactive algorithmic and
architectural optimizations will be employed. Particularly, the feedback from
the VLSI design level to the algorithmic level are critical to achieving the
most efficient designs and developing an optimized framework. Addressing the
challenging tasks in this project requires combined expertise in coding theory,
digital communications and VLSI design.

With respect to broader impacts, the proposed research could potentially
revolutionize digital communication and storage systems. The design techniques
to be developed can be also extrapolated to the implementation of other advanced
algorithms. The proposed research will be integrated into education through
developing dynamic course work, involving both undergraduate and graduate
students in research, and promoting engineering to middle and high school
students. In addition, the participation of students from underrepresented
groups in engineering will be increased by recruiting and retaining women.