* 0846629
* PECASE:  Microstructure and Processing of Cylindrical Nanomaterial Dispersions
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Virginia Davis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2015
* USD 411,735.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to acquire in depth, scientific understanding of the relationships between
microstructure, processing and properties for macroscale materials produced from
model cylindrical nanomaterial dispersions. Cylindrical nanomaterials are a
particularly exciting new class of materials because they can be produced from
many chemical elements; this enables a wide range of potential properties and
applications. It has never before been possible to investigate systems with such
large rod lengths, wide range of length to diameter ratios, high rigidity, and
potential for large long-range interactions. The potential liquid crystalline
phase behavior of the cylindrical nanomaterial dispersions will be investigated
as a function of temperature, nanomaterial dimensions, and solvent interactions.
Changes in dispersion morphology and alignment in response to shear will also be
explored. This information will be used to optimize the bottom-up assembly of
solid macroscopic films and fibers comprised of cylindrical nanomaterial
building blocks. The research plan includes collaboration with Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique in Bourdeaux
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide a basis for controlling the alignment and distribution of
cylindrical nanomaterials during the production of advanced macroscopic
materials. Potential applications include macroelectronic devices, sensors,
electro-optical devices, and antimicrobial coatings. The interdisciplinary
education of undergraduate and graduate researchers is an integral part of
achieving the research goals. As part of this CAREER plan, the PI will develop
fun and rewarding experiences that encourage students to choose and persist in
science and engineering majors. These activities include mentoring undergraduate
researchers and facilitating the educational and career development of students
from underrepresented groups. In addition, nanotechnology outreach activities
will be incorporated into science camps for middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Materials Processing &amp;
Manufacturing Program, of the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation
Division and by the Office of International Science and Engineering.