* 0846183
* CAREER:  In Situ Constraints on Nocturnal Nitrogen Oxide Chemistry in Forested and Marine Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Joel Thornton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2014
* USD 845,385.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project
are to elucidate the mechanisms and importance of nocturnal nitrogen oxide
chemistry in the polluted marine boundary layer (MBL) and rural forests via
field observations, laboratory studies, and modeling. Simultaneous, in situ,
measurements of dinitrogen pentoxide (N2O5) and nitryl chloride (ClNO2)
concentrations will be made during two MBL field campaigns to develop a detailed
understanding of ClNO2 production by N2O5, with special attention paid to ship
plume chemistry. In these MBL campaigns, and in an additional campaign in a
rural California pine forest, a newly developed, field-deployable apparatus will
provide the first direct in situ measurements of N2O5 and NO3 reactivity.
Detailed gas-aerosol chemistry box modeling will be performed to test hypotheses
of ClNO2 production mechanisms, and to explore the impacts of this chlorine atom
source on the chemistry of coastal and remote marine
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan aims to inspire and engage
University of Washington (UW) undergraduates, Native American high school
students, and K-12 teachers in the appreciation and practice of Earth system
science. A campaign will take place on Makah tribal lands adjacent to Olympic
National Park, in which Makah high school seniors will be partnered with UW
undergraduates in the collection and analysis of Puget Sound ship traffic and
its connection to air quality. The data will be integrated into inquiry-based
analysis exercises for two undergraduate-level atmospheric chemistry courses.
The principal investigator will also work with the Olympic Park Institute to
develop curriculum materials for use in their K-12 teacher training programs.