* 0846233
* EAR-PF: Extracting the wind component of climate during the Marinoan glaciation from the aeolian rock record
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ryan Ewing, Ewing                   Ryan           C
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ryan Ewing has been granted an NSF
Earth Sciences postdoctoral fellowship to develop an integrated program of
research and education at the Princeton University and California Institute of
Technology. This intensive field study will provide, for the first time, a
detailed and complete sedimentological and stratigraphic characterization of the
two, largest-known, Marinoan age aeolian-depositional successions (~635 Ma), the
Bakoye Group in Mali, West Africa and the Whyalla Sandstone in Australia. The
objective of this investigation is to establish robust geological evidence of
the wind fields during the Marinoan glaciation at each locality; thus, revealing
important evidence for atmospheric circulation patterns that directly relate to
the extreme climatic events thought to have occurred at this time. This study
also addresses what prevailing geologic, climatic and eustatic conditions,
related to the development of an aeolian sediment supply and transporting winds,
existed that led to the creation of dune-fields, and the accumulation and
preservation of these aeolian deposits. This work will serve to improve
paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic models aimed at understanding climatic
change during this interval in Earth's history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ewing
will develop and lead aeolian-related curriculum for undergraduate classroom and
field courses, and directly involve an undergraduate student in his field work.
In addition, Ewing will develop a publicly available GIS database of paleowind
proxies that will provide descriptions of recent and ancient aeolian deposits
and will pair the wind data with paleogeographic reconstructions to show
paleowind regimes through Earth's history.