* 0846241
* CAREER:  Elucidating Structures of Charge Traps in Organic Photovoltaic Materials Using Ultrafast 2D IR Spectroelectrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* John Asbury, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2015
* USD 624,000.00

In this award funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor John B. Asbury of the Pennsylvania State
University will use two-dimensional infrared spectroelectrochemistry to study
the molecular structures of defects in organic electronic materials. When
electrons or positively charged carriers (termed holes) become trapped at
defects in organic electronic materials, the electrical functionality of the
materials is significantly reduced. The research funded by this award will use
the dynamics of molecular vibrations in conjunction with their frequencies to
elucidate the structures of defects in organic photovoltaic materials. In
particular, defects will be charged electrochemically allowing them to be
examined with two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy. The vibrational dynamics
and 2D line shapes of charged defects will be compared to the corresponding
features of the neutral materials for which structural assignments are known,
thus facilitating structural elucidation of the defects. This approach will be
used to establish predictive relationships among the structural and electrical
characteristics and the corresponding defect structures and energetic
distributions in organic photovoltaic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of two-dimensional
infrared spectroscopy as an analytical tool to examine defects will impact the
organic electronics field by developing predictive structure-property
relationships. Knowledge of these relationships will guide the rational design
of organic photovoltaic materials that resist the formation of or are tolerant
to defects, leading to the development of inexpensive solid state solar cells
with greater than 10% power conversion efficiency. The understanding of charged
defects will also facilitate the development of inexpensive lighting and display
technologies based on organic electronic materials. The interdisciplinary nature
of the research program will stimulate graduate and undergraduate researchers to
work at the interface of ultrafast spectroscopy and materials disciplines. The
educational plan is firmly rooted in the recommendations of the National
Academies for enhancing the science and technology enterprise in the United
States. Special emphasis is placed on targeting secondary school science
education by involving in-service high school teachers in the research program
supported by this award and by developing summer curricula for students from
under-performing high schools through the Upward Bound Math and Science program
of the U.S. Department of Education.