* 0846961
* CAREER: A Probe-less Large-array Protein Sensor via MEMS Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Junseok Chae, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 09/30/2015
* USD 406,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to tackle fundamental
issues in the use of molecular probe in biosensors and implement a micro-
packaging via MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems) technology. The approach
is to use nature?s competitive adsorption phenomena, namely the Vroman effect,
which describes how low molecular weight proteins adsorbed on a surface are
displaced and exchanged by subsequently higher molecular weight proteins. The
biosensors are encapsulated in both chip-level and wafer-level using MEMS
technology.&lt;br/&gt;Existing MEMS-based biosensors have extremely high
sensitivity. To achieve high selectivity, however, they use molecular probes
such as nucleic acids, enzymes, and antibodies and are attached to transducer
surfaces to capture specific target molecules. However, these probes impose many
limitations: expensive reagents, highly-educated technicians to operate, and
above all it is impossible to find probes for all target molecules. The proposed
research tackles these issues by leveraging nature?s competitive
adsorption/exchange phenomena, the Vroman effect. By having a large array of
different surfaces that are covered by proteins of known size, it is possible to
have a miniaturized protein sensor without using molecular probes.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed probe-less biosensor is a new concept, which can lead to new research
areas in instruments for biological research. The generic feature of the micro-
packaging methodology can be used for other types of MEMS-based devices. The
educational activities range from K-12 students and teachers to college students
including under-represented minorities and women. Students will experience
experiments to understand fundamentals of proteins via the ?YES! Summer Program?
at Arizona State University.&lt;br/&gt;