* 0846024
* CAREER:  Health Bridge:  Motivating Personal Health Record Adoption by Low -Income Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Katie Siek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2015
* USD 608,962.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The increase in obesity and related chronic illnesses has
motivated academic, government, and commercial sectors to address this epidemic.
Assistive technology interventions provide an inexpensive method to disseminate
information, track health metrics, and give personalized feedback on outcomes
for individuals. However the effectiveness of these interventions is limited for
low-income communities because the interventions have been designed with little
consideration for the social and environmental context of health-related
behaviors. Personal Health Records (PHRs) can assist individuals receive
personalized feedback and authoritative health information, but have not been
widely adopted because of privacy, usability, and updating issues. The research
objectives of this proposal are to discover how to integrate PHRs into everyday
life and empower individuals to confidently secure their PHR data with privacy
interfaces. The research is relies upon community-based, iterative,
participatory design activities including contextual interviews, design
workshops, shadowing, and iterative evaluation of prototypes to develop a
integrative PHR framework called Health Bridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research supporting Health Bridge includes community building, curriculum
design, and K-12 outreach activities. Research methodology and results will be
integrated into the PI?s established health related course and specialized
undergraduate curriculum in health related informatics. In addition, the PI and
her students will help increase the pipeline of future informaticians by
developing outreach materials that will be distributed by the National Center
for Women &amp; IT and the Computer Science Teachers Association Roadshow
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;