* 0846471
* CAREER: Improving Postural Balance and Rehabilitation Outcomes Using Vibrotactile Sensory Substitution
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Kathleen Sienko, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2015
* USD 492,374.00

0846471&lt;br/&gt;Sienko&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and Education Objectives: Balance
impairments affect a large population of individuals including the elderly and
those with vestibular deficit, peripheral neuropathy, traumatic brain injury,
and stroke. Recognizing this reduced quality of life, the goals of this research
are: 1) To design and build a sensory substitution technology platform to
augment current balance rehabilitation best practices, 2) To assess the
capability of sensory substitution to improve stability during locomotor
activities, 3) To evaluate the cognitive workload associated with attending to
information provided by a sensory substitution device, 4) To determine the
effect of vibrotactile feedback on fall prevention, and 5) To examine whether or
not a patient can retain improvements in balance following training with sensory
substitution technology. Balance-impaired populations including vestibular,
vestibular secondary to traumatic brain injury, stroke, and the elderly will be
tested in collaboration with colleagues at the University of Michigan,
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Northwestern University, and Walter Reed
Army Medical Center. This research proposes to investigate the mechanisms that
govern standing and locomotor responses to vibrotactile sensory substitution
while emphasizing co-creation with both the prospective patient population and
those administering rehabilitation (physical therapists in most cases)
throughout the design process. The study and implementation of this co-creation
process will be pursued further through an integrated educational program that
examines medical device co-creation in a broader context of global health. To
this end, the PI will implement a Global Health Design Minor in the University
of Michigan's College of Engineering; this minor will include an Immersion
Experience in which students travel to the developing world to learn the process
of co-creation by working with and directly assessing the needs of end users,
followed by a two-course capstone design sequence in which these experiences are
translated into medical device designs than can more realistically achieve
broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: While prior work by the
PI and others has suggested that vibrotactile feedback can significantly improve
balance during stance, its application in improving balance during gait remains
for the most part unexplored, as does its efficacy as a rehabilitation tool for
balance-impaired individuals. A major obstacle standing in the way of its use
for these critical applications is the current lack of knowledge regarding the
biomechanical parameters best suited for vibrotactile feedback during
locomotion. This research will focus on uncovering feedback variables and
vibrotactile display strategies that can improve both stability during gait and
balance rehabilitation outcomes. For example, the device will have the unique
capability to display vibrotactile feedback of gait velocity, stride length, and
gaze-three important variables that therapists qualitatively use to correct
vestibulopathic gait. The knowledge gained from these studies will be useful not
only for vibrotactile feedback but also for the broad range of sensory
substitution devices aimed at overcoming balance deficits.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Ultimately, it is the goal of this research to provide scientific
justification and device development for an ergonomic, affordable, wearable
sensory substitution prototype that would enable balance-impaired individuals to
perform activities of daily living and improve their quality of life. In a
rehabilitation setting, the device has the potential to impact both the rate of
recovery of balance function and the extent to which recovery is achieved by
providing continuous information about body motion that corroborates verbal and
tactile feedback provided by therapists. The broader impacts of the educational
plan emphasizing co-creation of medical technologies for global health include
the development of affordable medical devices for the U.S. and developing world,
the education of undergraduate and graduate students in the necessity of
incorporating end-user input during engineering design, and the dissemination of
global health issues to a broad audience.