* 0846063
* CAREER:  Mobile and Ubiquitous Computing Technologies for Young Children with Chronic Health Conditions
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Gillian Hayes, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2015
* USD 560,898.00

An emergent area of impact and significance is the application of mobile and
ubiquitous computing technologies to chronic healthcare. The long-lasting nature
of chronic medical conditions makes record-keeping and long-term analysis of
diagnostic and evaluative measures extremely important and challenging. Capture
and access technologies, i.e., ubiquitous computing technologies that enable
recording and access to recorded data, are particularly promising for monitoring
the effectiveness of interventions for chronic conditions. Health and behavioral
data can be captured, analyzed, and mined over time, providing valuable evidence
for tracking the progress of interventions. This research will examine the role
that novel mobile and ubiquitous computing technologies can play in record-
keeping for chronic care of young children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this research addresses three major challenges. First, technological
interventions must be developed that support better record keeping and
associated visualization and hypothesis testing to allow caregivers to
understand the impacts of their pharmaceutical and behavioral interventions.
Second, these interventions must be understood in the short-term to support
testing of clinical efficacy and also over the lifetime of these patients whose
chronic conditions can span several decades. Third, the focus of these
technologies must be not only on capturing and allowing access to appropriate
data but also in accomplishing these goals while easing the extensive burden on
families. &lt;br/&gt;