* 0846449
* CAREER:  Impact of Liquefaction-Induced Water Layers on Forward and Inverse Geoengineering Analyses
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Scott Olson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 404,469.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is evaluate water layer evolution during seismic shaking, as well as its impact
on engineered structures. Ground failures related to liquefaction (e.g., lateral
spreads, building settlement/tilting, floating of buried structures, flow
slides) represent a significant and growing source of economic loss resulting
from earthquakes. These failures damage nearly all forms of infrastructure,
including lifeline and transportation facilities, building foundations, dams and
levees, and waterfront structures. Understanding and mitigating these
consequences is critical to maintaining resiliency following a major earthquake.
However, some studies show that discrete layers of water may form within the
subsurface during earthquakes, and these poorly understood ?water layers? may be
responsible for a significant percentage of infrastructure damage. Therefore, it
is imperative that the geo-profession answer questions such as: How and where do
water layers form during earthquakes? If water layers form, how persistent and
continuous are they? How do water layers influence engineering structures and
our interpretation of prehistoric earthquakes? To answer these questions, an
integrated field, laboratory, and centrifuge study will be undertaken to
evaluate water layer evolution during seismic shaking, as well as its impact on
engineered structures. The field studies will search for water layer signatures
by examining numerous liquefaction sites in central and southern California and
paleoliquefaction sites in the New Madrid and Wabash Valley seismic zones that
are conducive to forming water layers during (or after) shaking. The laboratory
and centrifuge studies will evaluate water layer formation under a wider variety
of controlled conditions. The educational plan focuses on building engineering
judgment in students through an ?integrated problem assessment? approach that
involves fusing hands-on demonstrations (employing the laboratory equipment
constructed for this project), expert-based forums, problem-based learning,
cooperative learning, and creative thinking with traditional lectures and
discussions. This integrated approach will better prepare students for
engineering practice, where working in teams with experts from multiple
disciplines to develop creative engineering solutions is commonplace. The
broader impacts from this study include: (1) reducing economic losses related to
earthquakes by developing tools to assess water layer formation so that proper
mitigation measures can be adopted; (2) providing fundamental input to seismic
hazard analysis in regions of the United States (such as the central and eastern
U.S.) where paleoliquefaction studies provide the primary basis for these
analyses; and (3) developing a new breed of engineers and students who blend
expertise from multiple disciplines (including geotechnical engineering,
earthquake engineering, engineering geology, engineering seismology,
sedimentology, hydrology, and engineering mechanics) using ?engineering
judgment? and ?integrated problem assessment? to address geohazards and mitigate
their impacts.