* 0846744
* CAREER: Fabrication of Surface Modified Hydroxyapatite Nanofibers and their Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Hao Li, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2014
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to develop an integrated
educational and research foundation to explore biomimetic nanocomposites
containing ultra-long hydroxyapatite nanofibers for biomedical, especially
orthopedic, applications. The main objective is to fabricate surface modified
ultra-long hydroxyapatite nanofibers and fabricate and evaluate the composites
containing these nanofibers. It is expected the long nanofibers are very strong
and can also provide good reinforcing effects. The research tasks include a)
development of nanofabrication techniques for hydroxyapatite nanofibers with
length up to several millimeters by combining biomimetic and engineering
approaches, b) surface modification of the nanofibers, and c) fabrication and
mechanical and biological evaluation of the resulting nanocomposites for
orthopedic applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will make
great contributions to fundamental understanding of biomineralization and
biomimetic nanofabrication, and also enhance the infrastructure critical to
future fabrication of one dimensional inorganic nanofillers and their
nanocomposites. The proposed research may also provide a disruptive technology
that may eventually lead to non-metal orthopedic implants suitable for load
bearing applications, which may benefit millions of Americans with osteoporosis
or at risk. Furthermore, the proposed educational and outreach efforts are
designed to: 1) introduce graduate and undergraduate students to the basic scope
and frontiers of nanomanufacturing and nanocomposites and educate more engineers
with a multidisciplinary background; 2) actively involve underrepresented groups
in laboratory research; and 3) promote the public awareness of nanotechnology
and enhance the public image of engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;