* 0846727
* 2009 Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Plant Genomes, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

The 2009 Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Plant Genomes is the seventh in a
series of biennial scientific conferences on plant genomes. The meeting will
focus on functional and evolutionary genomics in a diverse range of plants, and
will explore themes and technologies from other genomes, including those of
animals and fungi. The conference is intended to provide a forum at which to
review progress in genome analysis of the major plant groups and to determine
the similarities and differences in genome structure, composition, and function
of the major groups of experimental and crop plants. A key feature of the
seventh meeting is the explicit focus on genes, networks, and applications. The
conference will include a diverse array of topics including sessions on (1)
celebrating the maize genome; 2) hybrids and heterosis; 3) genomes, plants and
microbes; 4) innovative phenotyping; 5) integrating omics/iPlant; 6) models; and
7) evolution inside and outside the lab. Keynote talks will highlight progress
on the 12 Drosophila genomes and transcriptional network evolution. Finally, a
workshop will facilitate discussion of plant genomes and the progress towards
the Arabidopsis 2010 goals. Attendance at this conference is expected to fall
between 150 and 200 international scientists, including graduate students,
postdoctoral workers, and principal investigators. The intellectual merits of
this conference include the opportunity for investigators at all stages of their
scientific careers to share and discuss their latest results and concepts. The
informal peer review that occurs during both talks and poster sessions is
invaluable, as it provides rapid feedback that can steer and accelerate future
research. This conference also provides ample opportunity for learning and for
building collaborations, as no sessions are held in parallel, and thus all
attendees share a common experience, while the secluded venue maximizes the
likelihood of productive scientific exchange. Several aspects of this conference
have a particularly broad impact. One is the active participation of younger
scientists, who particularly benefit from the opportunity to present their
latest ideas. Another is the conference archive, which allows participants to
share aspects of the conference with their colleagues who were unable to attend,
while protecting the rights of authors who present unpublished research.