* 0846919
* CAREER: Silicon Optomechanics - Harnessing Light Force in Integrated Silicon Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Hong Tang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Silicon Optomechanics - Harnessing Light Force in Integrated Silicon
Photonics &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The objective of this proposal is to
harness optical force on a silicon platform for building silicon optomechanics.
Specifically, we will exploit waveguide gradient forces as the fundamental
mechanism for operating optomechanical devices. We will also develop novel on-
chip photonic interferometry for precision motion readout and investigate new
classical and quantum optomechanics arising from strongly coupled optomechanical
systems. Novel device applications enabled by this new device system will be
explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Harnessing and controlling
optical force on a chip will lead to the convergence of two important fields:
nanophotonics and nanomechanics. It will also bring transformative advances in
both photonics and nanoelectromechanical systems. Our approach has the potential
to provide a new fundamental tool for silicon photonics, as well as new
nanomechanical actuation and readout scheme for NEMS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Translating the seemingly small yet
fundamentally important phenomenon into an engineering reality will
significantly impact not only the sciences and engineering but also society. The
application of optical forces, as described here, could provide a prime example
for the application of fundamental science in today's highly-developed
technology-driven world, and motivate anyone who is interested in studying
nanoscale science and engineering. The educational plan addresses new curriculum
development in nanotechnology by creating hands-on lab modules. The knowledge
gained through this project will be disseminated through a plurality of widely
accepted multimedia platforms designed for outreach to the local high schools,
the New Haven area community colleges, and further to the general public.