* 0846589
* CAREER: Next Generation Multifunctional Composites for Radiations and Impact Hazards Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Marwan Al-Haik, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project will study hybrid, multifunctional composites using surface
grown carbon nanotubes on carbon fibers yarns. The resulting hybrid composites
offer better alternatives to both fiber reinforced composite and carbon
nanotubes based composites. The multiscale reinforcement offers an opportunity
to place nanotubes in advantageous areas of the composite where conventional
fiber architectures are inadequate. For radiation shielding the polymer matrix
will provide resistance to high energy nuclear particles and the surface-grown
carbon nanotubes will minimize the degradation of the overall structural
properties of the hybrid composite. Moreover, the high electrical conductivities
of carbon nanotubes will provide desirable electromagnetic shielding. This work
will verify, through experiments and multiscale simulations, the impact
resistance and the shielding effectiveness capabilities of the hybrid composites
against high energy particles. This transformative research will pave the road
for hybrid multifunctional composites with strength, toughness, and
deformability higher than currently available polymer composites. Hybrid
composites will enable significant protection against impact/blast events and
will offer effective shielding against high energy particles radiation,
lightning and EMI shielding from high power transmitters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides education and training components to
engineering students through integrating research modules in the
graduate/undergraduate courses. Five graduate students will participate in the
synthesis, fabrication characterization, mechanical testing, irradiation and
simulation of the hybrid composites toward their graduate degrees. Participating
students will broaden their knowledge through active collaboration with
intensive research institutes and a National Lab. The outreach plans offers
summer teaching and training program to students in the Southwest Indian
Polytechnic Institute.