* 0846504
* CAREER: Novel Ceramic Nanocomposites with Smart Interface Design
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2016
* Haiyan Wang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The CAREER program explores the fundamental interface
control in ceramic nanocomposite thin films which allow the design of
nanostructures with new or significantly improved materials properties. This
study will have direct impact on processing high temperature superconductor
(HTS) YBa2Cu3O7-Ã¤ (YBCO)-coated conductors with high critical current density in
both self-field and in-field for many envisioned applications. The fundamental
knowledge gained will also illuminate the interfacial phenomena observed in many
other ceramic nanocomposite systems with heterogeneous interfaces, such as
microelectronic and optoelectronic devices, thin film solid oxide fuel cells
(SOFC), thin film solar cells and etc.. The research program will integrate with
the following educational objectives: (1) to develop a teaching model "The Art
of Laying Apples" for the PI's thin film classes; (2) to offer a
multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students at Texas
A&amp;M University (TAMU), and at Los Alamos National Laboratory and the
University of Houston through collaboration; and (3) to disseminate the research
results to a much broader audience by (a) involving high school teachers in the
research project through a summer research program at TAMU; and (b) involving
under-represented groups into materials science and engineering through the
Women Engineering Forum and the Women Mentor Program at TAMU and the Los Alamos
Summer School (LASS) at the University of New
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This CAREER project
addresses fundamental materials science research on the synthesis,
characterization and engineering of heterogeneous interfaces in epitaxial
ceramic nanocomposites. This project explores misfit dislocations and associated
defects commonly observed at heteroepitaxial interfaces in ceramic
nanocomposites, and studies their impacts on material functionalities. The
material systems selected for this study are nanolayered and nanoparticle-doped
YBCO. The goal is to understand interface control in epitaxial nanocomposite
ceramic thin films, with the objective to engineer the interfaces for unique
functionalities. First, a thorough microstructural characterization will be
performed on nanolayered systems where strong interfacial effects have already
been observed. A combination of various atomic-scale characterization tools
including high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy
(EELS) analysis will be employed to identify misfit dislocations and associated
defects at the interfaces. Second, a systematic study to correlate the misfit
dislocation density and the flux-pinning property will be conducted on YBCO
nanocomposite thin films. Finally, a novel 2D ordered nanoparticle array
confined by the 2D misfit dislocation array is proposed. All the YBCO
nanocomposite thin films will be prepared by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) at
TAMU. Various characterization techniques, such as high resolution XRD, TEM
(combined with STEM and EELS compositional analysis), as well as transport
property measurements will be utilized to investigate the structural and flux-
pinning properties of these YBCO nanocomposite systems.