* 0846004
* CAREER: Deterministic Shared Memory Multiprocessing: Vision, Architecture, and Impact on Programmability
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Luis Ceze, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 02/29/2016
* USD 558,938.00

Software innovation typically relies on performance improvements
of&lt;br/&gt;the underlying hardware. However, technology limitations
hinder&lt;br/&gt;further significant progress in single-thread performance.
Therefore,&lt;br/&gt;the software industry has the immense problem of rethinking
its&lt;br/&gt;software development process and techniques to adopt
multicore&lt;br/&gt;systems. Popularizing parallel programming is a Grand
Research&lt;br/&gt;Challenge for the systems community [CRA]. Being able to
leverage the&lt;br/&gt;full potential of multicores would put us back into
exponential growth&lt;br/&gt;of usable performance as well as lead to
significant power savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main reasons why
parallel programming is hard is that&lt;br/&gt;parallel code in current
multicore systems can execute&lt;br/&gt;nondeterministically. Each time a
multicore executes a parallel&lt;br/&gt;application, it can produce a different
output even if supplied with&lt;br/&gt;the same input. This frustrates debugging
efforts and limits the&lt;br/&gt;ability to properly test parallel code,
becoming a major obstacle to&lt;br/&gt;widespread adoption of parallel
programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project poses broad intellectual
questions with far-reaching&lt;br/&gt;implications in modern computer systems:
Can nondeterminism be removed&lt;br/&gt;from shared-memory multiprocessor
systems without degrading&lt;br/&gt;performance? What are the trade-offs in
designing deterministic&lt;br/&gt;multiprocessor systems? What are the
implications and uses of&lt;br/&gt;deterministic behavior in programmability?
The PI plans to answer these&lt;br/&gt;questions by devising efficient, general
purpose, fully deterministic&lt;br/&gt;shared memory multiprocessor systems and
demonstrating that they can&lt;br/&gt;enable significant changes in how parallel
programs are written,&lt;br/&gt;tested and deployed. An integral part of the
concurrency challenge is&lt;br/&gt;education, so this project also aims to
develop a graduate and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate curriculum that will teach
students about concurrency&lt;br/&gt;principles and practical parallel
programming.