* 0846444
* CAREER: Fundamental Insights into Deformation of Lightweight Alloys from Discovery-Class Atomistic Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Srinivasan Srivilliputhur, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objective of this award is to understand deformation science in
ultralight, single-crystal, hexagonal close-packed magnesium-lithium (Mg-Li)
alloys by using the state-of-the-art atomistic simulation methods such as
accelerated molecular dynamics (AMD). While the conventional molecular dynamics
technique allows us to study deformation mechanisms in materials over nano-
second timescales, AMD and other techniques allow study of large material
systems containing important microstructural defects over experimentally
relevant time scales. In many instances, the experimentally relevant timescales
are at least six orders of magnitude larger than molecular dynamics time scales.
In pursuit of this goal, we will explore some fundamental problems associated
with defect interactions at the microstructural length scale and clarify fatigue
processes in Mg-Li alloys using computational modeling. Deliverables include a
catalog of fundamental components and basic mechanisms, modeling and analysis
tools developed for this work, documentation of research results, student
education, and research experiences for graduate and undergraduate students. Mg
is about two-thirds as dense as aluminum. Replacing many automobile components
with Mg alloys will reduce automobile weight, decrease the fuel consumption by
about 30%, and cut down carbon-dioxide emission substantially. Li is the
lightest metal known and it dissolves extensively in Mg. Thus, alloying Mg with
Li can produce revolutionary, lightest weight structural alloys if we overcome
fundamental issues such as instability of its room temperature mechanical
properties. Our work will shed light in this important area. Other areas of
impact include bridging the knowledge-divide between sighted and blind students
through a digital library for the blind students, increasing the participation
of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in research, enhancing
research and education experiences for student researchers through collaboration
with our colleagues at national laboratories, conference presentations, and
journal publications, and disseminating state-of-the-art research tools like AMD
into the classroom curriculum rapidly.