* 0846132
* CAREER:   Protein Interactions and Conformational Changes in Fibronectin Fibril Formation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Klara Briknarova, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2015
* USD 788,199.00

These studies will provide insight into molecular interactions and
conformational changes that are involved in conversion of a soluble protein,
fibronectin, to insoluble fibrils of the extracellular matrix. The conversion as
well as its product is, despite years of research effort, still poorly
understood. This is mainly due to the lack of control over the conversion, and
the difficulties that are associated with investigations of the resulting
heterogeneous aggregates. The project will take advantage of an experimentally
more tractable model system that employs a small fragment of fibronectin, termed
anastellin. Anastellin binds to soluble fibronectin and converts it to an
insoluble form that morphologically and functionally resembles fibronectin
fibrils deposited by cells. The binding sites for anastellin in fibronectin
include the first through third and the eleventh type III (FN3) domains. To
investigate the structure and dynamics of the complexes between anastellin and
its target FN3 domains, hydrogen/deuterium exchange, relaxation dispersion
experiments, proteolysis and truncations will be used in conjunction with
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. These
studies will elucidate the molecular basis of the interactions that play key
roles in this model assembly process, and characterize how unfolding of the
interacting FN3 domains contributes to fibril formation. Based on the observed
structural and dynamic changes in FN3 domains that are induced by anastellin
binding, a model will be formulated for assembly of fibronectin aggregates. In
addition, a novel method that will hinder aggregation of proteins during
solution state NMR experiments will be developed and tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research will help to
elucidate how molecular interactions and conformational changes lead to
conversion of soluble fibronectin to insoluble fibrils. In addition, a new
method will be developed for investigations of aggregation-prone proteins by
solution state NMR experiments. These studies will provide unique opportunities
for graduate, undergraduate and high school students to get involved in
biochemical and structural biology research. Special emphasis will be placed on
recruitment of Native American students. The principal investigator will also
develop a seminar for freshmen that will discuss exciting biological discoveries
that center on proteins. This seminar will aim to inspire and motivate first
year students in order to increase their retention. In addition it will provide
an excellent opportunity to get students interested in biochemical research
early on during their studies. Finally, the principal investigator will
introduce biochemical applications into an undergraduate physical chemistry
course for non-majors in order to expose a broader audience of students to this
interesting subject.