* 0846660
* CAREER: Quantitative Phase Imaging of Cells and Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Gabriel Popescu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 402,000.00

0846660 Popescu

The proposal focuses on extending the boundaries of quantitative phase imaging
(QPI), which has the unique ability to quantify subtle changes in both structure
and dynamics of cells and tissues without using contrast agents, to high-impact
applications, including neuroscience, cancer imaging, and cell membrane
biophysics. QPI technologies already developed by the PI include: 1) an
interferometric microscopy technique, termed Jones Phase Microscopy (JPM),
capable of extracting the spatially-resolved Jones polarization matrix
associated with transparent and anisotropic samples, 2) a Fourier transform
light scattering (FTLS) experimental approach that combines optical microscopy,
holography and light scattering for studying inhomogeneous and dynamic media and
3) a phase contrast imaging technique referred to as phase contrast tomography
(PCT) that can retrieve submicron thick sections from a 3D cell or tissue
sample. Research activities and methods were described in four areas: 1)
nanoscale cell membrane dynamics of red blood cells, 2) viscoelasticity of brain
cells using FTLB, 3) imaging dynamic transport and cell-to-cell communication in
live neurons, and 4) refractive index mapping of healthy and diseased tissue.
The red blood cell studies include developing an analytic model to extract
membrane rheology from fluctuation data in collaboration with Alex Levine, UCLA,
and a study of out-of-non-equilibrium dynamics focused particularly on
determining the effects of ATP mediated processes. The viscoelasticity of brain
cells study, in collaboration with Martha Gillete, UIUC, will focus on
differences between neuron and glial cells. The transport studies will focus on
non-contact measurement of neuronal action potentials and the dynamic imaging of
organelle traffic. The refractive index studies proposed extend preliminary work
on cm wide blood smears to whole organ scale imaging. The measurements made will
be extended to studies of refractive index changes during cancer progression in
collaboration with Steve Boppart, UIUC.