* 0846172
* CAREER:  High Fidelity Haptic Interaction using Large Range of Motion Magnetic Levitation Systems for Medical Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Peter Berkelman, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2014
* USD 534,356.00

The PI has developed two prototype magnetic levitation systems with novel
designs, which provide unprecedented extended motion ranges in addition to the
many advantages of magnetic levitation for 6 degree-of-freedom haptic human-
machine interaction (such as mechanical simplicity, absence of friction and
backlash, and high impedance range and control bandwidths). The first device
uses a novel coil and magnet configuration to approximately double the
translation and triple the rotation range of previous Lorentz force levitation
devices in all directions (increasing the motion volume 8 times and reachable
orientations 27 times). The second device is a modular system to levitate a
platform of one or more magnets above a planar array of 5 or more cylindrical
coils, which provides a planar motion range extendable to any area (by
increasing the size of the coil array) and a potentially unlimited rotation
range (the current prototype uses 10 coils to levitate one magnet with a motion
range of 60x80 mm in the horizontal plane, 30 mm vertical, and 30 degrees of
roll and pitch rotation). .In this project the PI will extend the performance
capabilities of two magnetic levitation systems in terms of their motion and
impedance ranges, control bandwidths, and accuracy, through new modeling,
control, and computation methods. He will formulate and implement novel haptic
simulation methods to benefit from the unique capabilities of the new devices
for task-specific simulated environments including surgical simulation and other
haptic skill tasks. And he will evaluate the resulting haptic interaction
systems in terms of the realism of the haptic perception by users and system
effectiveness for haptic training and task performance. The PI's overall
objective in this work is to bring to bear topics in electromagnetic analysis,
multivariable nonlinear dynamic control, computational methods, haptic modeling
and real-time physical simulation methods, and human haptic perception and task
performance, in order to improve the fidelity and effectiveness of human-machine
haptic interaction using magnetic levitation devices. The PI's hypothesis is
that application of the proposed methods will lead to significant measurable
improvements in haptic perception, interaction, and task performance, both for
general human-machine interaction and in specific applications such as training
of haptic medical skills and upper-limb
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The realization of
magnetic levitation systems with extended translation and rotation ranges in all
directions (Lorentz device) and/or easily extensible translation in horizontal
directions and unlimited rotation (planar device), will provide dramatic
benefits in a wide range of domains including robotic manipulation, fine
positioning and orientation, automation, materials handling and processing,
force and vibration control, and camera and antenna pointing not to mention
entertainment. High-fidelity haptic interaction will also have application to
the study of psychophysical human haptic perception, and to the display of
complex multidimensional abstract data. The new technologies will provide
exciting opportunities to teach physics and engineering concepts at any level in
a memorable, intuitive way; to this end, the PI will develop educational
materials with haptic magnetic levitation demonstrations and simulations, which
will be made available to complement materials already in development in
robotics areas for university classes and secondary schools.