* 0846081
* Collaborative Research: NeTS-NOSS: Distributed Algorithms for Sensor-Aided Directories to Mobile Objects
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2008,01/31/2011
* Konstantin Busch, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 01/31/2011
* USD 87,689.00

The availability of low-cost devices with sensing and networking capabilities
has opened up an exciting opportunity to observe the physical world like never
before. Many envisioned applications of sensor networks involve monitoring of
mobile objects, such as vehicles or animals. This project designs, analyzes and
implements lightweight sensor-aided distributed directories, which can guide
users to current locations of (mobile) objects, and answer individual or
aggregate queries about them. Directories are designed using locality as a
primary criterion: the effect of a perturbation in an object's position or in
the network structure must be local, and should not cascade beyond a restricted
region that is close to the perturbation. Directories are designed to
simultaneously manage multiple mobile objects or groups of objects moving
together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the construction of
novel directory schemes based on various distributed computation techniques,
including link reversal, path reversal, hierarchical methods, and sketching of
distributed data streams. The resulting directories are scalable, energy-
efficient, and resilient to network failures. The performances of the
directories are evaluated through a combination of theoretical analysis,
simulation, and implementation on a sensor network testbed that has been built
at Iowa State University. It is expected that the research will enable sensor-
aided object monitoring at a much larger scale than is now possible, and will
benefit any application of sensor networks that involves tracking mobile
objects. The research will involve students at various levels of the educational
system. The results of this research will be widely disseminated through
publications in journals and conferences, and will be posted online at
CoRR.&lt;br/&gt;