* 0846426
* CAREER:  Self-Assembly in Two and Three Dimensions: from Crystal to Surface Design and Back
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Angelo Cacciuto, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2014
* USD 585,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER proposal supports an integrated research and education program that
centers on solving problems involving colloidal particle self-assembly using
theoretical and computational methods. Unlike most of the work done so far in
the field that focuses on how order arises from given local interparticle
interactions, this research will study the inverse problem of finding what local
interactions are required for the building blocks to self-assemble into a given
structure. Using this approach, new strategies will be developed to find
particle interactions that are capable of generating specific crystal structures
through self-assembly. The role of elastic and amphiphatic surfaces in mediating
particle self-assembly and the role of particle aggregation in determining the
mechanical and elastic properties of soft interfaces will also be studied. The
ability to design particle interactions in a systematic fashion to target
desired crystals, and the prospect of manipulating the mechanical properties of
microscopic elastic sheets, will be results of great practical importance. The
results of this research will help open the way to rational design of structures
with novel optical, mechanical and functional properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspects of this CAREER award are
multifaceted. One major goal is to increase participation of underrepresented
groups in the sciences and specifically in chemistry by improving K-12
curriculum activities in nearby Harlem high schools. The PI also plans to
develop multi-platform interactive educational software, in the particular form
of video games, that will be made freely available to middle and high schools
nation wide. This approach is based on the premise that active learning and
interactivity will be the key to motivate and inspire the next generation of
scientists. This outreach program builds on the framework of the Center for
Technology, Innovation, and Community Engagement at Columbia University, and
complements the ongoing efforts of the Chemistry Department and the University
to reach the Harlem community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a combined research and education
program to develop theoretical and computational methods that can predict how
molecular building blocks will self-assemble into three-dimensional materials
structures. This approach could apply to many materials systems, some
representative examples include: aggregation of proteins into functional
biomachines on the scale of large molecules, formation of protein coats of
viruses, packing of large molecules to form biological membranes, and assembly
of nanometer scale particles to make photonic crystals, crystals engineered for
specific optical properties, such as transmitting particular colors of light and
blocking others. The major research objectives include the development of
numerical tools to examine how particles need to interact with each other in
order to self-assemble into a desired complex crystal structure, the study of
how elastic surfaces or membranes can assist particle self-assembly, and the
study of how particle clustering on soft interfaces can be used to determine the
mechanical and elastic properties of materials used as templates. The results of
this research could help open the way to rational design of structures with
novel optical, mechanical and functional properties. This program will build on
the strong commitment of Columbia University to the field of nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspects of this CAREER award are
multifaceted. One major goal is to increase participation of underrepresented
groups in the sciences and specifically in chemistry by improving K-12
curriculum activities in nearby Harlem high schools. The PI also plans to
develop multi-platform interactive educational software, in the particular form
of video games, that will be made freely available to middle and high schools
nation wide. This approach is based on the premise that active learning and
interactivity will be the key to motivate and inspire the next generation of
scientists. This outreach program builds on the framework of the Center for
Technology, Innovation, and Community Engagement at Columbia University, and
complements the ongoing efforts of the Chemistry Department and the University
to reach the Harlem community.