* 0846618
* CAREER: Integrated Microsystems for Synthetic Biology
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Michel Maharbiz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This proposal aims at establishing the foundational
knowledge that will enable us to build synthetic multi-cellular machines. The
researchers will design, fabricate and test a series of hybrid systems
consisting of genetically modified bacteria, microfabricated arrays of chemical
actuators and optical sensing. The broad goal of the technical work is to
develop techniques for modulating synthetic signaling pathways in E. coli
bacteria using chemical micro-interfaces. Aim 1 will produce a microsystem and a
synthetic gene construct in which cells, guided by the microsystem, will express
gene expression patterns programmed by the user. Aim 2 expands this by adding
coordinated feedback into the microdevices to develop a complete hybrid two-
component Turing reaction-diffusion system. Aim 3 then applies the knowledge
gained in Aims 1 and 2 to transition the control from a flat culture plate onto
a spheroidal assembly of cells resembling a simple multi-cellular system. The
long term vision of this work is to design, build and test chemical interface
microsystems that dynamically guide gene expression patterns of multi-cellular
synthetic biology systems. This will require the development of both the
relevant microsystems intended for sensing and communicating with cells and the
synthetic gene constructs which respond to these microsystems. The United States
today stands on the brink of a technological revolution, much as we did in the
mid-20th century when we began to build complex electronic devices.

Intellectual Merit The work presented here employs microtechnology to make a
radical paradigm shift away from the standard methods in synthetic biology which
rely on homogenous populations of cells. To date, successful synthetic pattern
generation has only been achieved by manually placing two different populations
of cells on a cell culture plate (sender and receiver cells) and allowing them
to communicate. This work intends to change this: by communicating directly with
cells programmed to respond, cultures of cells can be made to develop spatial
inhomogeneities in gene expression. The ability to create complex spatial
patterns of gene expression, (ie. synthetic bacterial differentiation) will
enable the fabrication of a new class of organic constructs built from co-
operating cell populations in a manner analogous to differentiation schemes in
developmental biology.

Broad Impact The broad impact and outreach plan has five components: 1) K-12
workshops with Poplin Press and Matthew Perry to develop and test GoNano!, a
card-based teaching aid for elementary and junior high students, 2) the
development of both a new BioMEMS course for graduate students at UC Berkeley,
based on a syllabus on which the PI has published, and a new core MEMS course
for undergraduates (which, surprisingly, does not exist in EECS at UC Berkeley),
3) leadership involvement in Berkeley?s SUPERB program, of which the PI is an
alumnus, 4) student exchange and BioMEMS seminars with Prof. Nelson Sepulveda at
the University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, 5) leadership and participation in the
URM community at Berkeley; the PI served as the president of the Latino Faculty
& Staff Association at the University of Michigan and that experience can be
applied at Berkeley.