* 0846510
* CAREER: Parameterizations of Langmuir Turbulence in Shallow Water
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2014
* Andres Tejada-Martinez, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 12/31/2014
* USD 480,000.00

0846510 &lt;br/&gt;Tejada-Martinez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, Langmuir circulation (LC) is
characterized by pairs of parallel counter-rotating vortices oriented
approximately in the downwind direction driven by the wave- and wind-driven
turbulence within the upper ocean mixed layer. The highly resolved field
measurements of Gargett et al. (2004) first identified full-depth LC in shallow
water with dominant effects on the mixing process and sediment re-suspension on
the bottom boundary layer. These unique measurements have drastically changed
perceptions of what turbulent processes are important on shallow shelves. The
PI's large-eddy simulation (LES) of full-depth LC shows favorable agreement with
the in-water observations of the turbulent structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will focus on LES computations of the interaction of LC with the bottom
boundary layer and its impact on the gas transfer and temperature at the air-
water interface. Studies will be guided and validated by comparisons with field
measurements. Preliminary LES computations have revealed that the homogenizing
action of LC introduces a deviation from the classical law-of-the-wall behavior
often invoked for the bottom boundary layer. Furthermore, LES has shown that
full-depth LC can increase the surface gas transfer efficiency by 30%. These
studies will lead to new RANS (Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes)
parameterizations accounting for its effects on bottom boundary layer turbulence
in coastal regions. These studies will also lead to new bulk parameterizations
of gas transfer at the air-water interface and temperature across the surface
thermal boundary layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An educational program is designed
to introduce computational science and turbulence in the environment to high
school and undergraduate students. Through the NSF-sponsored Research
Experiences for Teachers program at USF, high school teachers will gain
experience in scientific computations by participating in summer research
projects. Simulations will also be incorporated into the PI's Basic Fluid
Mechanics third-year undergraduate level course. A citizen science network will
be established to record LC events in the Tampa Bay region and promote
environmental awareness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being co-funded
by the Engineering, Geosciences, and Cyber Infrastructure Directorates.