* 0846453
* CAREER: Inter-kingdom Signaling as a Paradigm for Molecular Systems Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Arul Jayaraman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0846453&lt;br/&gt;Jayaraman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intell
ectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to
develop an integrated research and educational program in molecular systems
biology (MSB). This project focuses on soluble signal-mediated signaling between
bacteria and human cells, termed inter-kingdom (IK) signaling, as the research
paradigm for MSB. The quantitative characterization of signaling mechanisms and
the identification of regulatory networks has led to a fundamental understanding
of how signaling pathways are involved in the regulation of biological
processes. The next level of challenges in cell signaling is on understanding
how different signals and signaling mechanisms function in heterogeneous and
complex environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project plan is four-fold.
First, the molecular systems signaling framework to be developed in this project
will lead to a fundamental understanding of signals, receptors, and recognition
mechanisms, which will further the advancement of emerging areas such as
synthetic biology. Second, these studies can form the basis of novel molecular
therapeutic strategies against E. coli O157:H7 (EHEC) and other pathogens.
Third, the microfluidic tools and reporter cells to be developed in this work
can be applied to other paradigms in biology and medicine (e.g., stem cell
engineering) where spatio-temporal behavior is important. Fourth, the dynamic
profiling method described in this project will synergistically further efforts
in computational systems biotechnology through the development of new models and
algorithms for describing biomolecular dynamics and interactions. The broader
impact of the education plan is two-fold. First, the biotechnology specialty
certificate and mentored research will provide the framework for training the
next generation of biotechnology professionals, introduce active learning into
the biotechnology learning experience, and stimulate interest in biotechnology
in a large and diverse undergraduate engineering student body. Second, the
dissemination of research results through distance learning schemes to students
in rural schools in Texas will provide a much-needed connection between higher
education institutions and rural schools and society; thereby, leading to
increasing number of minority students pursuing STEM careers.