* 0846704
* Career:  Resuspension of Environmental Pollutants: an Investigation of Mechanical and Electrostatic Forces
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Andrea Ferro, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 12/31/2013
* USD 420,421.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-0846704&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Ferro&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resuspension,
the lift off and reentrainment of settled particles into the air, is an
important source of human exposure to particle bound pollutants, both indoors
and outdoors. However, resuspension has not been well characterized and existing
fundamental models have thus far been limited to ideal cases that do not
accurately predict resuspension in real environments. To address this research
gap, this CAREER project will investigate the resuspension of pollutants using
an integrated research and teaching approach. The objectives of the career
development plan are: (1) to develop well prepared scientists and engineers who
can apply their knowledge in the area of pollutant fate and transport; (2) to
increase the numbers of underrepresented students in science and engineering
undergraduate and graduate study; (3) to characterize the behavior of
resuspended particles through a combination of theoretical and experimental
work; (4) to improve and validate a fundamental resuspension model to predict
particle behavior in the built environment; and (5) to transform the way people
view human exposure to harmful substances by advancing and communicating the
role the resupension/deposition cycle in exposure pathways. The PI will conduct
integrated experimental and theoretical research to characterize and model the
behavior of resuspended particles from human walking. She will employ chamber
and wind tunnel studies to quantify resuspension factors and modeling studies to
develop and validate a theoretical resuspension model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
providing the tools to incorporate resuspension in human exposure and pollutant
cycling models and through a targeted educational and outreach plan, the
proposed research could result in: 1) changes in the selection of materials used
in the built environment; 2) guidance for emergency response to chemical and
biological agents; and 3) human behavior modification and policy changes to
reduce exposure to resuspended pollutants. This project will train graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 teachers and students in the fate and transport of
environmental pollutants, and increase the presence of underrepresented groups
in science and engineering research through active recruitment and mentorship.