* 0846764
* CAREER: Controlling Mechanisms of Dust Layer Ignition and Flame Propagation in Dust Clouds
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Ali Rangwala, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2015
* USD 429,982.00

0846764&lt;br/&gt;Rangwala&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research in this CAREER award focuses on
developing fundamental scientific understanding of dust fires and explosions.
Combustible dust layers can be ignited by a surface whose temperature is
sufficiently high and the resulting fires can cause large losses in lives and
property. In some cases these processes are the first step towards an escalating
chain of events that can lead to both gas and dust explosions. Initiation and
propagation of dust deflagrations are extremely complex phenomena due to the
interaction between solid particles and the gaseous flame front. In comparison
with premixed gas deflagration, a dust-oxidizer deflagration depends on the rate
of evolution of volatiles, the mixing of these volatiles with the oxidizer
surrounding the particles, coupling of the particles and gas-phase oxidation,
and radiative energy exchange between the flame and its
surroundings.&lt;br/&gt;To identify mechanisms and controlling parameters for
dust-layer ignition and deflagration, detailed experiments are being developed
to measure ignition and the rate of propagation of a dust-oxidizer flame with
different fuel/oxidizer ratios, particle sizes, and dust types. In one part of
the work, a modified ASTM E2021 hot-surface apparatus will be used to analyze
parameters controlling the ignition of dust layers. These parameters will then
be used to predict ignition of a dust deposit in a realistic geometry such as a
two-dimensional wedge and a three-dimensional corner. Influence on particle size
and oxygen concentration on dust layer ignition will also be analyzed. In
parallel, the structure of a premixed dust-oxidizer flame will be explored to
analyze flame propagation in particle-laden flows. A premixed Mache Hebra burner
with suitable modifications to allow burning of a homogenous mixture of dust and
oxidizer will be used to study the structure of a stabilized dust-oxidizer
flame. Laminar burning velocity measured by Laser Doppler Anemometry will be
used to characterize the mass burning rate of Lycopodium (30 µm), polymethyl
methacrylate (300nm, 10µm, 30µm, and 60µm), coal (15-38µm, 38-44 µm and 44-
55µm), and aluminum (10µm) powders. The results of this experimental study will
be further used to validate numerical CFD models for flame propagation in dust
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;The research is also meant to act as a catalyst for new
opportunities of fundamental research in the field of fire science and
engineering. The education plan will increase the awareness in schools and
universities world-wide toward the discipline of fire science and engineering in
two ways: (a) Establishing national and international project centers focused
towards undergraduate students for three-month independent study groups in areas
of fundamental fire-related research and (b) Interacting with local high-school
and middle-school teachers to develop a three-week summer course for their
students to generate an interest in basic science. Students will get hands-on
experience at the WPI fire laboratory and learn about fire safety from local
firefighters. The educational efforts of this proposal are expected to increase
awareness of the field of fire science, while the research program will help in
bringing a shift from the present engineering-based empirical models to
fundamental theory-based analysis and experimentation.