* 0846486
* CAREER: Joint Power-Allocation and Diversity (JPAD) Optimization for Networked Underwater Acoustic Transceivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Yahong Zheng, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 06/30/2015
* USD 416,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to design networked underwater
acoustic transceivers to achieve high network throughput and high reliability
for shallow water sensor networks. The approach is to maximize the power and
bandwidth efficiency through a joint power allocation and diversity (JPAD)
optimization method combined with adaptive medium access control (MAC) and
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) schemes. The research is integrated with
education and outreach through two new courses that bridge curricula gaps
between networking and communications and between signal processing and circuit
design, student training for underwater research, and collaboration with the
Women's Leadership Institute and the Summer Research Academy at the Missouri
University of Science and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, this project contributes to boosting network capacity and
reliability for underwater communications through two major paradigm shifts:
optimization with practical discrete inputs rather than idealized Gaussian
inputs to improve transceiver design and using joint power-allocation and
diversity matrices instead of scheme using only adaptive power allocation. The
design methodologies developed for underwater communications in this project
should also be applicable to radio frequency (RF)
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, the project
has the potential to advance the development of underwater sensor networks and
enhance capabilities for environmental monitoring, disaster prevention, offshore
exploration, and surveillance. The education and outreach activities help to
train the next generation of researchers, increase the participation of women
and other students from underrepresented groups, advocate responsible
engineering approaches for reducing sound pollution in oceans, and educate the
general public about the impact of acoustic communications and sensor networks
in aquatic environments.