* 0846624
* CAREER:  First-Principles Modeling of Titanium-Oxygen-Solute Intreaction:  Materials Design for Improved Energy Efficiency
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2014
* Dallas Trinkle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The University of Illinois will develop a long-term computer modeling study of
how different chemical additions?like niobium, tantalum, vanadium, and
zirconium?change the properties of oxygen in titanium to design new titanium
alloys for widespread use. The computer model starts with an understanding of
how atoms bind to each other to model changes in chemical bonds as the metal is
bent and shaped. Too much oxygen usually makes titanium brittle, but other
elements in an alloy can change how oxygen acts. These different chemical
additions change chemical bonding, which makes the alloy stronger/weaker, or
ductile/brittle.

Modeling changes in strength and ductility allows researchers to design and
optimize new titanium alloys in a computer, rather than through expensive trial-
and-error approaches. At the same time, new computational modeling methods will
be developed that make this new study possible, and allow other researchers to
apply these techniques to other materials. Titanium alloys have good corrosion
resistance and mechanical properties which make them ideal for many aerospace,
nautical, and even automotive applications; as titanium alloys replace heavier
alloys, fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emission from transportation is
reduced.

The computer modeling will allow the design of new alloys much more rapidly, and
allow titanium alloys to enter widespread use for transportation. At the same
time, computational modeling methods will be incorporated into undergraduate
education to enhance learning for students at Illinois. The outreach program
specifically targets the pipeline of minority students into STEM careers by
enhancing high school science education, recruitment to engineering schools, and
improving retention.