* 0846342
* CAREER: Multi-scale interactions of air pollution, urban growth, and equity - integrated research methods and informal science teaching
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Amy Stuart, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0846342 (Stuart)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to (1)
build an integrated toolset for investigation of air quality equity in
developing urban areas, (2) advance knowledge on air quality equity and the
impacts of growth on equity in the Tampa area, and (3) design a science museum
exhibit that enhances interest of girls in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). Research activities will include development of capabilities
for air pollution modeling at multiple scales with the CMAQ and CALPUFF models,
for local passive sampling and analysis (of NOX, benzene, 1,3-butadiene, and
acetaldehyde), for urban growth modeling, and for integration and geospatial
analyses. These will be applied to estimating spatial patterns of air quality
around Tampa, to determining current equity effects by comparing air quality
with population distributions, and to studying impacts of two alternative future
urban growth patterns (suburb-oriented versus "smart growth" development).
Educational activities will involve development of an exhibit for a nearby
science museum in Tampa. The exhibit will use inquiry-based learning techniques
to teach content. Evaluation of the exhibit will be designed to assess the
effectiveness of enhancing the interest of girls in STEM. Research and education
activities will be integrated by including research results in the exhibit
content and in the PI's courses, by involving several students in project
research and in exhibit development, and through student writing on project
activities for both research and education journals.