* 0846286
* Collaborative Research:   Genes, environment and gene expression in a wild primate population
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gregory Wray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2013
* USD 641,635.00

Understanding the expression and evolution of complex traits requires, among
other things, measuring the genetic variation that underlies these traits. This
in turn requires an understanding of the interplay between genes, the
environment, and the traits an organism displays, specifically the nature of
gene by environment interactions (GEIs). GEIs arise when two different genotypes
respond differently to a change in the environment. Surprisingly little is known
about GEIs in natural populations, although GEIs are pervasive in all known
organisms, including humans. This project will address this gap by examining
multiple aspects of GEIs in a wild mammal population. The project takes
advantage of a long-term field study of wild baboons in the Amboseli basin in
southern Kenya, in which individually known animals have been under continuous
observation for 38 years. The investigators will test hypotheses about the ways
in which GEIs influence variation in traits of adult baboons, and the manner in
which GEIs affect standing genetic variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed project will continue and extend the investigators' long history of
training American and Kenyan students. The project will generate several unique
data sets that will be of interest to the wider scientific community, and which
are available for no other natural primate population. In addition, PIs have
shared the design and implementation of their comprehensive long term database
(BABASE) with a number of other scientists, and have also developed a website
for the research project (www.princeton.edu/~baboon) which serves as a vehicle
for providing information and data to the public.