* 0846605
* CAREER: An Exploration of Faculty Expertise and Student Learning in Capstone Experiences
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Marie Paretti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 12/31/2014
* USD 405,215.00

This CAREER project explores the question, ?What constitutes expert teaching in
the capstone environment?? This question examines the ?epistemology of
engineering educators,? highlighted by the NSF-funded Engineering Education
Research Colloquies as a core research area, in order to more effectively
prepare current and future faculty to support student learning. This question
will be answered in a four-phase mixed methods study consisting of 1) a national
survey of capstone instructors informed by prior literature on both design
education and teaching expertise, 2) interviews with selected instructors
identified by the national survey, paired with surveys of the interview
subjects? students; 3) in-depth case studies of expert instructors identified by
the interviews and student surveys; and 4) development, implementation, and
assessment of innovative online programs for graduate students and faculty to
enhance teaching. &lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the growing body of research
in two domains: design education and teacher expertise. Design education
researchers have analyzed key design activities, compared practices of novices
and experts, explored the role of reflective practice, examined problem
definition, proposed instructional materials, and designed learning outcomes and
assessments. At the same time, research on teacher expertise has identified
practices associated with expert teaching in K-12, including domain knowledge,
flexibility in adapting curricula, and effective monitoring of student learning.
But researchers and faculty still lack a concrete understanding of teaching
expertise in design education. The proposed CAREER project will make substantial
contributions to the research in both domains, as well as provide a basis for
future studies of design teaching and learning across the curriculum. The PI is
experienced in the quantitative and qualitative research methods required for
the study, and her prior research on design education provides a strong
foundation for the work.&lt;br/&gt;