* 0846834
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education to Probe Coherent and Quantum States in the Presence of Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Giti Khodaparast, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

****Non Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). We are living in a
fast-paced world of modern quantum technology where better understanding of the
quantum states and interactions in semiconductor materials can play an important
role in developing the next generation of devices. Some of these devices will
likely make use of a quantum property of electrons known as ?spin.? This CAREER
award funds projects to establish several optical, magneto-optical, and
transport techniques to advance current understanding of quantum phenomena in
semiconductor structures where the spin strongly affects the motion of the
electrons. Understanding the quantum phenomena in these material systems will be
an important step in the development quantum semiconductor devices, but equally
important, will provide an environment to explore challenging phenomena in
condensed matter physics. The research activities will involve diverse groups of
undergraduate and graduate researchers in frontier projects to train the next
generation of experts in semiconductor optics with ample knowledge of solid
state and quantum physics. One important educational aspect of this CAREER award
is collaborations with Roanoke Governor?s High School. Lectures on modern and
recent topics in physics for the students who attend the high school from seven
districts in the New River Valley will be provided. In addition, the students
will have opportunities for short internship
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). In light of the current interest in spin-related phenomena, there has
been growing activity in understanding and manipulating spin-orbit (SO)
interactions in low dimensional semiconductor structures. The goal of the
research supported by this CAREER award is to explore the quantum states and
dynamics of interacting and confined electrons in low dimensional semiconductor
structures with strong SO interactions. Several optical, magneto-optical, and
transport techniques will be employed to advance our understanding of quantum
phenomena in semiconductor structures such as InSb/AlInSb and InNAs/GaAs based
heterostructures. A broader impact of the activities in this project is
increasing our students? knowledge and skills in different aspects of modern
experimental techniques and deepening their understanding of fundamental
physics. One important aspect of the educational plans of this CAREER award is
collaborations with Roanoke Governor?s High School. Lectures on modern and
recent topics in physics for the students who attend the high school from seven
districts in the New River Valley will be provided. In addition, the students
will have opportunities for short internship programs.