* 0846152
* CAREER: Energy-Efficient Parallel Architectures for Computer Vision
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Michael Taylor, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 404,396.00

In the evolution of biological organisms, the ability to see has been a popular
feature for millions of years. However, the majority of machines built today
remain essentially blind to the photons that continually bombard them. Effective
real-time computer vision has countless applications and would have a
transformative effect on the economy and safety. Enabling machines to see relies
not only on the advancement of computer vision research, but also the design of
the hardware platforms that will execute these algorithms with sufficient energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, the conventional wisdom was
that the ability to manufacture chips with exponentially increasing numbers of
transistors will bring us processors that are fast enough for whichever
algorithm it is we want to run. Unfortunately, power limitations are limiting
how many of these transistors a chip can use at any one time. As a result,
energy efficiency is the critical metric which will influence whether future
vision algorithms are viable solutions to the real-time vision problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses around the design of Stingray, a
chip with many massively specialized, diverse kinds of processing cores, which
is tuned for maximal energy efficiency in vision processing applications. The
project explores these and other architectural challenges that arise in
designing effective low power Stingray systems. It exposes students to a broad
range of issues including parallel compilation, vision, and hardware design. It
seeks to capture the properties of vision applications to build a complete,
prototype vision processor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;