* 0846636
* Mechanisms of Photochemical Reactions - Emphasis on Vitamin D Field
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jack Saltiel, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 484,365.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Jack Saltiel of Florida State
University, who will study photochemical processes in the vitamin D field. He
will investigate their medium dependence in order to resolve experimental
discrepancies and to achieve the mechanistic understanding needed for
theoretical advances. Photochemical and spectroscopic observations will be
employed to characterize the photochemistry and photophysics of individual
ground state conformers obtained by rotation about essential single bonds. The
goal is to resolve composite responses into the individual responses of each
molecular entity that contributes to the measured quantity. The research also
involves synthesis of molecules designed to test theories on the photophysical
and photochemical responses of organic molecules to light absorption. The
research aims to provide the experimental foundation to gain a theoretical
understanding of the behavior of electronically excited
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the research are to understand
the central role of the processes that trigger natural responses to light, as in
vitamin D formation in the skin, in vision, and in photosynthesis. The theory of
electronically excited states is a scientific frontier whose progress relies on
valid experimental conclusions such as those provided by this research. Other
broader impacts expected to result from the funded research are to continue the
long and uninterrupted string of undergraduates who have prospered by
participation in research with Professor Saltiel. For example, of the recent
students, two have earned PhDs in biochemistry and biophysics from Rice and
Stanford Universities; one student was an NSF Graduate Fellow at UC Berkeley and
is now at Harvard Law School; two students are currently Biophysics graduate
students at Caltech and Yale. With respect to gender, one female NSF graduate
fellow in Biophysics now at Yale, was a freshman music major when she joined
Professor Saltiel's research group. Finally, a female Hispanic student who spent
a summer in Professor Saltiel's lab later became an NSF Graduate Fellow in
Biochemistry at UNC Chapel Hill and is currently a postdoctoral fellow at
Northwestern University.