* 0846240
* Rehousing the Ethnobotanical and Archaeobotanical Collections of the University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Carla Sinopoli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 482,327.00

The University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology Ethnobotanical Laboratory
contains more than 33,000 botanical specimens and associated documentation for
the study of cultural uses of plant species in the past and present. Specimens
from more than 700 archaeological sites provide critical evidence for examining
the domestication of wild species, climate change, and human interactions with
the environment over the last 10,000-plus years. Collections from numerous early
20th century Native American communities provide insights into indigenous
agricultural and ecological practices with important implications for
contemporary issues of sustainability and biodiversity. This award will provide
funding to improve the care and documentation of these important collections by:
rehousing them in new archival quality cabinets, updating database information,
and expanding physical and digital access to collection information.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Along with assuring the preservation of irreplaceable ethnobotanical
samples, the broader impacts of this project include increasing access to the
collections to scholars and students at the University of Michigan and, through
web dissemination, far beyond. In addition, the Museum will develop and enhance
relations with national and international biodiversity and botanical
organizations, disseminating collection information via the internet, and will
collaborate with heritage communities, particularly Native American tribes, in
studying ethnobotanical knowledge and resources.&lt;br/&gt;