* 0846192
* 2010 Projects:  Molecular Genetics of Arabidposis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Elliot Meyerowitz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 05/31/2013
* USD 850,000.00

Elliot M. Meyerowitz&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number 0846192&lt;br/&gt;Molecular
Genetics of Arabidopsis thaliana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flowering plants grow from
collections of stem cells called apical meristems. When a seed germinates, there
are two meristems-the root apical meristem from which the root grows, and the
shoot apical meristem, which eventually gives rise to the entire above-ground
part of the plant. The Meyerowitz laboratory has developed a set of new live-
imaging methods for studying cell divisions and gene expression in shoot apical
meristems. What is proposed here is a series of studies, using these methods and
plant genetics, to understand two aspects of plant stem cells. The first is the
ability of any plant tissue to give rise to a new shoot apical meristem. This
process will be followed in detail, leading to an understanding of how patterned
growth originates in plant tissues. The second set of studies will follow the
effects and perception of the plant hormone cytokinin in growing shoot apical
meristems, leading to better understanding of the role that this plant hormone
plays in plant growth.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work include the
education of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in plant developmental
biology. In addition, results and images from these studies will be used in
teacher training programs, including the nationally recognized "Grounding in
Botany" program, in which laboratory exercises using plants are developed by
teachers for high school classrooms; and a program in which graduate students
and postdoctoral scholars from Caltech spend up to six weeks at the
Exploratorium in San Francisco, teaching high school and elementary science
teachers in a summer teacher training program. Finally, it should be noted that
the results of the proposed studies will lead to practical abilities to control
plant growth, which in turn will be a contribution to agriculture with impact on
supplies of food and fuel, two of the great problems facing humanity