* 0846313
* CAREER: Nano-plasmonic Scanning Probe and Microsystems for Controlled Genetic Perturbation
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Xiaojing (John) Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 02/28/2014
* USD 489,000.00

The objective of this research is to integrate nanophotonics with
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) to understand the regulation of gene
expression under controlled perturbations. The approach is to develop luminous
scanning probe-based platform for light transmission, concentration and live
imaging at the tip. By adjusting the light intensity, one can directly perturb
sub-cellular structures through nano-surgery or micro-ablation. Through the
integrated near-field scanning optical microscopy, one can observe in real time
the evolution of gene expression in live embryos during perturbation. The
measurement data will set the foundation for an electronic library of gene
expressions correlated to distinct perturbations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop, for the first time, a versatile microsystem with tip-
light manipulation, enhancement, probe actuation and sensing, and near-field
imaging functions. Perturbing the microenvironment is a complementary approach
to modifying the genetic components of the developmental network. Using
nanophotonic microsystems with unprecedented accuracy, this research can lead to
significant advancement in the understanding of mechanisms crucial for robust
development and engineering of substrates to guide organism development with
controllable genetic characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can be
of broader use on integrating heterogeneous nanosystems. It will also have a
profound impact on biomedicine to enhance understanding of how environment-
introduced ?errors? in gene action may lead to birth defects and cancer. The
program has multiple integral educational initiatives, including the development
of new teaching modules on nanophotonic Microsystems, cross-training of life
science students at the frontiers of device engineering; and the establishment
of ?Young Biomedical Engineers?(y-BME) program to recruit minority and female
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;