* 0846876
* CAREER:A hybrid experimental and computational program to elucidate the molecular differentiation program of a model stem cell
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Jeffrey Varner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0846876&lt;br/&gt;Varner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide tools and
methodologies that will enable advancements in the formulation, identification
and analysis of mechanistic mathematical models of protein-protein and protein-
DNA interaction networks. Although the experimental system being explored is a
simple adult stem-cell, the proposed tools are network agnostics, thus, they can
be applied to the study of virtually any network of interest in cell-biology. It
is the earnest hope of the Principal Investigator to demonstrate that large-
scale modeling has a definitive role in biomolecular engineering and to provide
tools that allow non-computational scientists to use modeling and mathematical
analysis in their research efforts. The proposed research is a critical first-
step toward this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in the development of
computational tools for the modeling and analysis of stem-cell differentiation
networks and will advance the state of the art of mechanistic modeling of
networks relevant to open questions in cell-biology. The project is ideally
suited for cross-disciplinary education of graduate and undergraduate students.
The research is experimentally and computationally focused and will attempt to
advance the state of the art in each these two aspects.