* 0846583
* High-Resolution SEDOR and Switch Angle Sample Spinning Probes for Dipolar Recoupling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Terry Gullion, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 07/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

The overarching goal of this proposal is the development of new techniques for
structure elucidation in the solid state. The PI proposes to accomplish this by
exploiting dipolar couplings between nuclear spins. The strength of these
couplings correlates with interatomic distances and thus provides structural
information that is otherwise only accessible by diffraction techniques. The
advantages of using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) over diffraction lie in the
fact that single crystals are not required, and that the method is very
sensitive to protons which are usually invisible in X-ray diffraction
experiments. The PI pioneered this technique for nuclei with nuclear spin of 1/2
(such as H, C, F, P). In this proposal, the PI seeks to expand this technique to
quadrupolar nuclei with a spin greater or equal than 1. In fact, most of the
elements in the periodic table possess magnetically active isotopes only with
quadrupolar spin. Many of these are extremely important for biological samples
(Na, O) or materials research (Li, Cs, V, etc.) The PI proposes the design and
construction of new NMR probes and their implementation in a series of new NMR
experiments to achieve this goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structure
elucidation is one of the central questions in chemistry. The understanding of
molecular structure helps to deduce relationships with molecular function. This
knowledge is crucial for the development of new materials that enhance the
quality of our lives or allow for the creation of new drugs. Structure
elucidation of materials in their solid state using diffraction techniques
usually requires the material to be present in their crystalline, or well-
ordered, form. However, especially biological materials are often difficult to
crystallize and thus tools like nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrocopy
have been developed to aid in structure elucidation. NMR spectroscopy has other
limitations, however, such as a much lower sensitivity, and generally, the
inaccessibility of elements whose nuclei suffer from a non-spherical charge
distribution. The majority of elements in the periodic table falls into this
category, and includes elements of high biological relevance such as oxygen and
sodium. The latter are inaccessible to atomic distance measurements by solid
state NMR. Professor Gullion from West Virginia University plans to design,
develop and build new instruments that will allow NMR measurements on these
ubiquitous and important elements. Professor Gullion will engage the help of
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in this endeavor. He will
share his technical know-how via video clips disseminated over the web, and free
workshops in his laboratory. He will continue to entice our youngest generation
about science through magic shows performed at the kindergarten level.