* 0846562
* CAREER: Hybrid Approach to Direct-Write Based Micro and Nano Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Salil Desai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to investigate the physics of micro/nano droplet formations and the resultant
micro/nano structures fabricated using a hybrid manufacturing approach. The
approach is to generate droplets at varying length scales (micro to nano) that
will be selectively deposited on different substrate designs. Nanoimprint
lithography will be used to fabricate nanometer sized patterns of varying
topographies that will be deposited using the direct-write inkjet system. The
ability to change drop and resultant feature sizes (micro to nano) on-the-fly
with multiple material jet heads will create an effective method of building
functionally-gradient materials. This research will unravel intriguing
multiphysics phenomena that occur within the complex spatio-temporal domains of
nanodroplet formation via molecular dynamics modeling. Experimental design and
ultra high speed photography investigation will establish relationships among
process parameters such as charge potentials and fluid properties for optimal
nanoscale feature deposition. The educational objectives include the (1)
integration of nano/micro manufacturing and computational modeling coursework
into undergraduate and graduate curriculum, (2) implementation of research
experiences for a predominantly minority student population and (3) societal
dissemination of nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
proposed hybrid approach will enable the selective manufacturing of micro/nano
heterogeneous structures with high aspect ratios, overhanging features, and
multiple material compositions in a matrix formation. This work will give
insight on the structural and functional integrity of nano and micro structures
formed. Societal impact initiatives include nanotechnology education to the
general public at the local science center and summer outreach camps to under-
represented high-school students. A fundamental understanding of the nanoscale
droplet dynamics and resultant micro/nano structures will revolutionize the
fabrication of a diverse application base including functionally-gradient
materials, regenerative tissue scaffolds, and bio-chem sensors that lead to
next-generation devices and systems.&lt;br/&gt;