* 0846446
* CAREER: Fundamental Understanding of Mercury Cycling in Lakes and Use of Reservation-Based Research to Recruit American Indians into Environmental Engineering and Science
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Marc Beutel, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2015
* USD 417,815.00

CBET- 0846446&lt;br/&gt;Beutel, Marc&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anaerobic bottom
waters and profundal Sediments in lakes are important sites of mercury
methylation (MeHg). The principal objective of this project is to better
understand how key environmental factors, especially dissolved oxygen (DO),
would influence MeHg cycling in lake sediments and bottom waters. The central
hypothesis is that DO penetration into profundal sediments controls MeHg cycling
by: (1) repressing MeHg bioproduction and release from surficial sediments, and
(2) inhibiting the release, and subsequent water column methylation, of organo-
Hg complexes bound to metal oxides in surficial sediments. Effects of DO and
macrofauna density on Hg cycling in profundal sediments will be investigated
based on intact prohundal sediment-water samples to be obtained from South Twin
Lake on the Colville Indian Reservation and laboratory samples to be collected
in the laboratory chambers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and
educational plans are tightly integrated both topically and geographically. The
overarching theme of Hg cycling in lakes drives both an ambitions research
program and a creative outreach program, with both programs focused on the
Colville Indian Reservation in Eastern WA. The integrated programs will advance
discovery related to Hg cycling in lakes while promoting learning by American
Indian high school students, undergraduates and graduate students. Broadening
participation of underrepresented groups is at the core of the project's
educational plan. Outreach to American Indian students that shares the thrill of
scientific discovery combined with targeted recruitment efforts will ultimately
result in increased representation of American Indians in environmental
engineering and science.