* 0846923
* CAREER: Molecular Perspectives of Gas-Surface Reactions during Growth of Thin Film Nanostructures
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Sumit Agarwal, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 404,658.00

0846923 Agarwal

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit: This CAREER proposal integrates research and educational
activities in the thematic area of gas-surface dynamics critical to nanoscale
control of thin-film growth. The goals of the research program are aligned with
the Colorado School of Mines? (CSM) focus on Earth resources, energy, and
advanced materials. In particular, the study will concentrate on atomic and
molecular layer deposition (ALD/MLD). These deposition techniques operate in
alternating cycles of self-limiting, gas-solid surface reactions. Recently, ALD
has been used in numerous applications due to its ability to deliver conformal
films on large-area substrates with nanometer-scale control over the film?s
composition and thickness. To date ALD process development has been largely
empirical, and with the exception of a few metal oxides, there have been very
few comprehensive studies. While ALD is largely limited to inorganic materials,
MLD is an emerging technique to deposit organic films. There is a need to
develop a molecular understanding of the heterogeneous chemistry that occurs in
ALD/MLD processes, so that they may be developed to their fullest potential. The
inherent compatibility of the two processes can be utilized for the formation of
advanced inorganic-organic hybrid films.

In this research and education project, ALD/MLD processes will be examined
taking a fundamental science approach. A combination of state-of-the-art surface
and gas-phase diagnostics has been assembled that include in situ surface
infrared spectroscopy, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, quartz crystal
microbalance, spectroscopic ellipsometry, and quadrupole mass spectrometry. The
powerful capabilities of this approach are demonstrated through the PI?s recent
studies on the ALD of TiO2 using O3. This project will illuminate the molecular
pathways critical to ALD/MLD synthesis of metal oxides, functional polymers, and
advanced metal films. Work on metal oxides will focus on the application of O3
and O radicals, which have received little attention despite becoming the
oxidizers of choice for industrial processes. MLD studies will investigate two
novel strategies to overcome key limitations facing organic thin film synthesis:
(a) process chemistries that produce no reaction byproducts, and (b) ?smart
assembly?, in which the initial reagent produces a masked functionality that is
selectively activated using a second reagent. Investigation of metals will focus
on the key issue of nucleation, with ruthenium serving as the model compound.
The PI will further integrate the insights from these three topical areas to
design molecular scaffolds for high density nucleation of ultrathin metal films
on pre-functionalized surfaces.

Transformative Aspects: This study can be potentially transformative as it will
reveal the molecular transformations occurring during ALD/MLD processes, which
will ultimately lead to novel strategies for film growth. Furthermore, this
program will address one of the least understood processes in ALD, which is the
initial nucleation of metals on different surfaces. Broader Impact: An inherent
feature of the project is the emphasis on education and its integration with
research. Specifically, three interrelated educational goals will be pursued:
(a) development and assessment of a new interdisciplinary elective course in
thin-film processing; (b) close mentorship and career counseling through
research; and (c) participation in outreach programs designed to increase
minority student recruitment and retention at the undergraduate level. The
project also involves a graduate student exchange program with the Eindhoven
University of Technology in The Netherlands, which will facilitate a
intellectual and cultural experience for students at both institutions.

The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials
science having high technological relevance in a variety of fields such as
microelectronics, optoelectronics, and photovoltaics. The study is unique in the
sense that it brings together a variety of state-of-the-art surface and gas-
phase diagnostics to investigate gas-surface dynamics during deposition of thin
films and nanolaminates through ALD and MLD. The general methodology and
diagnostic tools will assist the PI is setting up a broader program for studying
interfacial phenomena in other thin-film deposition processes, such as plasma-
enhanced CVD. The multidisciplinary nature of the research encompasses physics,
chemistry, engineering, and materials science. Besides development of new
courses, several aspects of this work will be used to enhance existing courses
in photovoltaics, plasma science, and microfabrication at CSM.