* 0846554
* CAREER: New Algorithmic Approaches to Computationally Challenging Stochastic Supply Chain and Revenue Management Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Retsef Levi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project is the development of a unified computational and theoretical
framework that will bridge the gap between multi-period stochastic optimization
models and computationally challenging practical large-scale applications in
supply-chain and revenue management. Consider a firm like Amazon that has to
manage over 40 million different items to satisfy customer purchases in a timely
manner. Amazon has to make many daily decisions, such as how many units of each
item to stock, where to locate inventories, and how to ship orders to customers.
The management of this large supply chain is very challenging especially because
the future customer demands and supplies are uncertain and fluctuate over time.
Demand forecasts are one of the most effective tools in managing future
uncertainties. However, how to use demand forecasts to devise an effective
inventory control policy that matches supply and demand is a challenging problem
both for researchers and practitioners. Another example is workforce revenue
management optimization, where companies like IBM have to manage pools of
skilled workers over time to handle multiple consulting projects, aiming at
choosing the most profitable ones. Traditional modeling tools like dynamic
programming are effective in studying structural properties of the optimal
policies of some of these models. However, they typically don?t lead to
efficient procedures to compute optimal or even good policies for practical
instances. This research project seeks to develop a new algorithmic framework to
study these problems under general modeling assumptions that capture their
practical aspects. The new algorithms will be based on several new techniques,
such as marginal cost-accounting schemes and cost-balancing techniques, and
provide simple to implement, yet provably near-optimal policies. A key research
methodology is the use of theoretical and computational performance analysis to
guide the development of the new algorithms. Through collaborations with
industry partners the algorithms will be tested on real
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses several broad application
domains in supply-chain and revenue management. If successful, the results of
this research will lead to a unified modeling and algorithmic framework to study
these practical problems in broader perspectives than the current state-of-the-
art. This will expand the theoretical and computational understanding of these
challenging problems. In the longer-term, the combination of more sophisticated
models that capture the practical aspects of the problems together with
conceptually simple and efficient algorithms is likely to lead to significant
improvements in the performance and efficiencies of the respective supply chains
and other business environments. Collaboration with industry partners will be
used to enhance the practical impact of this research project, and to enrich the
classroom experience for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;