* 0846188
* CAREER:  Transformation and Transport of Organic Carbon in the Colorado River-Reservoir System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Hilairy Hartnett, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2014
* USD 573,548.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Rivers are the dynamic link between
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. The biogeochemical processes that produce,
consume, and transform organic carbon in rivers are critical to understanding
regional carbon budgets, the controls on river water quality, and ultimately the
export of terrestrial organic carbon to coastal regions. Our basic understanding
of river carbon cycling is based largely on data from pristine rivers; yet today
virtually all rivers are managed to optimize water supply, flood control and
hydropower. On the Colorado River a system of dams and reservoirs has
dramatically altered hydrodynamics and geomorphology, water residence time,
particle load, light conditions, and sediment-water interactions. Comparatively
little is known about the effects of these reservoirs on carbon biogeochemistry.
This project will assess the distribution, composition and reactivity of
terrestrial and riverine carbon along a sequence of well-characterized
reservoirs in a single watershed. &lt;br/&gt; This CAREER project integrates
hypothesis-driven biogeochemical research questions, state-of-the-art analytical
approaches, and innovative teaching strategies to address three fundamental
research elements: &lt;br/&gt;1. Developing a regional carbon budget for the
Colorado River System using a combination of field measurements and laboratory
manipulation experiments.&lt;br/&gt;2. Examining the composition, reactivity,
and fate of dissolved and particulate organic carbon in the Colorado River
System.&lt;br/&gt;3. Enhancing learning outcomes for geoscience students through
field-based teaching.&lt;br/&gt;Longitudinal water sampling, carbon
characterization, and biogeochemical process studies, culminating in a carbon
budget for each reservoir, will assess the trophic state of the river system and
reveal new insights into the interactions among the biological and physico-
chemical mechanisms that transform terrestrial and riverine carbon. The research
and teaching will be integrated through inquiry-based student field-projects
that address discrete questions complementary to the broader scientific
objective; the students results will be integrated into classroom activities,
enhancing science education for hundreds of other students. This project will
provide undergraduate geoscientists the skills to address complex environmental
problems by exposing them to field-based research at an early stage in their
academic career. The Colorado river system provides a unique opportunity to
study a large managed river, and the results of this work will provide insight
for the biogeochemical mechanisms that support carbon cycling in contemporary
river systems.&lt;br/&gt;