* 0846112
* Career: Cognitive Auditory Systems for Processing of Complex Acoustic Scenes
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Mounya Elhilali, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 556,421.00

Performance of hearing systems and speech technologies can benefit greatly from
a deeper appreciation and knowledge of how the brain processes and perceives
sounds. While most current systems invoke operations akin to the peripheral
auditory system, they stop shy of incorporating promising capabilities of the
central auditory system, most importantly its ability to adapt to the demands of
an ever-changing acoustic environment. Recent physiological findings are
amending existing dogmas of processing in auditory cortex; replacing
conventional views of "static" processing in sensory cortex with a more "active"
and malleable mapping that rapidly adapts to behavioral tasks and listening
conditions. Hence, a new architecture for sound processing based on cognitive
and adaptive processes promises to open a revolutionary frontier for hearing and
speech technologies.

The PI will conduct a five year CAREER award study aimed at developing effective
algorithmic implementations to tackle challenging sound and speech processing
problems in real ecological environments. This research aims at providing a
rigorous framework for designing experiments that test the role and mechanisms
of active and cognitive adaptation in the auditory system. This
interdisciplinary effort will integrate techniques from neurophysiology,
psychophysics, computational neuroscience and engineering. The planned research
will focus on: (i) developing a computational model for adaptive and cognitive
auditory processing using dynamic systems techniques such as adaptive and kalman
filtering; (ii) furthering understanding of the role of cortical plasticity in
auditory perception with a series of experiments with human subjects (using
psychoacoustics and Magnetoencephalography -MEG-) aimed at exploring the neural
correlates, time course and role of these adaptive processes; (iii) assessing
the computational and experimental findings in a range of engineering
applications; and (iv) exploring the integration of higher cortical processing
capabilities in hearing prostheses.

This research effort is complemented by an educational plan aimed at promoting
education in the field of adaptive and cognitive audition, through the
development of new undergraduate and graduate curricula, introduction of new
educational and assessment tools for improving and monitoring student
achievements, as well as outreach activities to attract talented individuals to
the field of cognitive engineering.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).