* 0846641
* CAREER: The Effect of Latent Heating on the Hadley Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Dargan Frierson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2015
* USD 576,196.00

The Hadley circulation is a dominant feature of the climate system. Its strength
and extent are connected to the distribution of clouds, water vapor,
precipitation, surface winds, and ocean currents throughout the tropics and
subtropics. Despite the primary role of latent heating in driving the Hadley
circulation, most previous theoretical work has used dry models. The research
goals of this project are to test theories for the Hadley circulation using a
hierarchy of general circulation models, with particular focus on an idealized
moist model that uses simplified parameterizations and allows for large
parameter variations and ease of interpretation and reproducibility of results.
The importance of physical effects, such as eddy fluxes of moisture, heat, and
momentum in modifying the zonally symmetric theories in the past will be
investigated. Simulations with a range of prescribed ocean heat fluxes (both
symmetric about the equator and centered off-equator), with zonally asymmetric
boundary conditions, with changes to the height of the tropopause, and with
changes to the convective parameterization will be performed in order to
investigate how these different factors and processes affect the Hadley
circulation. Simulations with an idealized coupled ocean-atmosphere model will
also be performed. The hierarchy of models is chosen to isolate individual
physical effects in models of maximal simplicity first, then add in different
effects systematically, and then compare with more comprehensive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals of this project are to inform
high school students, undergraduates, and the general public about the
importance of condensation as a source of heat in the atmosphere. At the high-
school level, this will be accomplished with a series of laboratory experiments
with students from two different climate zones. The students will measure the
effect of condensation on the outside of cooled drink cans on raising the
temperature of the liquid therein, and will compare data between the two sites.
The Principal Investigator (PI) will visit the site in central Washington State,
which has a high percentage of minority and low-income students, to give
presentations about the effects of condensation on the atmosphere. In addition
to the outreach experiments, educational and research goals will be integrated
by using undergraduate and graduate research assistants in the project and by
presenting research results and concepts to the general public in the form of
essays.