* 0846475
* CAREER: Fusion of Multi-scale Sensing and Simulations for Bridge Scour Risk Management: An Integrated Research and Educational Plan
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Xiong Yu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 06/30/2015
* USD 450,001.00

ARRA statement: This CAREER proposal will be awarded using funds made available
by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and
meets the requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum
entitled, Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20,
2009. I also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does
not support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery
Act. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER plan integrates research and educational
activities to reduce the risk of bridge scour, the number one cause of bridge
failures. &lt;br/&gt;The research activities combine the development of
innovative sensors with advanced simulations, and aim to overcome the
limitations of the existing theories and testing methods. The research program
is expected to make significant scientific contributions in development of 1)
innovative laboratory and field sensors to monitor bridge scour and understand
the dynamic damaging mechanisms involved, specially the effects of turbulence on
processes of sediment transport and 2) a capability to accurately predict bridge
scour under turbulent conditions incorporating multi-scale Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) methods and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The sensors
and cyber computational tools will improve the design of scour countermeasures
thus ensuring safety and economy through protection of critical transportation
infrastructures. The CAREER research plan will be implemented through a strong
partnership with governmental agencies and professional
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This integrated research and
educational career development program also includes activities that would
enrich the engineering classroom experience of undergraduate, graduate, and K-12
students and teachers. These will include the development of new course
materials related to infrastructure engineering, an area of focus of Civil
Engineering program at Case Western University. Students and K-12 teachers will
be provided with research-based learning experience. Students at all levels will
also be encouraged to participate in real or simulated engineering case studies
to be showcased to the communities on the local level and beyond.