* 0846053
* CAREER: An Effective Integration of Research and Education on High-Speed and Energy-Efficient Interconnects for Multi-Core and Multi-Thread Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Jiangjiang Liu, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal ID: 0846053 &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: An Effective Integration of
Research and Education on High-Speed and Energy-Efficient Interconnects for
Multi-Core and Multi-Thread Systems&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Jiangjiang Liu
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
project is to improve the speed and energy efficiency of computers that use
multi-core systems. There is enormous demand for these multi-core systems in
high-performance and data-intensive applications. When information is sent from
one core to another, the interconnect devices create a bottleneck. Compressing
the information to reduce its size speeds up the transfer over the interconnects
and reduces energy consumption. This project will conduct the first
comprehensive compressibility analysis of information on all important
interconnect components for multi-core systems in the context of real-world
application programs. This will help guide the proposed design of compression
techniques for interconnects and provide a deeper understanding of how
compression should be applied to help interconnect performance and alleviate
energy bottlenecks in multi-core systems. Three novel information compression
techniques are proposed. The proposed methods can be adapted and applied to
address high-speed I/O channel performance and energy
bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER project effectively
integrates research and education; promotes undergraduate and graduate research;
stimulates and equips aspiring computer science undergraduates who are
underrepresented or economically challenged in advanced study; triggers initial
interest of K-12 students in computing with strong outreach efforts; enhances
Lamar?s infrastructure by providing high-performance computing equipment;
enhances scientific and technological understanding by disseminating the results
of the program to a broad audience through international publications and a
dedicated website; and advances and accelerates expansion of high performance
computing applications as well as commercial business applications by improving
the interconnect speed and overall performance of multi-core systems.