* 0846705
* CAREER: Electrohydrodynamic Coulter Counting
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Chuan-Hua Chen, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 03/31/2014
* USD 418,000.00

0846705 &lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Coulter counter detects and
characterizes particles by the modulation of electrical current through a small
fluidic aperture. This study hopes to establish a new paradigm of Coulter
counting using electrohydrodynamic (EHD) cone-jets, and demonstrate the
potential of this technique in quantifying and deploying nanoscale objects
ranging from biological macromolecules to synthetic nanoparticles. Resistive
nanopore sensing is a miniaturized descendent of Coulter counting using
biological or synthetic nanopores. Contemporary nanopore sensors typically have
fixed diameters and suffer from either short life spans or low reproducibility.
These limitations can be circumvented by exploiting the EHD cone-jet transition,
a unique phenomenon that permits production of tunable nanoscale liquid jets
from much larger nozzles off-the-shelf. To this end, experimental and analytical
tools will be combined to identify conditions required for reproducible EHD jets
at both micron and sub-micron levels. By integrating Coulter counting with EHD
cone-jets, a drop-and-place technique for deploying nano-objects will be
developed with unprecedented single-particle accuracy. This study will address
the following fundamental questions associated with the development of the EHD
Coulter counting technique: Can nanoscale EHD jets, with or without intrinsic
pulsations, be reproducibly generated and detected? Can a liquid jet be used in
lieu of a synthetic pore to accomplish Coulter counting? Can single-particle
accuracy be achieved in EHD deployment? The interrelated experimental and
analytical investigations outlined in the study will reveal scaling laws
governing the dynamics and stability of nanoscale EHD jets, and establish the
performance boundary of the new technique of EHD Coulter counting. The
successful development of an EHD Coulter counter would enable the analysis of
nanoparticles such as drug capsules and quantum dots over a tunable range of
length scale without resorting to labeling, and the deployment of macromolecules
with single-molecule accuracy for protein nanoarrays and in vitro
compartmentalization. Based on this research, the PI will develop a new
graduate-level course in Microscale Physicochemical Hydrodynamics and will train
undergraduate researchers through the Pratt Fellows and NSF REU programs at Duke
University. The PI will recruit a teacher for two summer internships from the
Southern School of Engineering, a high school that offers a pre-engineering
program with a predominant African American enrollment. This teacher will
participate in building prototype EHD Coulter counters and in training
university students to communicate scientific ideas at the high school level and
then, assisted by the PI, transfer the knowledge in state-of-the-art
microfluidics research into a high school level curricular unit that supports
the North Carolina Standard Course of Study.