* 0846010
* CAREER: Contingent Static Analysis for Dynamically Composed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Jeffery von Ronne, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 425,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Pervasive societal use of information systems has increased the need for
software to be both reliable and extensible. One technique that can be used to
improve software reliability is the application of static analyses to discover
and validate that properties hold across all program executions. Unfortunately,
additional challenges arise when applying static analyses to programs that can
be dynamically extended, such as is the case, for example, with Firefox plugins,
Microsoft Office Add-Ins, and Eclipse plugins. This project will develop
techniques for contingent static analysis that will be able to more precisely
and efficiently analyze dynamically extensible software systems.

Specifically, this project will explore techniques for accommodating dynamic
composition during interprocedural program analysis using a runtime mechanism to
efficiently avoid making overly conservative approximations. Analysis results
will be expressed as contingent properties of different program regions, where
the validity of each contingent property depends explicitly on the validity of
properties from other program regions. The runtime mechanism will then validate
and invalidate these contingent properties as new code is dynamically loaded
into the execution environment. This approach will be applied to develop
contingent escape and information flow analyses.