* 0846539
* CAREER:  Nanowire Interfaces for Increased Strength and Multifunctionality
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Henry Sodano, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2011
* USD 410,478.00

The objective of this CAREER research and education plan is to study a novel
ceramic ZnO nanowire interface recently identified by the PI to study the role
of a nanowire interphase on the mechanical and multifunctional properties of a
fiber reinforced composite. This fundamental study will develop a theory
defining the translation of the properties from the nanowire interface to the
macroscopic response and characterize the failure mechanism of the interface.
Both experimental and theoretical analyses will be employed to study the
structure-property relationships of the interface and their influence on the
material?s mechanical and functional response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research extends beyond carbon fiber composites with
potential scientific findings that can be applied to continuous and
discontinuous fiber reinforced metal and ceramic matrix composites. The effort
may also lead to new methods for functionally grading other interfaces such as
those found in prosthetics and biological implants leading to new biologically
inspired interfaces which rarely exhibit discrete boundaries between two
materials of vastly different mechanical properties. Fundamental advances in the
modeling of composite systems with active nanoscale inclusions in the interphase
will be accomplished, resulting in future applications of this technology,
ranging from self-monitoring biological implants to energy harvesting
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this CAREER plan
is designed to transfer state-of-the-art research to the classroom and enhance
engineering recruitment and retention by targeting students from middle school
to graduate level. A Family Engineering Night (FEN) has been planned which will
incorporate ASU undergraduates from four minority student groups, a research-
driven course in nano and multi-scale composites, and the continuation of a
strong undergraduate research program. The purpose is to enhance recruitment and
retention of engineers, including minorities and underrepresented groups, and
motivate students to commit to a life-long process of learning and sustained
involvement in science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;