* 0846784
* CAREER: Atomic-Resolution Study of Electron-Spin Interaction in Strongly-Correlated Mixed-Valence Cobalt Oxide Nano-Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Robert Klie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The performance and reliability of many electronic
devices is frequently governed by the stability and durability of the device?s
active component materials. For example, atomic level structural defects, or
interfaces between different materials often cause decreases in device
performance, or total failure at a macro level. At the same time, however, some
future applications will actually rely on the presence of these atomic level
defects and interfaces to improve the device?s performance. These defects and
interfaces are unavoidable, but by understanding how to control and manipulate
their influence on a material?s properties, we can improve the functionality of
the material on the macro level. Accordingly, a fundamental understanding of how
atomic-scale defects or interfaces influence a material?s macroscopic behavior
is essential to continuing the development of reliable, next generation devices.
Cobalt oxides are one class of ceramic materials that has recently attracted
scientific attention as an inexpensive, non-toxic, and highly stabile group of
compounds with properties such as superconductivity, thermo-electric behavior,
or magneto-resistive behavior. These properties make cobalt oxides attractive
for use in a wide range of new device applications. For example, the magnetic
properties of cobalt oxides have the potential to revolutionize magnetic storage
in high capacity solid-state computer hard-drives, while their thermo-electric
properties may lead to the development of coatings that will allow heat from
automotive tailpipes or furnace exhaust pipes to be converted into electricity.
At present, however, cobalt oxides are neither reliable nor efficient enough for
viable macroscopic applications, because there is a lack a fundamental
understanding of what is happening with the material on the atomic-level. This
CAREER grant utilizes atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron
microscopy combined with electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) to investigate
the fundamental mechanisms governing the magnetic and electrical properties of
cobalt-oxide ceramics and the effects of defects and interfaces on these
properties. The educational aspect of this proposal involves training of
undergraduate and graduate students, in particular underrepresented minorities,
in state-of-the-art materials characterization. Summer programs for
undergraduate students will be developed, and the participation of undergraduate
students in research projects will be fostered further through the PI?s Journal
of Undergraduate Research at the University of Illinois at
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The objective of this
CAREER proposal is to examine how charge, orbital and spin-interactions
influence the magnetic and electronic structures of mixed-valence cobalt-oxide
ceramics. Two systems will be examined: LaCoO3 and Ca3Co4O9. These systems were
chosen for their intriguing, potentially widely useful properties, and for their
status as model structures for other strongly correlated cobalt-oxide ceramics.
LaCoO3 exhibits magneto-transport properties as well as two spin-state
transitions that result in magnetic phase transitions without any structural
transition, while the misfit-layered Ca3Co4O9 shows an exceptionally high
thermo-power. Atomic-resolution Z-contrast imaging in a scanning transmission
electron microscope (STEM) with (EELS) and in-situ heating/cooling experiments
(10 &lt; T &lt; 1000 K) is being used to study the local atomic and electronic
structures of these materials. The PI?s laboratory setup includes an aberration-
corrected STEM, which will allow for sub-Ã… spatial-resolution and sub-eV energy-
resolution, as well as a conventional TEM/STEM for atomic-resolution insitu
heating and cooling experiments. The insitu STEM analysis will be supported by
MBE thinfilm synthesis, macroscopic magnetization, transport measurements, and
surface characterization, as well as first principles modeling. This combination
of experimental and theoretical techniques enables the fundamental structure-
properties relationship of charge, orbital and spin-interactions in mixed-
valence cobalt-oxide ceramics to be unraveled, which could advance the field of
electro-ceramics and lead to the discovery of emergent phenomena that can be
used as innovative devices and sensors. An important feature of this program is
the integration of research and education through the training of undergraduate
and graduate students in cutting-edge transmission electron microscopy and
theoretical materials science.