* 0846258
* CAREER:  Cooperative Human-Computer Model Updating Cognitive Systems (MUCogS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Juan Caicedo, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this early
career development (CAREER) project is to develop a framework for cooperative
human-computer Model Updating Cognitive systems (MUCogS). Commonly used
numerical modeling techniques, such as finite or boundary elements, provide
accurate representations of simple structures, but until data and additional
observations are incorporated into these models they often fail to represent the
physical parameters of complex existing structures with desirable levels of
accuracy. Model updating techniques are used to enhance these numerical models
based on experimental data. Current model updating techniques obtain one model
that best matches the existing structure by minimizing the error between
experimental measurements and data produced by the numerical model. The analyst
is limited to the selection of an initial model, adjusting few algorithm
parameters or ?knobs? and has little control on the process performed by the
algorithm itself. This research changes this paradigm by designing advances
algorithms to detect several plausible solutions to the model updating problem.
A trained engineer can use his/her engineering judgment to select one or several
appropriated models for subsequent analysis. Through this framework MUCogS
formally include the analyst on the model updating technique creating a
cooperative human-computer system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has direct
application in any field of structural engineering that incorporates numerical
modeling of existing structures (e.g., earthquake engineering, wind engineering
and structural health monitoring). The successful completion of this research
will significantly enhance an engineer?s ability to validate innovative designs,
evaluate the performance and detect damage of existing structures. This
advancement directly impacts state, federal and private budgets dedicated to
infrastructure maintenance and replacement. The educational component of this
research includes the development of engineering judgment among undergraduate
students by nurturing critical thinking through the implementation of inquiry-
based teaching in structural engineering classes. The outreach activities focus
on exposing urban schools, with a significant population of minority students,
to structural engineering. In addition, undergraduate research assistants are
included on the research activities during the duration of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;