* 0846363
* CAREER: Adaptive Biomaterials that Enable Cell-Induced Remodeling and Drug Release
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sarah Heilshorn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0846363 PI: Heilshorn, Sarah ORG:
Stanford&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Adaptive Biomaterials that Enable
Cell-Induced Remodeling and Drug Release&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: No current therapies exist to
induce complete spinal cord regeneration; however, the clinical community
suggests that a combined approach involving biodegradable materials, cell
transplantation, and drug delivery offers the best hope. Towards this broader
goal, the focus of this project is to develop new design strategies for
adaptable biomaterials that undergo predictable, cell-induced remodeling. All of
these materials are fabricated using recombinant protein engineering technology,
which allows precise molecular-level control over the entire primary structure.
Due to this exquisite level of control, the initial mechanical properties,
degradation profile, and cell adhesivity of the biomaterial can be independently
and exactly tuned. Through precise design of these adaptable biomaterials,
dynamic two-way communication is enabled between the biomaterial and embedded
cells. This two-way cell-scaffold communication will be studied using neural
progenitor cells encapsulated within these adaptable biomaterials. In Aim 1, the
relationship between initial biomaterial properties (elasticity and cell-
receptor-ligand density) and cell phenotypic response (three-dimensional neurite
outgrowth and protease enzyme secretion) will be determined. The PI hypothesizes
that neurite outgrowth can be directed through material design. In Aim 2, the PI
will develop a theoretical model to predict degradation profiles and compare
this model to experimental measurements of cell-induced remodeling. It is
hypothesized that cell-scaffold interactions can be dynamically controlled
through precise local tuning of the degradation rate. In Aim 3, the PI will
explore the use of cell-induced remodeling as a trigger to release peptide
pharmaceuticals from biomaterials. It is hypothesized that tailoring of the
biomaterial degradation rate and the peptide diffusion rate will provide
predictable delivery profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This
program includes an integrated education plan that promotes teaching and
learning across multiple groups. At the high school level, students from under-
represented groups will participate in hands-on research, share their
experiences with peers and teachers in the classroom, and receive continued
mentoring as they embark on their collegiate careers. Success of this new
program will be assessed with help from the Stanford Office for Science
Outreach, and results will be disseminated at national conferences and in
engineering education journals. The integrated education plan also includes
activities to promote diversity and interdisciplinary training for undergraduate
and graduate students through new course development as well as formal and
informal mentoring programs. The research impacts the broader scientific
community by providing new approaches to design highly tailored biomaterials
with adaptive properties. Currently, no general strategy exists to control the
rate of biomaterial adaptation after implantation. These types of adaptive
biomaterials are required to develop therapies for spinal cord regeneration and
may guide the way towards future prosthetic interfaces that integrate with host
tissue, such as implanted prosthetics that grow with a
child.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;