* 0846534
* CAREER: Optics in Biological Research, Education, and Outreach
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Chris Schaffer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0846534 Schaffer

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The PI proposes to develop tools to enable the introduction of exogenous DNA
into specifically targeted cells in the brain of a live rodent, opening the door
to cell-targeted genetic manipulation. This new capability will extend the power
of genetic manipulation techniques to a new class of experiments, where single-
cell targeting enables cell-cell interactions and early stages of disease to be
studied, in vivo. They will use tightly-focused femtosecond laser pulses to
ablate a small, transient hole in the membrane of a targeted cell, allowing DNA
that has been injected into the extracellular space to enter the cell. This hole
rapidly reseals, leaving the cell alive and functional. Preliminary data
confirms optoporation of targeted cells in vitro and in vivo as well as in vitro
expression of optically transfected DNA. They will extend this technique to in
vivo transfection in targeted brain cells. They further propose to use this
technology to express light-gated ion channels in single brain neurons and use
cell-resolved calcium imaging to follow how the optically initiated firing of
the transfected cell effects activity in surrounding cells. This work could
provide a unique means to study the functional connectivity of cortical neuronal
circuits, in vivo.