* 0846310
* CAREER: Quantitative Characterization of Noncovalent Interactions by Mass Spectrometry - A Systematic Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Kevin Schug, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program supports this CAREER award to Professor Kevin Schug of the University of
Texas - Arlington, to devise means of quantitatively assessing noncovalent
binding interactions by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS).
Host-guest and target-receptor type binding is studied, providing a potentially
powerful tool for applications such as rapid drug discovery. The approach will
be extended to the discovery of new chemical entities (NCEs) incorporating
functionalized nanoparticles as affinity probes to identify new antimicrobial
agents from coral, algae, and sponges. Analyses involving complex matrices
include the consideration of matrix effects during ESI-MS; controlled band-
dispersion methods will be used to probe the concentration dependence of matrix
effects with unprecedented speed and efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
routine use of ESI-MS for quantitative and qualitative analysis in the life
sciences, the proposed research has a broad technical impact, generating a
better understanding of the analytical capabilities of ESI-MS. The impact of the
work is enhanced by Prof. Schug's involvement with a general and highly visible
outreach program for K-12 education (Diversity in Science in the United States
(DISCUS)), targeting but not limited to students of limited English proficiency
(LEP). The DISCUS program is designed to: 1) increase awareness in K-12
students, teachers, and parents of the need for more scientists in the U.S.; 2)
develop and apply pedagogical tools to increase knowledge retention in K-12
science education; and 3) communicate available opportunities and routes to
higher education for underrepresented minority groups and LEP students.
Visibility of the program is maximized through course instruction, web presence,
and participation in state and national fairs and conferences. Students and
researchers involved in this work gain expertise in important analytical methods
(a highly desirable background in industry) and learn to apply these methods in
an interdisciplinary fashion.