* 0846265
* CAREER: Spatial Sensing for Design of Miniature Sensor Array Microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Milutin Stanacevic, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is the
design of algorithms and real-time system implementations for the task of source
localization and separation using miniature sensor arrays. The dimensions of the
arrays are much smaller than the wavelength of the incident signals. The
approach integrates wave-front sensing and independent component analysis in a
framework that has the potential to extend the performance of current source
separation algorithms and result in efficient implementation in mixed-signal
very large-scale integration (VLSI) circuitry, yielding real-time performance in
a small form factor. The extension of the algorithms under study to
electromagnetic waves has the potential to significantly increase the efficiency
of power transfer through inductive coupling for implantable biomedical devices.
Extension to radio frequency (RF) waves presents an alternative solution for
adaptive wideband beam-forming for compact smart antennas in portable
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The miniaturization of sensors poses new
challenges in sensor integration and presents new opportunities to advance the
performance of current systems. The gradient flow method under investigation has
the potential to advance the theory and practice of smart sensor array
interfaces through the synergy of spatial and temporal sensing. The integration
of this biologically-inspired concept has the potential to lead to important
advances in solving the difficult "cocktail party" problem, separating and
distinguishing signals in a noisy environment, observed in
acoustics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed work have the
potential to contribute to a number of applications including intelligent
hearing aids, acoustic monitoring and surveillance in demanding environments,
implantable neural interfaces, and portable communication devices. In addition
to the project's scientific and engineering impact, the research has the
potential to cultivate and introduce interdisciplinary approaches to engineering
problems to undergraduate and graduate students through classes, projects, and
workshops in analog integrated circuit design and sensory information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;