* 0846572
* CAREER:  Advancing Model Predictive Control of Cell Differentiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Ann Rundell, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Number: 0846572

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

CAREER: Advancing Model Predictive Control of Cell Differentiation

Intellectual Merit: One goal of tissue engineering is to direct the
differentiation, integration, and organization of living cells to produce
biological substitutes for organs to meet the need of nearly 100,000 Americans
who are waiting for organ transplants. Current efforts in tissue engineering are
largely driven by experiments with very little guidance from control theory.
This project develops and experimentally evaluates a control theory-based
approach that will facilitate the design of protocols to predictably promote the
differentiation of human promyelocytic leukemia (HL60) cells into monocytes and
granulocytes. Model predictive controllers will be designed using sparse grid-
based optimization methods to select practical values that are robust to model
uncertainties and experimental disturbances. This potentially transformative
research will be among the very first studies specifically designed to develop
and experimentally validate control theory-based strategies to control cellular
differentiation.

Broader Impact: Efforts will be made to educate and inspire tomorrows engineers
to pursue careers that utilize control principles and practices to design
experimental strategies to manipulate cellular processes. It is estimated that
more than 500 graduate, undergraduate, and middle school students will benefit
from the proposed educational activities. Mastery-oriented teaching and small
group mentoring sessions are anticipated to promote student attainment of a
positive self-image, sustained motivation, and life-long learning skills while
the Web-modules, electronic fieldtrips, and summer camp activities will
highlight the beneficial contributions of control engineers to society. This
integrated research and education career plan will have implications for the
control theory, systems biology, tissue engineering, and engineering education
communities.