* 0846952
* CAREER: Vulnerability of Water Infrastructure to Climate Variability and Change: Implications for Sustainable Water Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Sajjad Ahmad, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) Award is to understand the complex and dynamic
interactions among population growth, water-energy nexus, climate change, and
vulnerability, in a coupled human-environmental system. The main objective of
this research is the development of a new theoretical framework, based on
systems approach, for sustainable management of water resources that will reduce
the vulnerability of water infrastructure to climate related extreme events
(floods, droughts). Based on this theoretical framework, a dynamic decision
support system (DSS) will be developed using system dynamics modeling approach.
This DSS will be used to evaluate vulnerability of infrastructure (water
systems, flood control systems) to climate variability and change and to analyze
different short- and long-term policies for sustainable (cost-effective, reduced
energy and carbon footprints) management of water resources. This framework will
potentially transform the way engineers and planners design, evaluate and choose
water development and water supply projects, and will contribute to advancing
engineering methods to promote smart growth. Vulnerability assessment of water
infrastructure to climate variability and change can benefit society by saving
lives and reducing damage to property. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide research experience to graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students.
Stakeholders will participate in project design; results will be disseminated to
scientific community and policy makers; and the public awareness on sustainable
water management issues will increase through outreach activities. An
interdisciplinary course on Sustainable Water Resources Management for graduate
students and a water management simulation game for K-12 students will be
developed. Significant societal benefits through the training of next generation
of engineers in sustainable water management practices are anticipated.