* 0846651
* CAREER: Combined Light and Carrier Localization in High-refractive Index Silicon Nanocrystal Structures: a Novel Approach for Si-based Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Development
project aims to advance nanophotonics by developing a new class of light
emitting devices exploiting aperiodic media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This Faculty Early Career Development project aims to advance
nanophotonics by developing a new class of light emitting devices that leverage
Anderson light localization in deterministic aperiodic media for enhancing
radiative transitions in silicon nanostructures. Differently from conventional
photonic crystals approaches, the proposed research allows broadband engineering
of density of states fluctuations, radiation patterns and localized fields in
photonic-plasmonic nanostructures, enabling unprecedented control and
enhancement of radiative processes on the nanoscale. The active material will
consist of Er ions embedded in Si nitride superlattice structures. This material
provides efficient excitation of Er resulting in 1.54Ã¬m emission, which will
couple with localized modes in aperiodic metal-dielectric arrays. This project
explores for first time Anderson light localization in the context of on-chip
light emission, and will result in the demonstration of photonic-plasmonic
light-emitters susceptible of optical and electrical excitation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The successful demonstration of Si-based
emitters and lasers will extend the reach of optical technologies into diverse
fields, enabling low-cost applications of integrated optics in communication,
processing, interconnects and optical biosensing. The establishment of this
program at Boston University will contribute to a substantial education and
outreach plan with the development of new courses for graduate (Nanophotonics)
and undergraduate students (Science of Light), international symposia and short
courses on Nanophotonics open to the general public and freely accessible
online. These initiatives, combined with the largely interdisciplinary character
of the proposed effort, will attract many young scientists to the exploding new
fields of nanophotonics, plasmonics and light-localization in complex media.