* 0846358
* CAREER:  Highly Resolved, Process-Driven Fossil Fuel Carbon Dioxide Inventory to Advance Carbon Science, Climate Science and 21st Century Decisionmaking and Public Engagement
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Jonathan Harbor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 647,073.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the global fossil fuel
carbon dioxide (CO2) flux at high space/time resolution has emerged as a
critical need in both carbon cycle and climate change science. The Vulcan
Project led by the Principal Investigator (PI) has recently completed such an
inventory for the United States at &lt;10 km/hourly scales with mechanistic
detail. In this project, the PI plans to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extend Vulcan:
Build a global fossil fuel CO2 emissions inventory that more accurately
allocates emissions in space/time than is currently available. The PI will
combine the recently-constructed global power plant database, monthly energy
supply/demand statistics, digital road atlas data, and NASA "nightlights"
observations to build this inventory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enlist Vulcan: With
the improved global Vulcan emissions as a key boundary condition, the PI will
generate new inverse estimates of the non-fossil net carbon exchange, utilizing
a traditional Bayesian inverse approach and a maximum likelihood ensemble filter
assimilation system. Sensitivity and error analysis will be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enrich Vulcan: The North American Vulcan
inventory can offer much more insight through integration of carbon science with
social science and economics to create new knowledge and support national
priorities in carbon management and climate change mitigation. The open,
accessible, visual data will empower/educate the public and overcome many of the
conceptual barriers to understanding the climate change problem. This
information will be hosted online in an open, visual, web-compliant
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educate with Vulcan: The PI will build the
"Footprint" Lab, a virtual learning environment where students "adopt" a
country/U.S. state and collaborate with researchers, instructors and the public
on discovery, verification, application, and other activities that immerse them
in a long-term, collaborative research network. The virtual lab will consist of
a geographic information system (GIS)-based, Google Earth-like, interactive,
collaborative environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is part of a long-
term vision aimed at advancing fundamental knowledge of carbon biogeochemistry
and climate change science through downscaling of fossil fuel CO2 fluxes and
incorporating those fluxes into inverse/assimilation systems. This long-term
vision also aims to benefit national priorities in carbon management,
mitigation, carbon trading and energy policy. In order to build the global
fossil CO2 flux inventory and enrich the existing North American inventory a
virtual, interactive learning environment will be constructed. This will form
the basis of a long-term, web 2.0-style network in which students, instructors,
researchers and the public interact, collaborate and share knowledge. The
"placed-based" nature of the research offers a compelling entry point for
students of diverse geographic, ethnic, and intellectual backgrounds in addition
to offering a web-based platform for public engagement and education.