* 0846783
* CAREER: Stability and Performance of Systems with Network-Induced Delays
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tamas Kalmar-Nagy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 135,612.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this integrated
research and educational endeavor is to advance the fundamental understanding of
the behavior of interconnected systems by studying the influence of delays on
their stability and performance. The proposed theoretical approach builds on a
hybrid system formulation for networked systems with delays. The novelty lies in
expressing the Lyapunov exponent ?a measure of stability- as a path average and
characterizing the discrete structure associated with the hybrid system (the
underlying graph). The statistical properties of the induced random walk on the
underlying graphs will be used to quantify stability and performance properties
of the networked system in terms of the moments of the delay distribution. This
is achieved by combining techniques and tools of dynamical systems techniques
(Lyapunov exponent, cell-to-cell mapping), discrete mathematics (graph theory
and generating functions) and statistical physics (random matrix products,
random walks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems of communicating components have
impacted a broad range of applications including space exploration, mobile
sensor networks, teleoperated surgical robots, control of teams of vehicles, and
integrated building systems. With the proliferation of embedded processors
interacting through networks, the analysis of communicating dynamic components
is timely and important. Such systems are common in chemical/nuclear plants,
cars, aircrafts, and thus questions regarding their stability and performance
should be rigorously studied. Due to network traffic, the signal delays can only
be statistically characterized. The fundamental contribution of this proposal is
a novel theoretical and computational framework for studying stability and
performance of interconnected systems with random time delays.&lt;br/&gt; The
education goal is to excite students about the possibilities in science and
engineering through engaging courses and involvement in a multidisciplinary and
multilevel project emphasizing practical problem solving, creative design, and
the scientific method. To integrate educational activities with experimental
validation of the proposed theory, a distributed testbed of vehicles/robots will
be built by a multidisciplinary and multilevel team supervised by the PI.