* 0846877
* CAREER: Unified Optimal Control and Estimation of Nonlinear Dynamic Systems with Closed-Form Solutions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ming Xin, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
ECCS-0846877&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Unified Optimal Control and
Estimation of Nonlinear Dynamic Systems with Closed-Form
Solutions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Xin, Ming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI
Institution: Mississippi State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to create a unified theoretic framework for
optimal control and estimation of nonlinear dynamic systems. The approach is to
(1) establish a rigorous theory and efficient algorithms for solving nonlinear
optimal control problems with closed-form solutions for a variety of terminal
conditions; (2) develop a dual nonlinear estimation technique using a unified
methodology derived from the control algorithm; (3) systematically integrate the
control and estimation algorithms and validate them through simulation studies
and experiments. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The novel theory will provide
new perspectives and tools to solve the traditionally difficult nonlinear
optimal control and estimation problems. The unified approach will give simpler
closed-form solutions and overcome the computational barriers. More importantly,
the new results will expand the optimal control application horizon
significantly since most real systems have nonlinear dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The success of this research represents a breakthrough in optimization
of a wide variety of complex dynamic systems, which will have a profound impact
on many aspects of the economy and society. The novel research results will
provide the state-of-the-art content for new courses, research topics, as well
as hands-on learning opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. The
educational impact can be maximized by involving students in integrating the new
techniques into the flight control research of unmanned air vehicles and micro-
satellite project at the Mississippi State University. The dissemination of this
new technique through the university?s unique outreach program will have a great
impact on attracting local high school and minority students' enthusiasm in
engineering.