* 0846133
* CAREER:   Organization of Social Structure and its Influence on Transmission Dynamics in a Honeybee Colony
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Dhruba Naug, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 09/30/2015
* USD 650,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just like any other large social group,
the honeybee colony critically relies on an efficient transfer of material and
information among individuals. The interaction network which makes this possible
is, however, also open to exploitation by pathogens or other harmful agents
which can rapidly spread and infect the large number of available hosts, posing
a serious challenge for the group. In a honeybee colony, the task based
separation of individuals into behaviorally and spatially distinct subsets
offers a potential mechanism by which the colony can resist the spread of an
infectious pathogen and understanding its details can thus provide important
insights into how the organizational structure of a social group can influence
the transmission of an infectious disease. The objectives of this project are to
understand the interaction network in a honeybee colony in terms of the
behavioral and physiological mechanisms at the individual level, how the
structural and functional properties of the network contribute to material flow
within the colony, and how individual-level physiological and behavioral
alterations could change the network structure and alter transmission patterns
in response to infections. The project will also use inquiry-based
investigations in animal behavior and disease ecology to get K-5 students,
especially girls, involved in science and K-5 teachers motivated to develop
science curriculum based on actual hands-on research. The project will widen the
career options for undergraduates by involving them in classroom teaching and
contributing to their training as scientists and educators. Understanding the
influence of social structure on honeybee diseases makes this study timely to
address the recent concern about the health of honeybees, a topic of national
importance but also important for extending our still incipient knowledge of
biological networks in general.