* 0846910
* CAREER: Graphene and Graphene Nanoribbon Optoelectronic Properties and Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Huili (Grace) Xing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Chiral Nanostructure Hybrid Materials for Applications in Terahertz
Reso-nator and Magnetic Storage Devices The objective of this research is the
design, fabrication, investigation and optimization of novel chiral
nanostructure hybrid material devices for applications in Terahertz
emitter/receiver systems and magnetic memories with increased storage capacity.
The approach is to compose metal chiral sculptured thin films deposited by
glancing angle deposition. Hybridization is ob-tained by filling low viscous
monomers into nanostructures pores, and subsequent polymeriza-tion will
transform the composite materials into functional hybrids. The
educational/outreach program consists of a nanotechnology mini-course for middle
school students, female student e-mentoring, development of a new materials
research program graduate course; and international student exchange in
cooperation with the University of Linkoping in Sweden. Intellectual Merit: The
research plan will lead to breakthrough advances for revolutionary new
electromagnetic devices from chiral nanostructure hybrids. The potential three-
dimensional non-volatile magnetic storage media may reach capacities far beyond
the currently available sto-rage densities, and the active Terahertz resonator
structures may be incorporated in Terahertz sources and detectors. Broader
Impact: Expanding non-volatile direct-access computer memory beyond current
limits will revolutionize data storage management. Development of Terahertz
devices will en-able medical and security screening. Communication, computing,
security, and health will immediately benefit from enabling this device
technology. The female student electronic mentoring system closes an identified
gap between female school students and engineering students, and enables female
student commitment to engineering majors. The nanotechnology summer course to be
developed fulfills recently identified gaps within the summer student outreach
activities.