* 0846825
* CAREER: Multi-Scale Study of Transport Phenomena in Printable Electronics for Enhanced Microstructure and Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Ying Sun, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 11/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0846825&lt;br/&gt;Y. Sun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This career plan will advance the
fundamental understanding of transport processes of inkjet-printed functional
materials on flexible substrates through the integration of innovative research
and education. The proposed research combines novel modeling and experiments
that include: (i) in-situ observation and multi-scale modeling of the flow, heat
and mass transfer induced by the interplay of wetting, evaporation, and self-
assembly of inkjet-deposited materials; (ii) laser and plasma substrate surface
modification for improved deposition in a roll-to-roll (R2R) format; and (iii)
microstructural and electrical-thermalmechanical property characterization of
deposited material. The focus is on the mesoscopic scale, where Marangoni flow,
evaporation, and particle self-assembly can be directly observed. A lattice
Boltzmann model will be developed to directly simulate drop impact and
evaporation on surface modified substrates; particle-particle, particle-carrier
liquid, and particle-substrate interactions; and final morphology of deposited
particulate materials. In contrast to previous experiments that have only been
concerned with post-mortem analysis of deposited structures, the proposed
experiments will integrate ultrafast confocal microscopy and micro-particle
image velocimetry systems to monitor in real-time particle self-assembly during
the evaporation phase and to provide model validations. The maskless laser
patterning combined with plasma etching alters substrate surface energies and
hence provides wetting controls for a confined deposition. The laser-created
patterns with increased surface areas due to ablative roughening will enhance
adhesion of the deposited materials. Modern characterization techniques (e.g.,
SEM, TEM, AFM, nano-indentation, and infrared microscopy) will be used to
determine final microstructures as well as electrical, thermal, and mechanical
properties of deposited materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Environmentally-benign R2R electronics fabrication using inkjet printing and
direct laser patterning on flexible substrates is an enabling technology that
will provide desired high-volume, low-cost production of flexible electronics.
The proposed work will yield important understanding of how the final
microstructure and properties of deposited materials depend on the electronic
ink formulation, processing conditions, and substrate properties. The intrinsic
limits on the spatial accuracy of ink-jetting devices, wetting, de-wetting,
contact line pinning, interfacial instabilities, microflows within the deposited
drop, and the self-assembly of particulate matter during drop evaporation all
contribute to the lack of precise control of deposited electronic materials. The
pre-patterned substrate surface will provide preferential wetting and dewetting
of the inkjetted material and better substrate adhesion. This will enable more
reliable deposition patterns with better edge definition, higher resolution, and
improved electrical-thermal-mechanical properties of printable electronics and
devices. This project will also impact other research frontiers on complex
fluids involving phase change and particle
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is an excellent fit
to the strategic directions of the Center for Advanced Microelectronics
Manufacturing, a national microelectronics R2R manufacturing R&amp;D center at
Binghamton. Knowledge obtained from this project will have a dramatic impact on
the processing of printable electronics, ranging from low-cost consumer
products, solar cells, and low-power lighting to highly specialized small scale
sensors and healthcare devices. The integrated education plan seeks to enhance
thermo-fluid science education through the development of new courses to
highlight multiscale modeling and nanoscale phenomena at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. As an offshoot of the proposed computational modeling
work, courseware for virtual thermo-fluid laboratories will be developed.
Through recruiting visits at local secondary schools and involvement with the
local Society of Women Engineers chapter, a sustained effort to attract women
and other under-represented students in engineering programs will be made.
Printable electronics will be demonstrated at the Watson Engineer's Week Open
House and through Summer Science Camp at the Discovery Center in Binghamton.
Seminars on the processing of flexible electronics for mid-career professionals
will emphasize on the structureproperty-performance relationships. The
partnership with Endicott Interconnect on laser surface treatment will enable
internship opportunities and foster the research to innovation transition. The
collaboration with novel ink and substrate providers (e.g., Corning) will allow
us to customize ink and substrate formulas for each specific application. The
joint effort between the PI and Computer Science faculty at Binghamton will
advance the grid computing capability via the partnership with the New York
State Grid.