* 0846756
* CAREER: Solid-Supported Cyclotrimerizations - A Library Approach to Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Christian Melander, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project will continue work on the development of
methods for the regio- and chemoselective assembly of carbo- and heterocyclic
organic structures using the [2+2+2] cyclotrimerization reaction as a key step.
Despite innovative research development over the last decades, transition-metal
catalyzed cyclotrimerization reactions still suffer from inherent selectivity
and reactivity issues. This research will address these fundamental problems
through the synergistic combination of solid-supported chemistry, linker design,
catalyst development, and the utilization of microwave irradiation. The unifying
cyclotrimerization conditions discovered through this work will be applied to
the synthesis of different benzene- and pyridine-containing natural products.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Alexander Deiters in the Department of Chemistry at
North Carolina State University. Professor Deiters' research efforts revolve
around the development of new methods for the rapid assembly of carbo- and
hetero-cyclic structures using cycloaddition reactions. Such chemistry will
contribute efficient synthetic methodologies, which will have an impact in the
pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. The developed methodology will also
enable the assembly of organic molecules in a more energy efficient way than
existing methodologies.