* 0846074
* CAREER: Passive Wireless Sensor Networks for Bio-inspired Sensor Skins
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Haiying Huang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 06/30/2014
* USD 429,994.00

ARRA statement: This CAREER proposal will be awarded using funds made available
by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and
meets the requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum
entitled, Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20,
2009. I also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does
not support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery
Act. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is formulated to study the
multiplexing and networking of passive wireless sensors for engineered sensor
skins. The proposed multi-disciplinary research is focused to resolve three
major challenges of sensor skins, i.e. electrical wiring, serial sampling, and
information overloading. This project strives to establish a methodology for the
systematic design and effective interrogation of large scale sensor networks.
Equipping man-made systems with the intelligence of detecting small
irregularities over a large area could fundamentally change how they function
and interact with the environment. The proposed sensor skin will enable the
transition of SHM paradigm from crack detection to damage prognosis, allowing
more efficient use of our national resources and infrastructures. If successful,
this will transform the sensor technologies in two critical research fields,
namely engineered sensor skins and structural health monitoring
&lt;br/&gt;Successful demonstration of passive wireless sensor skins will have
profound impacts on broad research areas such as mechatronics, robotics,
bio/medical research, and wearable healthcare, etc. The proposed research will
be integrated into an educational program that shifts the education paradigm
from lecture-based single-discipline teaching to student-centric
multidisciplinary learning. Learning prospective will be broadened by involving
graduate students and undergraduate minority students. Workshops will be offered
to inspire visiting K-12 students to pursue higher education in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;