* 0846196
* CAREER: Co-optimization of Integrated Circuit Design and Manufacturing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Puneet Gupta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,633.00

Proposal ID: 0846196&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Co-optimization of Integrated
Circuit Design and Manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Puneet
Gupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal aims to investigate methods for
co-optimization of integrated circuit design and the manufacturing process for
improved power, performance, yield, cost and turnaround time. The semiconductor
industry is likely to see several radical changes in the fabrication and device
technologies in the next decade. Each of these technologies requires enormous
research investment before they can see any adoption. Conventional after-the-
fact changes to design methodologies and tools to technology leads to wasted
effort and under-utilization of technology. Therefore, this project focuses on
early assessment of circuit design restrictions imposed by technological
choices. ?Equivalent scaling? improvements - perhaps as much as one full
technology generation - must come from new synergies between various ?silos? of
the integrated circuit design to manufacturing flow. The PI plan on developing
an algorithmic method of manufacturing process optimization driven by design
analyses to significantly speed up yield ramp and improve product
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductors have fueled wealth creation
and technological revolution for better quality of life in the past few decades.
The broader impact of the proposed research comes from enabling chip designers
and manufacturers to co-develop future technologies for affordable, high-
performance, high-density, low-power integrated circuits. My work will inform
both the design technology and process technology roadmaps, so as to enable the
electronics industry to derive maximum product benefit from underlying
technology. The education component of the proposal will train a new breed of
designers who are aware of process interactions and process/device engineers
aware of design implications. The PI will leverage UCLA's extensive diversity
and outreach resources to recruit students from female and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;