* 0846256
* PECASE:  Nanoengineered Sensing Skins for Structural Health Monitoring - An Integrated Research and Education Career Experience
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2014
* Jerome Lynch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 12/31/2014
* USD 462,611.00

Structural health monitoring (SHM) systems offer cost-effective health
management solutions for aging civil infrastructure systems. Current SHM systems
are characterized by the use of sensors that measure behavior at a specific
point in the system. In contrast, this proposal explores the creation of a
distributed sensing skin that provides direct spatial mapping of damage. The
sensor paradigm proposed is inspired by the human dermatological system which
offers distributed, multimodal sensing of the environment. Controlled molecular
assembly employing carbon nanotubes and polyelectrolytes yields a homogenous
multi-layered thin film in which four sensing modalities are simultaneously
embedded: strain, pH, humidity and ionic uptake. To measure the spatial
distribution of conductivity changes corresponding to each stimulus, electrical
impedance tomography is adopted. Smart structure technology can also serve as an
exciting backdrop for teaching math and science to middle-school students. To
address the lack of diversity in engineering and to develop an awareness of the
engineering profession in young underrepresented students, a middle-school
outreach program is proposed for inner-city Detroit. Hands-on learning modules
that explore the scientific principles behind the operation of sensors and the
formation of damage in structures will be created. In addition, a professional
short-course on smart structure technology will be created to recruit
professional engineers to serve as outreach mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;