* 0846591
* CAREER:  Structural Identification to Support Infrastructure Decision-Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Franklin Moon, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The research objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
program project are to develop and validate effective approaches to use sensor
data acquired from civil infrastructures to make informed decisions related to
management, preservation and renewal. The approaches to be investigated leverage
advanced sampling techniques to generate large populations of simulation models,
which are used to develop histograms of critical responses through a Bayesian
probabilistic approach that incorporates sensor data. The resulting histograms
are in turn used to provide reliable estimates of vulnerability and risk. The
decision-support frameworks will be developed and evaluated through comparison
with a configurable bridge model housed in the Laboratory of the Intelligent
Infrastructure Institute at Drexel University. This phase of the research will
aim to establish each framework's ability to reliably estimate structural
vulnerability and risk for a wide-range of bridge types and configurations. The
most robust frameworks identified will then be validated through applications to
two long-span bridges in the Philadelphia region. The outcomes of this research
will allow sensor data to be more effectively used to both inform infrastructure
decisions and to enhance related codes and standards as they move towards more
performance-based approaches.

The results of this research will allow engineers and decision-makers to take
advantage of available sensing technologies to more effectively manage, preserve
and renew civil infrastructures. To facilitate this impact, the proposed
research includes an outreach component to directly disseminate the findings to
the practicing engineering population that can benefit the most from them. In
addition, the results of this study will be broadly disseminated through
traditional approaches as well as through the development of an interactive
website. This research will also provide unique training opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate engineering students by placing them in intimate
contact with actual infrastructures throughout all phases of their education.
Finally, this project will promote the participation of traditionally under-
represented groups through targeted recruiting activities aimed at identifying
qualified students to conduct the research.