* 0846025
* CAREER: Towards a rigorous foundation for scheduling in modern systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Adam Wierman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scheduling policies are at the heart of
all computer systems and are a key determinant of system performance. The goal
of this project is to provide a rigorous foundation for modern scheduling design
issues. The project includes two main directions that correspond to two
important modern design paradigms. The first direction is understanding the
impact of prioritization. Prioritization is now a fundamental part of system
design, and it is applied for many reasons, e.g., to provide QoS guarantees, to
provide differentiated service, or simply to provide improved performance. The
second direction is understanding scheduling in distributed/parallel
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;Distributed/parallel designs are now the norm rather
than the exception, and they present a wide variety of important scheduling and
resource allocation issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across these two directions
there are two themes that play a prominent role in the research. The first theme
is the importance of power management in modern designs. As energy costs soar,
power management is increasingly being treated as a first-class design metric,
and must be considered when designing scheduling policies. The second theme is
the benefit of applying economic tools, such as game theoretic techniques, to
approach scheduling questions. Economic tools are increasingly being exploited
with great success by computer scientists, and the domain of scheduling is no
exception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because scheduling is important to a wide
variety of scientific, engineering, computing, and business applications, this
project will have a broad impact beyond computer science. However, because of
the interdisciplinary nature of scheduling, there are a wide variety of
approaches across very distinct communities. One goal of this project is to
provide courses and educational tools that help to bring these communities
together.