* 0846325
* CAREER:  Analysis of disordered systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Jeffrey Schenker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2015
* USD 479,082.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on a rigorous
analysis of wave propagation in disordered media, along with related analysis of
random operators and matrices. The goal is to establish diffusive propagation of
waves in a weakly disordered medium over arbitrarily long times. There is a rich
non-rigorous theory of wave diffusion in the physics literature, based on
heuristic analyses and uncontrolled perturbation theory, which suggests that
diffusion occurs and predicts the leading order asymptotic behavior of the
diffusion constant. In spite of the obvious importance of this problem, we are
far from having a rigorous analysis of the mathematics involved. The PI will
consider the problem from a number of view points, in particular using an
``augmented space" representation such as has proved useful in the analysis of
random walks in random media and homogenization. Additionally the PI will
consider related problems in the theory of random matrices, specifically random
band matrices, with entries that vanish outside a band around the diagonal,
which have been suggested as a model of a so-called metal-insulator transition
as the bandwidth is moved from the matrix size down to
one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the effects of disorder? This is a
fundamental question in regards to any model of physics, even one in which
disorder is not explicitly included. After all, any real world system is subject
to a small amount of noise, and experience shows that even weak disorder may
have a profound effect on the behavior of the system. Despite the fundamental
nature of this subject, aspects of it remain poorly understood and it is not at
present incorporated in the curriculum in an accessible way. This program seeks
to bridge this gap as follows: 1) through the development of courses for
undergraduates on the basic models of statistical mechanics and random matrix
theory; and 2) by focused research on aspects of the question relevant to wave
motion and semi-conductor physics. The goal of such work is to use analytical
tools to further basic understanding of models of theoretical physics and
applied mathematics. Such advances impact areas outside of mathematics and
theoretical physics in the short run by yielding ideas for constructing new and
better models useful in applications. In the long run, however, the impact will
be even greater, as mathematical work illuminates those parts of physical theory
that are truly fundamental.