* 0846270
* CAREER: Integration Research and Education in Engineering Multi-scale Cell-Cell Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Yubing Xie, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 01/31/2014
* USD 527,109.00

0846270&lt;br/&gt;Xie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between cancer cells and neighboring
cells plays a crucial role in breast cancer metastasis and anticancer drug
resistance. However, current cultivation systems fail to recapitulate
heterotypic cell-cell interactions in a breast cancer microenvironment. The
ability to incorporate and control cell-cell interactions in an engineered
breast cancer metastasis model is crucial for the understanding of breast tumor
progression and anticancer drug development, leading to a cure for breast
cancer. This in vitro study of breast cancer cell-stem cell interactions has the
potential to revolutionize traditional cancer research which targets bulk tumors
and uses expensive animal models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will have a broad impact on research,
education and outreach efforts in the region through the College of Nanoscale
Science and Engineering's (CNSE's) established infrastructure. This effort will
advance the understanding of the role of cell-cell interactions in engineering
human disease which will result in the development of novel human disease models
for the biopharmaceutical and biotechnology industry. At the same time it will
deliver new discoveries and enhance the infrastructure of CNSE. Accompanied by
research activities, the proposed "top-down" modular approach will serve as a
unique training system for graduate, undergraduate and high school students from
the City School District of Albany (CSDA) who will participate in the year-long
"Engineering Exploration Program" and "Nano High". It will not only provide
students hands-on nanobiotechnology skills but also "21st century skills".
Results generated during this proposed effort will be disseminated into the
design of the Nanobiotechnology Workbook for K-16 students and broadcast to the
general public community through "NanoNow" television show presented by CNSE. It
will also broadly benefit K-12 through CNSE's ongoing partnerships with the
CSDA, whose majority student population is composed of a traditionally
underrepresented group in science and engineering, as well as extensive outreach
programs at CNSE targeting students from throughout New York's Tech Valley
region. By exposing students to the exciting hands-on activity of
nanobiotechnology at a young age, science and engineering seeds will be
implanted in their mind. Eventually, one will have a sustained supply of
students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM ) fields.