* 0846697
* Infrastructure upgrade, curation and data basing of Indiana University collections
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* P. David Polly, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 475,302.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will computerize
curatorial data, improve the physical storage and organization of specimens, and
provide on-line availability of information for Indiana University's
Paleontological Collection and its William R. Adams Zooarchaeology Collection.
These collections document evidence of the past history of life, provide
comparative materials for identifying fossil and archaeological remains, and
house type specimens that embody more than 1,000 taxonomic names. In total,
there are an estimated 250,000 specimens in the collections. The project will
better preserve recent skeletal material belonging to endangered species, better
secure fossil type specimens, and better serve the research needs of the
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve the global
scientific community by improving access to an invaluable research. The project
will provide hands-on education of graduate and undergraduate students in the
care, preservation, identification, and interpretation of the remains of
animals, both living and extinct. It will also provide opportunities for
multidisciplinary faculty, graduate and undergraduate research projects.
Finally, the project will better educate students and the general public about
the contribution of zooarchaeology and paleontology to knowledge about
biodiversity, climate change, evolution, and the history of the earth's biota,
including humans. Data from the project will be available at
http://www.indiana.edu/~palcoll/ and http://www.indiana.edu/~zooarch/