* 0846350
* CAREER:  Control Tools for Nanoscale Rapid Broadband Viscoelasticity Measurement and Mapping of Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Qingze Zou, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 04/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop a new system identification and control methodology to enable
rapid broadband viscoelastic measurements. By mapping soft material responses at
multiple scales, the proposed methodology will be realized in nanoscale
measurements using scanning probe microscopy (SPM). Currently there are many
barriers to measurements of material properties at the nano-, meso-, and macro-
scales. They include (i) quasi-static or sinusoidal-oscillatory excitation
methods which are either too simple or too slow to rapidly excite the complex
behaviors exhibited by soft materials, (ii) hardware dynamics creeping into the
measured material properties, particularly when the measurement is at a high
frequency, and (iii) significant nonlinearity (such as hysteresis) and system
uncertainties. The proposed research will overcome these barriers through the
integration of optimal input design for time-varying vescoelastic model
identification with the system-inversion theory for rapid tracking-transition
switching and large system uncertainties. New iterative control and optimal
control techniques will also be developed to allow the high-speed output
tracking needed for exerting the optimal excitation input with minimal trade-off
of system bandwidth. The outcome of the proposed research is expected to be the
measurement of time-varying viscoelastic parameters of soft materials over a
frequency range at least 10 fold larger and within a time frame at least 10 fold
shorter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will introduce a new paradigm of multi-
scale soft material sciences and engineering, and help unravel rate-dependent
phenomena like wound healing by linking the macro-/meso- scale measurements to
the nano- scale. The realization of the proposed methodology at the nanoscale
will improve SPM as the key enabling tool for nanosciences and nanotechnologies,
advance our understanding of rapid nanoscale phenomena like dentin collagen
dehydration, and accelerate the synthesis and design of nano-/bio- materials
including bio-compatible polymers for drug delivery. The PI?s close
collaboration with a leading SPM manufacturer will accelerate the technology
transfer. The proposed CAREER education activities will promote nanotechnology
education in mechanical engineering, through curriculum improvements (including
a new course, a teaching module and a web-based SPM simulator), open lab tours
for a total of 450 high-school girls by leveraging two well-established outreach
programs at ISU, internships for undergraduate women students and high-school
science teachers, and industrial internships for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;