* 0846464
* CAREER: Interfaces and Their Effect on Charge Transfer in Extremely Thin Absorber Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Jason Baxter, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2015
* USD 411,500.00

0846464 Baxter

The research objective of this renewable energy related CAREER proposal is to
investigate nano-structured interfaces, material properties, and their effect on
electron charge transfer in extremely thin absorber (ETA) solar cells. ETA cells
will be economically competitive with fossil fuels at their predicted
efficiencies of 15% because they can be produced by low-cost solution methods.
However, demonstrated ETA cell efficiencies are only 2.5%. The discrepancy
between realized and predicted efficiency is due to lack of fundamental
understanding of the role of interfaces and material properties on charge
transfer processes within the cell. ETA cells employ a mesoporous n-type
semiconductor coated at the interface with a thin absorber film, with pores
filled by a p-type semiconductor to create an interpenetrating heterojunction.
The operating principle of the ETA cell is that the large junction area
presented by an n-type nanowire array allows thin absorber layers to be used,
such that charge separation across the interfaces is faster than competing bulk
recombination. Nanowires are also the ideal geometry to quickly transport the
separated charges to opposite contacts before they can undergo interfacial
recombination. To date, ETA cells have primarily been studied by making solar
cells and measuring their I-V characteristics, with few fundamental studies of
either the individual materials and interfaces or charge transport within the
cell. The proposed approach will use a combination of spectroscopy and electron
microscopy of individual materials and interfaces as well as steady-state and
perturbation studies of ETA solar cells to gain fundamental insight into charge
transfer mechanisms in the ZnO-nanowire/CdSe/CuSCN materials system. Techniques
including impedance spectroscopy, intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy,
and time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy will be employed to (1) measure carrier
lifetime and mobility in individual materials and thin film stacks, (2) measure
characteristic times to compare charge separation vs bulk recombination and
charge transport vs. interfacial recombination, (3) determine processes that
limit cell performance, and (4) design interfaces and material properties to
improve charge transfer and, hence, increase ETA cell efficiency.

Intellectual Merit: The transformational, spectroscopy-driven approach described
in this proposal will be applied to ETA cells for the first time in order to
understand the bulk and interfacial phenomena that govern cell performance. This
work will explore the nature of charge transfer across nano-structured
semiconductor interfaces, specifically focusing on the role of architecture,
defect structure, and electronic band structure. Solution methods of depositing
extremely thin coatings of high quality and precise thickness will be developed.
Ex situ characterization of materials and interfaces will be combined with
measurements of ETA cells to identify the properties or processes that limit
cell efficiencies. This detailed understanding, which cannot be achieved using
conventional methods, will allow comparison of experimental observations with
theoretical predictions and will aid in the design of materials, interfaces, and
molecular architectures that enable higher energy conversion efficiencies.

Broader Impact: If successful, the proposed renewable energy related work will
provide the fundamental understanding of interfacial phenomena that is necessary
to increase efficiencies of solar cells from 2.5% toward the 15% predicted by
theory. Such an improvement could potentially transform ETA cell technology to
be economically competitive with fossil fuels. Low-cost ETA cells would provide
a source of clean, secure, sustainable energy that could shift the U.S.
portfolio away from fossil fuels and toward energy independence. The design
principles learned from the CdSe system can be applied to other absorbers such
as CuInGaSe2 for even higher potential efficiency. Additionally, the enhanced
understanding of charge transfer at nano-structured semiconductor
heterojunctions will be useful for many other nano-structured systems where
controlling interfaces is critical to achieving high performance. These
applications include organic-inorganic solar cells, displays, electrochromics,
and batteries, all of which are important for sustainable energy or energy
efficiency. The novel experimental approach described in this proposal can be
employed by other researchers to enable new advances in a broad range science
and technology fields.

The educational objectives of this proposal are to educate students through
research activities and curriculum development and to expose people of diverse
ages and backgrounds to general concepts in renewable energy. A "Solar Energy
Seminar Series" will be established to engage the general Drexel community; and
an "Energy and Sustainability Workshop" for 5th-6th grade students and their
teachers will be initiated in partnership with the School District of
Philadelphia. This workshop will naturally be directed toward underrepresented
groups since the district is over 80% African-American and Hispanic and will
involve 100 students and 25 teachers over 5 years.

This project is jointly supported by the Interfacial Processes and
Thermodynamics program and the Sustainable Energy program in the NSF CBET
Division.