* 0846282
* Regulation of Protein Phosphatase 2A Activity in Arabidopsis by the RCN1 Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Alison DeLong, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 346,000.00

Reversible protein phosphorylation, the enzymatic addition and removal of
phosphoryl groups on target proteins, modulates the biological activities of a
large fraction of the proteins expressed in eukaryotic cells. Protein
phosphorylation levels in cells are determined by a highly dynamic and tightly
regulated balance between the activities of protein kinases, which add
phosphoryl modifications to target proteins, and protein phosphatases, which
remove those phosphoryl modifications. The serine/threonine protein phosphatase
2A (PP2A) constitutes an abundant population of enzymes that play crucial roles
in the regulation of growth and development. This project focuses on the
analysis of PP2A roles in controlling the production of ethylene, a key
regulator of growth, defense responses, reproduction, ripening and senescence in
plants. Using genetic and biochemical tools, the investigators will define the
mechanism by which PP2A modulates ethylene production. Identification of the
target for PP2A regulation in this pathway will be a significant advance not
only for our understanding of the regulation of ethylene biosynthesis, but also
for our ongoing analysis of PP2A function in plants. The cardinal challenge in
current protein phosphatase research is the identification of bona fide in vivo
substrates. Furthermore, because PP2A modulates several hormone response
pathways and is required for normal stress responses, better understanding of
the regulation of PP2A activity levels may allow manipulation of plant growth
properties and stress tolerance. The Arabidopsis system provides a powerful
model for this work because of the existing array of genetic and genomic
resources for analysis of ethylene biosynthesis and PP2A function in plants. The
proposed work provides excellent training opportunities for students at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels in a project with broad biological and
agronomic significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;