* 0846160
* CAREER:   Binding and Biomolecular Dynamics in Undergraduate Teaching and Education
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* David Gillespie, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2015
* USD 920,552.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an
experimental research program aimed at exploring how protein fold and function
depend on structural flexibility. Protein three-dimensional structures are held
together via a network of weak non-covalent interactions, and even the smallest
of binding partners can induce structural changes. This project will use such
perturbations to reveal the molecular mechanics of protein stability networks.
The bacterial copper chaperone CusF's well-known ligand-induced structural and
dynamic changes will be used to elucidate how conformational changes are
propagated throughout a protein's architecture. This project will also show how
a protein folding mechanism depends on the same structural details. Kinetics
measurements of a comprehensive set of CusF mutants will allow analysis of the
role played by each member of the stability network in the protein folding
reaction. Ultimately, the project will focus on how binding partners can be used
to control protein structure. CusF will be re-engineered to make its folding and
oligomerization entirely ligand-dependent. These discoveries will not only
inform on protein structure, function and design principles, but will also test
and advance the science of protein engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Moving beyond the traditional one-on-one mentoring that research
students often experience in college, this project builds scientific research
into the very fabric of undergraduate learning in two novel ways. First, actual
research problems are being introduced into teaching laboratories at the PI's
institution in both core and elective courses. From protein expression and
purification to ligand-binding and protein stability measurements, students in
physical chemistry and biochemistry laboratory courses will acquire the basic
skills of scientific problem-solving through activities that serve the project's
research objectives. These courses will broaden the number of students reached
by the award far beyond those working in the research laboratory and will make
the research experience a part of the educational experience of every chemistry
major. Second, the project provides for an outreach program aimed at the
community's underrepresented populations; this program will introduce students
to science at a formative moment of their careers. By bringing high school
students and their teachers into the research laboratory for an intensive summer
training program, the project will increase the numbers of students entering
college in the STEM fields in general, in particular, from the Ventura County's
large Hispanic community. These students will begin college with a clear
understanding of the importance of research and discovery in the sciences; the
unique laboratory courses developed in this project will reinforce this
knowledge throughout the students' subsequent college education.