* 0846088
* CAREER:   The Virtual Whisking Rat:   Linking Mechanics and Sensory Neuroscience
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Mitra Hartmann, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 617,823.00

The rat whisker system is one of the most commonly-used systems in neuroscience
to study how the brain combines sensory information with movement information.
To date, however, the small size and rapid movements of the whiskers have made
it difficult to quantify their dynamics. This work will quantify how the
whiskers move and interact with objects during rat exploratory behavior.
Improved understanding of the rat whisker system will provide considerable
insight into the general functional principles that govern the neural circuits
mediating sensing and control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A dynamic model of the
isolated whisker moving in free air and during object collisions will be
developed. This will be incorporated into an anatomically accurate 3-dimensional
simulation environment. Finally, behavioral experiments will identify the
patterns of mechanical input across the array associated with the rat's ability
to distinguish between flat and curved surfaces. The ultimate goal is to
determine how the brain might represent the shape of an object based entirely on
the patterns of forces and moments at the base of each whisker across the array.
The simulation environment will be distributed widely, so that researchers
working on any brain structure involved in rat whisking behavior can predict
whisker-object contact patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulation
environment will also be used in conjunction with previously developed robotic
systems in a classroom environment and to aid in the recruitment of
underrepresented minority engineering applicants. Students will be engaged in
understanding how basic mechanical principles must be applied to sensory
neuroscience. Simultaneously, the PI will develop a coordinated program for
undergraduate research across the McCormick school of Engineering at
Northwestern University. The success of these initiatives will be carefully
evaluated with the help of Northwestern's Searle Center for Teaching Excellence.