* 0846218
* CAREER: Computational Tools for Interpreting Genomes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Xiaohui Xie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 10/31/2014
* USD 751,980.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award to support the
research of Dr. Xiaohui Xie in the Department of Computer Science at UC-Irvine.
Dr. Xie is a second year, tenure-track Assistant Professor. Identification of
all functional elements encoded in genomes is a fundamental need in genomic
research. A powerful approach for discovering functional elements in the genome
is through comparative genomics. Functional sequences are often under strong
selection pressure to remain conserved so they can stand out from the
surrounding sequence by virtue of greater levels of conservation. This research
is developing novel statistical and computational tools for comparative genome
analysis and for discovering functional elements in genomes by modeling the
evolutionary constraints of these functional elements from their biased
nucleotide substitution patterns. An assumption underlying more common methods
for comparative genomics is that the functional sequences are evolving at a
slower rate than neutral sequences, and are modeled as having shorter
evolutionary distance between species than neutral sequences. In fact, many
functional nucleotides can change between certain nucleotides without affecting
the function they encode so that mutation-based approaches may have less power
for detecting less obvious functional elements. Secondly, the rate-based methods
only determine whether a sequence is conserved or not, but do not provide
information regarding the specific constraints encoded at each nucleotide of the
conserved sequence. This work is examining whether substitution patterns between
different nucleotides show a bias over evolutionary time through the development
of algorithms to infer these patterns directly from sequence alignments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of his CAREER plan, Dr. Xie is developing an
extensive curriculum of two new bioinformatics courses, one undergraduate and
the other graduate and two additional courses in computational biology. The
research includes the involvement of students from the minority science program
at UCI and from the California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science
(COSMOS) program, a high school student summer school program. The results from
this research will provide new scientific resources because the computational
tools and results will be freely available through publicly-accessible web
services at http://www.ics.uci.edu/~xhx/.