* 0846511
* CAREER: Global Medicines and Chinese Empire
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Carla Nappi, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 0.00

This CAREER project, which is funded by NSF's Science, Technology and Society
program, is a study of the roles of imperial expansion and global exchange in
the 14th-19th centuries in shaping Chinese medical and pharmaceutical history.
It will provide a rich understanding of the way global trade, state expansion,
and local practices transformed foreign medicine into the ethnic minority
medicine of modern China, and ultimately into the Chinese and alternative
medicines of today. Understanding how local practices and textual traditions
formed early modern pharmaceutical knowledge will provide a richer context for
understanding the practice and theory of current alternative medical theories,
drugs, and techniques in the United States and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has three primary research objectives. First is to study the history of
the exchange of medical goods and knowledge between China and the Islamic world.
Second, is to investigate the media of transmission (including recipes,
dictionaries, geographic works, images, and sensations) that enabled scientific
and medical exchange between the Chinese empire and various cultural groups
(including Tibetan, Arabo-Persian, and Mongol) on the imperial borderlands.
Third is a theoretical investigation of the ways that such media, and the
constructed geography of the pharmacy, continue to shape medical knowledge in a
transnational context&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific educational objectives
of this project includes the creation of interdisciplinary courses and seminars
in global science and medicine for undergraduate, graduate, and medical
students, including new courses devoted to Science on the Silk Roads and Drugs
and Environment in China and the World. It also includes. The development of new
pedagogical materials and techniques for sharing these educational opportunities
beyond the university, including workshops, public science literature, and
internet resources for teaching and studying silk road science and medicine
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early modern Chinese medicine and pharmacy developed in
the context of imperial expansion and exchange across the Chinese borderlands
and in the global market. This history is profoundly important for re-thinking
current issues of environmental policy and regulation, public education in
science and medicine, and the global pharmaceutical trade. By refocusing the
history of East Asian science and medicine from simple nation-state centered
history toward a more expansive study of Eurasian networks and movements as
units of analysis, this project hopes to change how Chinese science, herbal
medicine and their histories are understood, taught, and used. The project is
also designed to help scholars and the public better understand the role of
national identity-formation in the global scientific and medical marketplace of
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;