* 0846547
* CAREER:  Multi-Agent Systems and Gaussian Processes: Applications in Environmental Sciences
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2015
* Jongeun Choi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2015
* USD 500,729.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project is to develop a new systematic framework for the
synthesis and analysis of distributed learning and cooperative control
algorithms for multi-agent systems with applications in environmental sciences.
Practical algorithms will be developed and analyzed so that a resource-
constrained, multi-agent system can collect spatial measurements of a scalar
field in order to (i) self-calibrate the environmental model, (ii) recursively
learn the unknown field based on the calibrated model and (iii) perform tasks
such as the exploration, estimation, prediction and maximum seeking of a scalar
field in a robustly intelligent manner. Theoretically sound, implementable
control laws will be developed and analyzed using concepts such as stochastic
approximation theory and kernel regression. The conventional inverse problem
approach based on physical transport models is too computationally costly for
resource-constrained, multi-agent systems. In contrast, emphasizing practicality
and usefulness, this research relies extensively on phenomenological and
statistical modeling techniques such as Gaussian processes and kernel regression
to represent fields undergoing transport phenomena. Outcomes will be tested on
mobile robot platforms under realistic transport phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will have a significant impact on environmental sciences. The proposed multi-
agent systems, combined with different types of chemical sensors, will have
important applications such as the prediction and tracing of algal blooms and of
toxic chemicals in real-life situations. This interdisciplinary project will
offer training experiences for graduate and undergraduate students and provide
opportunities to foster collaboration with departments of Civil and
Environmental Engineering and Fisheries and Wildlife. In collaboration with the
Diversity Programs Office and the Office of Recruitment and K-12 Outreach at
Michigan State University, the educational program will offer interactive
seminars on biologically inspired mobile robots to K-12 and underrepresented
students in summer residential programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;