* 0846351
* CAREER: Closed Loop Modeling for Brain Machine Interface Design
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Iyad Obeid, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 447,306.00

I. Obeid&lt;br/&gt;0846351&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brain Machine
Interfaces are an emerging technology whose purpose is to allow amputees and
spinal cord injury patients to control a prosthetic limb using signals derived
from the brain. The proposed work will create the means for investigating how
the natural plasticity of the human brain can be exploited to innovate more
efficient (and thus more easily made portable) Brain Machine Interface
instrumentation. This will be achieved through the development of a new
simulator that simultaneously models neural adaptation in reaching tasks, a
prosthetic limb, and Brain Machine Interface hardware that connects the two. A
key element of this simulator will be the ability to use real-time visual and
proprioceptive feedback from the modeled arm to train the virtual brain cells
and thus, over time, improve the accuracy with which the brain can control the
prosthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will be accomplished using
three Research Aims (1) Design and implement a simulation platform that models
adaptive motor control of a human limb in three-space. (2) Design and implement
an instrumentation testbed capable of realizing entire families of Brain Machine
Interface data acquisition subsystems and systematically manipulating their
parameters. The system will handle up to 50 x 50 channels and will collect
performance statistics that quantify how and where information is lost or
altered in the data pathway. (3) Quantify how BMI performance can be expected to
degrade in response to errors in spike detection, spike sorting, and wireless
neural data transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will guide the
development of next generation Brain Machine Interface systems, especially the
implantable and wireless systems that remain an obstacle to Brain Machine
Interfaces becoming realistic therapeutic devices. The project will provide
training to students to conduct neural engineering research and also for
developing new hands-on instructional materials for teaching neural engineering
at the graduate level. The research will advance techniques for modeling
functional ensembles of cortical neurons while also creating pedagogical tools
for conducting neural engineering education and research at Temple University
and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;