* 0846649
* CAREER: High Performance Nanowire FETs for Logic and Memory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Qiliang Li, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: High Performance Nanowire FETs for Logic and Memory

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The objective of this research is to design and fabricate high performance
nanowire field effect transistors with steep subthreshold slopes and large on-
off ratios at low operation voltage, and integrate them for large-scale logic
and stand-alone memory applications. The approach is to introduce gate-channel-
source coupling in nanowire field effect transistors to achieve steep
subthreshold slopes much sharper than the thermodynamic limit of conventional
field effect transistors, and develop fast and reliable FLASH-like nanowire non-
volatile memory for future, more portable electronics.

Intellectual Merit: the proposed research will exploit the inherent advantages
of the Schottky-barrier nanowire field effect transistor structure, with the
potential to have transformational impact on logic and memory cell design which
will remain compatible with semiconductor chip technologies. These new devices
will be characterized by much better gate control, faster operation and lower
leakage power dissipation at reduced area and cost. Furthermore, very demanding
device physics will be carried out to establish the most appropriate structures
and operation conditions.

Broader Impact: the approach is expected to have substantial broader impact in
the quest for new nanoelectronic devices, as it will introduce device structures
with operational principles different from conventional devices, while at the
same time benefiting from the vast experience with silicon technology. These
devices will make urgently needed contributions to semiconductor industry in
logic and memory technology. New nano-fabrication technology and nanoelectronic
metrology will also be developed during the course of this research. As always,
science and engineering education is the main interest and focus of this
project.