* 0846147
* CAREER:  Integrating Grammatical and Psycholinguistic Approaches to Phonological Processes in Speech Production
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Matthew Goldrick, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 429,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in phonology has constructed
rich mathematical theories to precisely characterize the systematic patterns of
sounds observed in human languages. However, such theories have largely ignored
how humans process sounds in real time. For example, when a speaker decides to
produce a particular sequence of sounds, how does he plan out the sequence of
movements of his lips and tongue to produce the appropriate sounds? These
questions have been the focus of research in psycholinguistics, where detailed
experimentation has led to sophisticated but largely qualitative theories of
human sound processing. This project integrates the strengths of formal
linguistic and psycholinguistic approaches to develop a more robust framework
for the study of human speech production. The theory, Gradient Harmonic Grammar,
builds on the recently-developed Harmonic Grammar, which is a numerical,
constraint-based theory of sound structure. The project will extend this theory
by incorporating gradience--non-categorical variation in representational and
processing mechanisms--which is a central concept in psycholinguistics. Gradient
Harmonic Grammar will be tested via a set of quantitative models that examine
experimental data from careful, error-free speech and speech containing
mispronunciations. The framework and computational tools will then be extended
to model the gradient interaction of multiple sound systems in bilingual
speakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make the Gradient Harmonic Grammar framework
maximally accessible to the research community, a set of flexible, user-
friendly, open-source applications will be made publicly available over the
internet. These applications will include a set of laboratory assignments to
help educators bring these tools into the classroom. The experimental work on
speech errors can serve as the basis for future research into speech production
disorders, for example, those of stroke victims. Additional studies will also
use this general framework to help understand how bilingual speakers manage
multiple sound systems during speech proudction. Such research is a critical
part of understanding human language in an increasingly multilingual,
interconnected world.