* 0846964
* CAREER: Systems biology and engineering of Clostridium beijerinckii for enhance butanol production
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Nathan Price, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

0846964 Price

This CAREER research aims to integrate research in systems biology and biofuels
generation with the creation of an interdisciplinary course in systems biology.
This course will be addressed to both advanced undergraduates and to graduate
students, and will be integrated with campus-wide efforts to create a new
Professional Master's Program in BioEnergy and an ongoing program in
Bioinformatics. The motivations behind the research are two-fold: one
engineering and one scientific. The engineering goal is to re-engineer the
metabolic network of Clostridium beijerinckii for enhanced production of
butanol, important for its use as a chemical feedstock and for its high
potential as a second generation biofuel. The scientific objective is to pioneer
novel approaches to using systems biology in lesser-characterized organisms,
such as C. beijerinckii, to establish models linking the genotype to phenotype
relationship in sufficient detail to enhance and control a property of specific
interest - a very common challenge for many of the growing number of sequenced
organisms. The specific research aims are: 1) Reconstruct and experimentally
validate the first computable genome-scale metabolic network of Clostridium
beijerinckii; validation experiments to test model predictions will include
quantifying growth rates, uptake rates, and secretion rates on various
substrates both of the wildtype and of selected knockout strains; 2) Perform
metabolomics experiments and use the data to enhance the metabolic network
reconstruction and to monitor changes in metabolism through various fermentation
processes; 3) Build a Matlab-based reconstruction module to aid other groups to
more rapidly generate other metabolic models, automating the process where
possible, and providing organization tools for those aspects still requiring a
final step of manual curation; this tool will also serve as a teaching aid in
the course that will be developed (see below); and 4) Use the computational
model to guide the experimental construction of strains of C. beijerinckii for
enhanced butanol production. The specific educational aims are: 1) Mentor
undergraduate students through the development of a systems biology course and
active research mentoring; 2) Mentor graduate students through a graduate course
on systems biology and a related course on systems biology specific to bioenergy
pursuits, as well as through research mentoring; 3) Guide the first
undergraduate International Genetically Engineering Machines (iGEM) team from U.
of Illinois to provide expansive research experience for large number of
undergraduates in systems and synthetic biology; and 4) Develop a short-course
on model-guided cellular engineering to be taught internationally, beginning in
China and Korea, as well as within the USA. Intellectual merit: This proposed
project represents an endeavor to model the genotype to phenotype relationship
in enough detail to allow for rational design to guide synthetic biology. It
also utilizes an emerging technology and data source, metabolomics, and
integrates it with quantitative modeling that is needed to harness the
information content of this data. The development of systems biology approaches
to generate predictive network models from high-throughput data sources is a
highly significant activity towards harnessing the power of genomics to
accomplish engineering goals. Broader Impacts: The development of efficient
means to generate cellulosic butanol addresses issues relevant to very high
impact areas for the United States, including decreasing our dependence on
foreign oil and generating a carbon-neutral fuel cycle to benefit the
environment. The proposed work will also be integrated with more comprehensive
experimental programs, including industrial partnerships, as needed to translate
findings to practical application. The associated educational aims are critical
to training a new generation of scientists and engineers who have a deep
understanding of both quantitative analysis and biology, as is needed to drive
21st Century Biology and the emerging bioenergy industry.