* 0846429
* CAREER:The Development of Molecular Stress Biosensor to Study Mechanotransduction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yingxiao Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 366,521.00

0846429 Wang

Atherosclerosis, a disease represented by the lumen narrowing of arteries due to
plaque formation, is one of the leading causes of death in the United States and
most other developed countries. Atherosclerosis occurs likely at vascular branch
sites where the vessel walls are exposed to disturbed flow, but not at the
straight parts of vessels where laminar flow dominates. Evidence has shown that
different flows and the ensuing shear stresses play crucial roles in regulating
vascular endothelial cells (ECs), and subsequently endothelium permeability and
atherosclerosis. However, it is unclear about the detailed shear stress
distribution on EC surface and how ECs sense the spatiotemporal features of
these mechanical stimuli to determine patho-physiological outcomes. In this
proposal, the PI will develop an elastic molecular biosensor to visualize the
shear stress distribution on live EC surfaces, utilizing the fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET). A new intracellular molecular biosensor will
also be developed. Hence, both the signals of extracellular shear stress and
intracellular molecular activity can be visualized in a single live cell. Three
specific aims for this career proposal have been proposed: (1) To develop and
characterize a FRET-based shear stress biosensor in vitro; (2) To visualize the
distribution of shear stress on live ECs under different flow patterns; (3) To
visualize extracellular shear stress and intracellular molecular activities
simultaneously under different flow patterns. Given the importance of shear
stress in endothelium permeability, and subsequently atherosclerosis, the
significance of the proposed study can provide new information on the molecular
mechanism by which cells sense the spatiotemporal properties of mechanical
stimuli and convert them into biochemical/physiological signals. The main
educational objective of this proposal is to motivate the high school and
undergraduate students toward future career goals as the next generation of
leading scientists in bioengineering. The PI will combine the proposed research
and education and organize workshops for undergraduate students, featuring live
cell imaging, bio-nanotechnology, and mechanobiology. Minorities and women will
be particularly encouraged to participate in these workshops so that they are
exposed to the fundamental principles and exciting advancement in these
interdisciplinary fields. A significant effort will also be invested to bring
the fascinating research advancement in the laboratory to the younger
generation, i.e. high-school students. Research experiments will be videotaped
and distributed through the internet to reach a wide audience of high-school
teachers and students. An emphasis will be placed on how the mechanical and
biochemical properties of cell can be monitored, measured, manipulated, and
modeled to help our understanding of the complex biological system. The ultimate
goal of the proposed research is to help the development of new tools for the
early diagnosis of diseases related to mechanical force and the improvement of
the treatment. The educational impact is to motivate the next generation of
students, particularly underrepresented groups, to participate and promote the
emerging field of bioengineering, and to bring broad impact to the society
within and beyond the university.