* 0846483
* PECASE:  Compressive Cooperative Sensing and Navigation in Mobile Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Yasamin Mostofi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 10/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop the foundations of sensing and navigation in mobile cooperative
networks from a compressive sampling perspective. A mobile ooperative network
faces an abundance of information in its environment. Since there is not enough
time for direct measurement of the whole terrain, finding the fundamental
minimum sensing required for high-integrity and cooperative reconstruction of
the parameter of interest is considerably important and an open problem.
Currently, there is no analysis and design theory for ooperative mapping based
on a severely under-determined data set. onsequently, a avigation framework that
can guide the vehicles to the locations better for sparse sensing is also
lacking. Inspired by the recent breakthroughs in non-uniform sampling theory,
this proposal shows how the network can exploit the sparse transformation of the
parameter of interest for cooperative mapping based on a considerably small
observation set. The proposed approach provides an answer to the question of
"the next best positions for sensing" in mobile networks and guides the vehicles
to the locations that are better for compressed sensing/mapping. To ensure
uninterrupted cooperation, it furthermore complements this by proposing a
foundation for communication-aware compressive mapping. Along this line, it
shows how to build realistic communication objectives that are reflective of
communication unreliability such as path loss, shadowing and fading, and
integrate them with compressive sensing/mapping objectives. The proposed
research is fundamental in nature as it seeks to unveil the minimum sensing and
communication needed for the robust operation of cooperative mobile networks.

If successful, the proposed research will make a significant contribution to the
understanding and optimization of mobile cooperative networks in realistic
communication environments. Emergency response, exploratory missions, security
and surveillance are a few examples of the applications that have to operate in
an information-rich environment robustly and in a timely manner, and can
therefore benefit tremendously from the proposed work. This proposal also has a
significant educational impact on the Native Americans of New Mexico through
partnership with Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute (a Native American
community college) and Bernalillo High School (with 46% Native American and 46%
Hispanic students). More specifically, it will l) contribute to stablishing a
learning platform for the basics of control and communications at Southwestern
Indian Polytechnic Institute, 2) create a echnical/educational remote site at
Bernalillo High School and 3) develop a networked control course geared towards
the aforementioned community college and high school students, in which these
students will team up with UNM graduate students to do projects related to the
learning platform.