* 0846402
* CAREER: Biochemical Reaction Mechanisms by Real-Time, Hyperpolarization Enhanced Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Christian Hilty, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2015
* USD 550,003.00

In this award, Dr. Hilty from Texas A&amp;M University will utilize the recently
developed, commercially available Hypersense polarizer to create enhanced
nuclear spin polarization through dynamic nuclear polarization from contact with
organic radicals. Integration of stopped-flow methods will allow him to study
dynamics in enzymatic processes and protein folding. Dr. Hilty's educational
plan involves development of new demonstrations for the physical chemistry
lecture course, and his participation in the "Chemistry Road Show" to reach out
to high school students in rural areas of Texas. Dr. Hilty plans to develop
science kits that can be delivered to the schools via postal service if neither
he nor his students can pay a personal visit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of dynamic processes, that is,
processes captured on the same time scale as they occur, is a challenging
problem in chemistry when performed with molecular level resolution. Nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, the sister technique to magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), is a powerful and wide-spread tool in chemistry to
investigate molecular structure. Unfortunately, it does not lend itself very
well to the study of dynamic processes, as these often involve intermediate
species in small concentrations that NMR is not sufficiently sensitive to
detect. So-called dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) is a clever technique that
was devised in the 1950's to make NMR more sensitive - its downside is that it
must be performed at very low temperatures, that is -456 F! At these
temperatures, all molecules are frozen and dynamic processes come to a
standstill. Since the DNP advantage disappears in a matter of seconds, the
samples must be warmed up very rapidly so that dynamics can be studied. Dr.
Hilty from Texas A&amp;M University has developed an apparatus that allows him
to do exactly that - with it, he plans to investigate enzymatic reactions and
the folding of proteins. These processes occur in our bodies every single day,
and their dysfunction is responsible for many diseases such as Alzheimer's.
&lt;br/&gt;College students must enroll in physical chemistry courses to be able
to understand and do research such as Dr. Hilty's. The material is challenging
with a strong mathematical component that makes it hard for students to
establish connections with real-world phenomena. Dr. Hilty will improve the
physical chemistry curriculum by developing demonstrations to be shared with
other instructors to help students see these connections, ultimately resulting
in better student learning and enthusiasm for the field. In order to engage
students in this fascinating field earlier in their career, he partners with
Texas A &amp; M's "Chemistry Road Show" that is taken to high schools in rural
areas of TX. Dr. Hilty will enrich the show that is currently based on chemistry
demonstrations by developing hands-on activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;