* 0846846
* CAREER: Sustainable Energy Conversion of Solid Wastes with Integrated In-Situ Carbon Sequestration
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Ah-Hyung Alissa Park, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0846846 Park

This CAREER award is for research on creating an energy conversion system that
converts the now landfilled petrochemical portion (plastics) of municipal solid
wastes (MSW) to value added liquid fuel. The research includes carbon dioxide
capture and storage. Until now, these technologies have been developed
independently of one another, which has resulted in complex and economically
challenged large scale designs. The research will combine carbon mineral
sequestration with a MSW-to-Liquid process to achieve process intensification
and synergistic net reduction in carbon emissions. The overarching concept is
the shift of the water-gas shift (WGS) reaction equilibrium via constant removal
of carbon dioxide. This approach will be investigated by injecting engineered
mesopored Mg-bearing sorbent into the WGS reactor. One of the direct impacts of
this study will be technology for carbon mineral sequestration, benefitting
various carbon dioxide generating industries, such as the energy, chemical, and
petrochemical industries. The PI will participate in developing national-scale
outreach programs for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students as a member of
both the Societal Impact Operating Council and the Research and New Technology
Committee of the AIChE. Additionally, the PI will continue to expand the
participation of high school students in the activities of her laboratory.

