* 0846397
* Biomimetic Chemistry of Molybdenum and Tungsten: Analogue Reaction Systems of Oxotransferases and Hydroxylases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Richard Holm, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor R. H. Holm at Harvard University to carry out
fundamental studies of biologically related chemistry of molybdenum and
tungsten. These elements are essential components of enzymes that catalyze
reactions essential to the life of organisms throughout the evolutionary scale,
including humans. Molybdenum is an essential human nutrient and is required in
the functioning of enzymes that are involved in diseases including gout and the
effects of cardiac failure. Further, its deficiency is related to neurological
abnormalities and mental retardation. Molybdenum and tungsten enzymes are also
implicated in global cycles that process, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur,
arsenic, and selenium. The overall purpose of this research is to develop and
interpret molecular chemical systems that bear directly on the natural behavior
of molybdenum and tungsten as expressed by physiological reactions of enzymes
that contain these elements.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research represents an
opportunity for scientific advancement in biologically related inorganic
chemistry and a means of educating students (undergraduates and postdoctoral
scholars) in experimental techniques and theoretical ideas in this field. The
process involves research, seminars, and critical discussion. This laboratory is
open to undergraduate students who wish to work in the bioinorganic area. The
principal investigator is a frequent lecturer in outside venues. The sum of
these activities is considered a contribution to the education of present and
future scientific manpower.&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to a better
understanding of the occurrence, kinetics, and mechanism of oxygen atom transfer
reactions, in which an oxygen atom is moved from one molecule to another; such
reactions are the primary function of molybdenum-, tungsten-, and certain iron-
containing enzymes and of many oxidation catalysts employed in chemical
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;