* 0846775
* CAREER: Investigations into Nonlinear Phenomena in Electrostatic MEMS and their Potential for Smart Sensors and Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Mohammad Younis, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 07/31/2014
* USD 440,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The main objective of the proposed Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Project is to advance knowledge and understanding of the
nonlinear dynamics of electrostatically actuated micro-electro-mechanical
systems MEMS. This project will investigate nonlinear phenomena, including
escape-from-potential-well, fractal dynamics, subharmonic excitation, and
internal resonance, and explore their utilization to realize new devices of
unique characteristics, which are made possible due to these nonlinear
phenomena. Smart sensors, which can function as electromechanical switches, such
as to detect a dangerous gas or earthquakes activities and then send a warning
signal, are among the potential applications that will be explored. Detailed
theoretical and experimental works will be conducted on capacitive sensors,
microbeams, and micromachined shallow arches. Analytical models and approaches,
such as perturbation techniques and reduced-order models, will be utilized to
conduct local and global dynamic investigations, including basin-of-attraction
and engineering-integrity analysis, to help understand the stability of these
structures and their practical use. Concepts of combined sensors and switches,
which can be triggered when detecting low-level acceleration and dangerous
analytes, such as viruses, bacteria, and explosives, will be tested
experimentally and analyzed theoretically to shed light on their usefulness and
potential. The research will also explore the rich nonlinear dynamics of
electrically actuated shallow arches and its potential to realize new band-pass
filters, sensitive mass detectors, and low-power actuators.

This project can have significant impact on society in various aspects. The
major theme of the research is the exploration of new ideas of smart devices
based on simple structures (beams and arches). Their smart functionality is a
result of their interesting dynamics and not because of complexity in shape or
geometry. This fact means that they are simple and easy to fabricate, making
them of potentially low cost. Hence, they can be deployed in many places to
enhance health, safety, and security. The exciting applications of this research
will be used to inspire and motivate students from all levels to study and
investigate the fields of Nonlinear Dynamics, Vibrations, and MEMS. This
research will provide excellent training experience for students. The students
will be trained on modeling, simulating, and testing MEMS devices in a team of
multi-disciplinary researchers and professors. Knowledge from this research will
support the development of new graduate and undergraduate courses in MEMS
dynamics and will add and update on the material of the courses of
linear/nonlinear dynamics and vibrations. Also, this project will train
undergraduate minority students over the duration of the project in coordination
with the Binghamton Success Program. Knowledge from this research will also be
transferred to local schools through organized workshops for teachers,
curriculum developments, and exciting in-class demonstrations.