* 0846383
* CAREER: NEW WATER-SOLUBLE LIGANDS AND TRANSITION METAL COMPLEXES FOR ENZYME MODELING AND CATALYSIS
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Elizabeth Papish, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 12/31/2013
* USD 612,968.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Papish at Drexel University to synthesize and
study new ligands and complexes; the goal is to mimic the structure and function
of important metalloenzymes. In particular, the Papish group is interested in
modeling phosphotriesterase (PTE) because PTE catalyzes the hydrolysis of both
pesticides and nerve gases. New ligands will be designed to mimic the secondary
coordination sphere and provide water-solubility, properties that should lead to
fast catalysis of important hydrolysis reactions. The scope of potential
research applications is large and includes modeling various esterases, carbonic
anhydrase and oxygenases. Model complexes could provide catalysts for green
chemistry applications, including the breakdown of environmental toxins, the
harnessing of oxygen as an abundant and environmentally benign oxidant, and the
development of a class of ligands that is compatible with water as an
alternative to the use of organic solvents. This research project will be used
as a means of educating and motivating high school, undergraduate and graduate
students to study science by directly involving students in the research. To
illustrate that science and research are viable career paths for currently
underrepresented groups, a workshop on 'Careers in Chemistry' that features
women and minority chemists will be established. This workshop will create an
informal network of peer and professional role models for students; members of
this network can serve as mentors. In addition, they will describe the series of
decisions that led them to become successful scientists.