* 0846437
* CAREER: Horizontal Genetic Adaptation Resulting from Microbial Exposure to Anthropogenic Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2016
* Claudia Gunsch, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2016
* USD 482,035.00

0846437&lt;br/&gt;Claudia Gunsch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work in
whole genome sequencing and bioinformatics has demonstrated the importance of
horizontal gene transfer (HGT) in the development of bacterial resistance
against various toxicants. These analyses have shown that many different types
of mobile genetic elements (including plasmids) have been exchanged between
microbial species overtime. It is generally accepted that most of the sustained
adaptation events are linked to the presence of environmental selective
pressures. However, it is unclear which combination of physical, chemical and
biological conditions are necessary for HGT to occur. The goal of this CAREER
research plan is to determine the conditions under which HGT events occur,
specifically in the presence of anthropogenic contaminants. The hypothesis for
this research is that beneficial genetic modification events will only occur if
the recipient microorganisms have specific microbial characteristics and if the
physical conditions at a given site are optimal for induction of HGT. The
specific objectives of the research component of this CAREER development plan
are to: 1) Identify environmental factors which control the prevalence and
stability of horizontal genetic adaptation events; 2) Induce HGT in a lab scale
column with a mixed microbial community and; 3) Verify if the same factors
control in situ genetic adaptation for another primary substrate. Pseudomonas
putida mt-2, which harbors the TOL plasmid carrying the genes for the toluene
degradation pathway, will be used as the model donor bacterium. All findings
will then be verified using naphthalene, another substrate which typically is
degraded using plasmid encoded genes. To facilitate high throughput analysis, a
fluorescent molecular detection system will be used to monitor transfer of
plasmid between donor and recipient cells. These results could ultimately be
transferred into the development of new genetic bioaugmentation strategies for
the bioremediation of emerging contaminants which have been demonstrated to be
metabolized via plasmid encoded genes. Microorganisms carrying the appropriate
genes on a plasmid could be bioaugmented and, given the proper environmental
conditions, these plasmids could be stimulated to transfer to native microbial
species. These microorganisms would be more likely to survive under a specific
site?s environmental conditions as compared to bioaugmented bacteria, thereby
enabling the bioremediation of emerging contaminants at recalcitrant sites.
Furthermore, beyond the bioremediation ramifications, a successful completion of
these research objectives has broad relevance to other important biological
research areas such as the evolution and propagation of antibiotic resistant
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main teaching and broader impact objectives
of this CAREER work plan consist of the creation of an outreach program
(Scientists and Engineers for the Future) aimed at introducing underrepresented
minority students in middle school to science and engineering so that they may
make educated career decisions. The PI and her students will develop a new
outreach program entitled Scientists and Engineers for the Future aimed at
introducing students in 7th and 8th grade to environmental engineering education
and research. The PI will develop work plans which integrate the students
curricula with innovative hands-on activities representative of the biological
sciences and environmental engineering. These work plans include topics on
microbiology, molecular biology and water treatment technologies. In addition,
the PI will invite gifted 7th and 8th grade students to her lab and Duke
microscopy facilities to demonstrate genetic adaptation events.