* 0846267
* CAREER:  Exploiting the Density Fluctuating Regime in Supercritical Fluids for Environmentally Green Polymer Surface Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Tadanori Koga, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award
is to develop an integrated education and research program at Stony Brook
University designed to play a leading role in the field of environmentally
benign polymer surface processing. Supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2) is a
density fluctuating system which is known to be energetically unstable.
Consequently, when confined near a polymer interface, the fluid is found to be
driven across the interface into the polymer material, even when the enthalpy is
unfavorable. Furthermore, since the phenomenon appears to be a function of only
the amplitude of the density fluctuations in the fluid, it may also be
independent of the particular polymer/fluid combinations, facilitating the use
of density fluctuating scCO2 as a new process environment for polymer surface
processing. The research described in this proposal will explore the underlying
driving force for the density-fluctuation-induced surface phenomena. A variety
of in-situ and real-time X-ray/neutron scattering techniques will be integrated
to enable to form a comprehensive model of the interactions between the polymer
and density fluctuating scCO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed activity will
promote educational initiatives designed both to complement this research and,
more generally, to advance science education at Stony Brook. The first component
of this initiative involves the strengthening of an undergraduate thesis program
for Chemical Engineering majors at Stony Brook University which encourages them
to perform research as an integral part of their education. The second component
of this initiative involves the creation of an interdisciplinary lab course on
nanostructure characterization using X-ray scattering for upper-level
undergraduates and beginning gradate students. A unique aspect of this course
will be its use of a national scattering facility (at nearby Brookhaven National
Lab.) including planning, executing and analyzing a focused set of measurements.
A final initiative involves an international (Japan) collaborative program.
Graduate students at Stony Brook will gain valuable research experience in Japan
and expand their knowledge beyond their fields of study by interacting with
Japanese professors and graduate students of different backgrounds and
perspectives. Collectively, these efforts aim both to make the science community
at Stony Brook more inclusive and to give the students a more varied
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;