* 0846861
* CAREER:  A Program of Research Focused on Understanding of Interaction of Recycled Materials with Asphalt,  Outreach, Academic and Engineering Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Magdy Abdelrahman, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will focus on using
recycled materials, like tire rubber, to enhance the performance of pavement as
an aspect of the civil infrastructure sustainability. The broad goal of the
research program is to fundamentally characterize the materials and process
variables responsible for property development in asphalt-rubber interaction.
Asphalt applications have the potential to contribute to the solution of the
growing solid waste problem provided that engineering and environmental concerns
are addressed. Recycled tires, also known as crumb rubber modifier (CRM), and
recycled asphalt pavement (RAP) for example, can be engineered and used
successfully in asphalt pavement applications. Asphalt binders represent an area
that can improve pavement performance. The proposed research will synthesize
asphalt-CRM binders through interactions, will characterize the physical and
chemical properties of asphalt-CRM binders, and will model the impact of
chemical releases from recycled asphalt materials containing additives and
polymers on soil and groundwater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
have a broad impact because solid waste is problematic throughout the world. The
project will enhance available knowledge on property development during the
binder production process. Techniques from different engineering and science
disciplines will be used to solve the research problems. The educational plan in
this work is strongly tied with the research component through developing a
graduate/senior course on recycled material applications, and through faculty-
professional focus meetings to exchange experiences in the area of recycled
materials. Proposed activities will serve as a tool to recruit, train, and
mentor students in the undergraduate and graduate programs and will prepare
students for careers in recycled materials. The community outreach activities
will raise the awareness of K-12 students to the environmental issues facing the
local as well as the global community regarding solid waste
management.&lt;br/&gt;