* 0846293
* CAREER: Convective and Diffusive Transport of Drug Delivery Vehicles in Blood Flow in Microcirculation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Prosenjit Bagchi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 479,634.00

Bagchi&lt;br/&gt;0846293 &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in high-performance computing have enabled the
scientific community to progress toward the Direct Numerical Simulation of whole
blood, at least in microcirculation. Despite the complexity of the problem, many
research groups have succeeded in simulating the motion of multiple deformable
blood cells in semi-dense suspension. Leveraging on this progress, this research
addresses dispersion of drug-carriers in whole blood in presence of hundreds to
thousands of deformable blood cells. Targeted drug delivery methods rely on
carriers such as macromolecules and submicron particles to carry novel
therapeutic agents precisely to disease location. They have shown great promise,
for example, in cancer diagnosis and treatment. Once delivered, these carriers
move through the bloodstream via convective and diffusive transport, and then
bind to the diseased cells via adhesion molecules. This study will quantify the
role of red blood cell dynamics (tumbling/tank-treading) in the dispersion of
submicron particles under varying hemorheological conditions, compare the
results with the classical Taylor-Aris theory of dispersion, and identify
carrier size and hemorheological conditions for optimal dispersion. Direct
Numerical Simulation (DNS) will be conducted on drug-carrier dispersion in whole
blood represented as a semi-dense suspension of up to 1000 deformable blood
cells flowing in a microvessel. Deformation and unsteady dynamics of individual
blood cell will be resolved with high fidelity by appropriate mesocopic
rheological models. The fluid/structure coupling will be done by an immersed
boundary method. The simultaneous role of advection, diffusion, and biophysics
of binding of a polymer on to a cell, and of a microsphere on to the vascular
wall will be addressed. The DNS technique will be coupled with Lagrangian
tracking of submicron particles, the bead-spring chain model for polymer
stretching dynamics, and a coarse-grain model for molecular interaction during
binding. The multidisciplinary research will impact prediction of complex fluid
flows, multi-phase flows and fluid--solid interaction, and biology and disease
(and potentially medicine). The computational and fluid dynamic research planned
here will provide a theoretical basis for design of next-generation drug-
carriers for normal and pathological blood with improved transport properties.
An integrated educational plan includes encouraging, recruiting, and mentoring
women students from K11-K12 in PI's research by coupling two till-date
independent programs at Rutgers (Douglass Summer Institute for women, and
Governor's School program for aspiring engineers). It also includes research
experience for undergraduates, introduction of a cross-disciplinary course, and
dissemination of results by organizing a mini-symposium on fluid mechanics of
drug transport.