* 0846845
* CAREER: Computational Modeling for Population-Based Evaluation of Spine Procedures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Anthony Petrella, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0846845&lt;br/&gt;Petrella&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal
aims to develop a foundation of integrated research and education activities
with a focus on computational modeling of the spine. The primary research goal
is to develop and validate a probabilistic model of the lumbar spine capable to
account for variations in anatomical and surgical parameters across a realistic
patient population. The main educational goal is to develop a virtual x-ray
vision simulator to foster interest in science and engineering among K-12
students by teaching basic biomechanics
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Safety and efficacy
of a new medical device has historically been demonstrated through cadaver
testing and clinical trials. Of course, it is desirable to learn as much as
possible about a new device before implantation in humans. Cadaver testing is
the gold standard for pre-clinical evaluation of a new device, but it is cost
and time prohibitive to evaluate device function across a large population of
specimens. Most computational models described in the literature exhibit a
similar limitation - they are constructed based on the anatomy of a single
subject and are unable to predict function across a meaningful population. This
study aims to develop a computational framework to simulate the outcome of a
surgical procedure across a realistic patient population. The PI believes that
such a model represents transformational technology that has the potential to
significantly improve the power and quality of pre-clinical testing for new
medical devices and surgical interventions. The spine sector is currently one of
the most active areas for development of new orthopaedic technologies, and the
proposed computational model will be applied specifically to investigate the
efficacy of a new reconstructive concept for the lumbar spine based on combined
disc and facet arthroplasty. A novel biomechanics education program will also be
developed for K-12 students: a virtual x-ray vision simulator. Optical motion
capture equipment will be coupled with computer graphics techniques to overlay
skeletal models on regular video images of a presenter on stage. The result will
be a virtual x-ray vision system that gives young audiences the impression that
they can see a presenter's bones and muscles. Cutting edge markerless motion
capture technology will be used for this system so that no special clothing,
electromagnetic sensors, or markers of any kind are needed to track the
presenter on stage. This latter point is noteworthy because it means that
volunteers from the audience may participate in the program and be tracked by
the motion capture system without any special preparation. Another unique
feature of the proposed system is that it will function in real time so that
educational content will be interactive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Back pain is the most common cause of activity limitation in
people under age 45, the second most frequent reason for visits to the
physician, and the third most common cause of surgical procedures. The annual
cost of low back pain to the US economy exceeds $100 billion. Through better
pre-clinical evaluation of new spine procedures, the proposed computational
model has the potential to improve quality of life for millions of patients and
reduce the cost of spine care in the US. The educational program will ignite
excitement for science and technology among K-12 students and it will teach the
value of community outreach to college-age students. The PI will create a new
course (offered every fall and spring semester) in which teams of undergraduate
engineers will both enhance the educational program and help deliver it. The PI
has partnered with local schools and museums to present the program to
approximately 1500 K-12 students each year. Partner schools were chosen
specifically to target underrepresented groups. The goals are to increase the
number of students who finish high school and go on to college. Assessment of
these goals will be designed through collaboration with the partner schools and
through student questionnaires. Finally, a website will be created at the PI's
institution to promote the program and teach other educators worldwide how to
copy the virtual x-ray vision simulator for use in their own communities. The
website will also provide a survey to aid in program assessment.