* 0846457
* CAREER: New Computational Paradigms for Large-scale ab-initio Simulations of Emerging Electronic Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Eric Polizzi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: ECCS-0846457

Proposal Title: New Computational Paradigms for Large-scale ab-initio
Simulations of Emerging Electronic Materials and Devices

PI Name: Polizzi, Eric

PI Institution: University of Massachusetts Amherst

The objective of this research is to enhance significantly the role of
computational modeling and high-performance computing for designing new classes
of high speed, and high functionality electronic devices. The project aims at
providing a sound basis to face the challenges in large-scale atomistic
simulations for applications ranging from material sciences and chemistry to
nanoelectronics and bio-nanotechnology. Specific advanced mathematical
techniques and high-performance parallel algorithms are then proposed for
simulating the electronic structure and transport properties of large scale
systems only from the knowledge of the constituent atoms. To achieve these
goals, first-principle continuum-based modeling and calculations are performed
using efficient real-space mesh techniques and within the density functional
theory. The transport models range from a standard non-equilibrium Green?s
function formalism approach to more reliable time dependent and dissipation
models for exploring transition between micro and grand-canonical
representations A state-of-the-art nanoelectronics simulation environment,
NESSIE, will be developed for prototyping emerging materials and devices.

Intellectual Merit: This project proposes the fusion of the recent breakthroughs
in quantum atomistic simulation of materials and devices with those in high-
performance computing. The results are potentially capable of advancing
knowledge and understanding of nanoscale physics of emerging electronics and
focusing experimental investigation.

Broader Impact: This project will accelerate the development of quantum
technologies and their impacts in the global economy. Packaging the required
high-performance numerical simulation tools into portable software will also
have significant broader impacts in science and engineering and education.