* 0846360
* CAREER:  Ecological Engineering and the Sustainability of Dams: Evaluating Ecohydraulic Outcomes of Climate Change and Mitigation Opportunities in a Regulated River
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Desiree Tullos, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

0846360 Tullos

This CAREER award applies ecological engineering to the management of
environmental systems. It involves application and extension of the Willamette
Collaborative Model, being developed and used by federal agencies for water
resources planning in the Willamette River Basin in Oregon. The study will also
address uncertainty analysis and stakeholder-driven planning processes. As such,
the fundamental research activity of this work is the integration of existing
modeling tools with the addition of components for better evaluation of outcomes
in terms of ecosystem health (fish habitat). The hypothesis is that the impact
of climate change on ecosystems can be mitigated by dam reoperation. An
integrated modeling approach will be developed for predicting and managing
habitat for endangered salmon with connection to endangered species and the
threat of climate change. Dam reoperations to be studied by this proposed
project will-- be an important measure for climate change adaptation. The
educational objective is to enhance the ecological engineering program in the
PI's university and to activate stakeholder participation in sustainable river
management. A large number of students, including under-represented students in
engineering, will be involved in the educational plan. Engaging stakeholders
will extend the impact beyond education of graduate and undergraduate
engineering students.

