* 0846329
* CAREER: Chiral Nanostructure Hybrid Materials for Applications in Terahertz Resonator and Magnetic Storage Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Eva Schubert, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 01/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Chiral Nanostructure Hybrid Materials for Applications in Terahertz
Reso-nator and Magnetic Storage Devices&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is the design, fabrication, investigation and optimization of novel chiral
nanostructure hybrid material devices for applications in Terahertz
emitter/receiver systems and magnetic memories with increased storage capacity.
The approach is to compose metal chiral sculptured thin films deposited by
glancing angle deposition. Hybridization is ob-tained by filling low viscous
monomers into nanostructures pores, and subsequent polymerization will transform
the composite materials into functional hybrids. The educational/outreach
program consists of a nanotechnology mini-course for middle school students,
female student e-mentoring, development of a new materials research program
graduate course; and international student exchange in cooperation with the
University of Linkoping in Sweden.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research
plan will lead to breakthrough advances for revolutionary new electromagnetic
devices from chiral nanostructure hybrids. The potential three-dimensional non-
volatile magnetic storage media may reach capacities far beyond the currently
available sto-rage densities, and the active Terahertz resonator structures may
be incorporated in Terahertz sources and detectors.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Expanding non-volatile direct-access computer memory beyond current limits will
revolutionize data storage management. Development of Terahertz devices will en-
able medical and security screening. Communication, computing, security, and
health will immediately benefit from enabling this device technology. The female
student electronic mentoring system closes an identified gap between female
school students and engineering students, and enables female student commitment
to engineering majors. The nanotechnology summer course to be developed fulfills
recently identified gaps within the summer student outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;