* 0846563
* CAREER: QMHP: A Multiphenomena Simulator toward New Functionalities of All-Graphene Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Jing Guo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract The objective of this research is to develop the multiphenomena device
physics of a patterned graphene to a point where new classes of devices can be
conceived and simulated. The approach is solving quantum dynamic transport
equations in the presence of electron-electron, electron-phonon, and electron-
photon interactions, assisted by implementation of numerically efficient models
and algorithms. Intellectual merit: Physically meaningful and computationally
efficient device simulation capabilities play a critical role in revealing
device physics and exploring new device concepts. At nanometer and quantum
transport scale, unexpected device phenomena and new device functionalities
could arise from interaction of diverse physical processes. The proposed
research advances our fundamental understanding on interactions between
electrons, phonons, and photons in non-equilibrium quantum transport in
nanoscale devices. The research will also contribute to building the predicative
simulation power for new device phenomena in the emerging field of graphene
electronics.

Broader impact: The research would enable engineering graphene for integration
of communication, data storage, and imaging functionalities into existing
integrated circuit technologies, and thus significantly extend the chip capacity
through functional diversification. A web-based simulator will be developed and
deployed to provide simulation support for the research and education worldwide
on graphene electronics. Early exposure to electronics and optoelectronics will
be provided through a set of video presentations on electronic and
optoelectronic technologies in popular products through a University of Florida
outreach program with an emphasis on minority student participation. An online
nanotechnology course advising system will also be developed.