* 0846959
* EAR-PF: Integrating geodesy and seismology toward understanding the dynamics of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Emily Montgomery-Brown, Montgomery-Brown        Emily          K
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2013
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Emily Montgomery-Brown is awarded
an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop an integrated program
of research and education at the University of Wisconsin - Madison. She will use
both seismic and geodetic data to study the changing magma plumbing system at
Kilauea volcano, Hawaii. Combining both types of measurements provides an
opportunity to study how the seismic properties of the rock change in response
to deformation induced by the intrusions. From the deformation data, we will be
able to determine the volume change from the intrusions, and how much the host
rock was stressed by the volume change. The stress change can alter the seismic
properties of the rock by influencing the density or orientation of small
cracks. We will be able to observe these effects by measuring when certain parts
of the seismic waves from deeper (5-10 km) earthquakes travelling through the
study area arrive relative to other parts. The recorded changes will relate
directly to the known stress change determined from models of the deformation
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The response of the host rock to a deformation
episode provides insight into what drives the commonly observed steady
deformation of the volcano. Possible driving forces include spreading due to the
gravitational load of the rock itself, or outward pressure from the internal
magmatic system. Visualizing how these driving forces produce eruptions and
earthquakes within a volcano is often difficult, so to facilitate understanding,
a scale mechanical model of Kilauea will be created in cooperation with the
University of Wisconsin's Geology Museum that illustrates the driving forces and
variable physical properties of the magmatic and tectonic elements that make up
the volcano. This model will then be shared with the public through the Museum?s
outreach activities.