* 0846816
* CAREER:  Efficient Monte Carlo Methods in Engineering and Science: From Coarse Analysis to Refined Estimators
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Jose Blanchet, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 12/31/2013
* USD 409,950.00

&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project is to investigate and develop a framework that exploits
asymptotic analysis, expressed at a coarse scale, to systematically generate
efficient rare-event simulation algorithms for complex stochastic systems, which
must necessarily be implemented at a fine scale. The objective is to study five
types of environments that exhibit stylized features that have not been well
studied in rare-event simulation, namely, a) Stochastic recursions with heavy-
tails (which are used to model insurance risk and reservoir processes), b)
Heavy-tailed queues (which arise in database and networking applications), c)
Counting problems and inference for combinatorial structures (arising in
sociology and biology), d) Location of objects immersed in a random medium (with
particular emphasis on military applications where one needs to find targets
that have eluded detection for long time), and e) Random fields (which arise in
settings such as oceanography, environmental studies and medical imaging). The
strategy consists in connecting large deviations analysis with algorithmic
design of efficient simulation estimators. A key tool that we exploit in the
design and performance analysis of our algorithms is a systematic use of
Lyapunov bounds for Markov chains, combined with parametric families of
importance sampling distributions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Events such as
environmental or natural disasters, major market crashes, pension and insurance
breakdowns and terrorist attacks are rare but consequential. If successful, the
proposed research program will provide efficient computational tools for risk
assessment of such events which exhibit features such as heavy-tails, complex
dependence and incorporation of combinatorial objects. Efficient evaluation of
rare-event probabilities can provide decision makers with key quantitative
policy assessment metrics and accompanying insights. Examples include computing
the probability that a target is able to evade a set of detectors as well as its
conditional most likely location, and assessing ruin probabilities for purposes
of sizing the capital reserve of insurance and financial
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;