* 0846695
* CAREER: Testing Models of Cretaceous Cordilleran Paleogeography: An Integrated Provenance Study of Four Basins
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Kathleen Surpless, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2014
* USD 402,985.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Tectonic deformation, magmatism, and associated changes in erosion rates and
paleodrainage systems directly affect sedimentary basin evolution in active
tectonic settings. Thus, a detailed and robust evaluation of convergent margin
sedimentary basins may provide the most complete record of tectonic and magmatic
events in ancient convergent margin systems. The North American Cordillera
provides an ideal setting for developing this robust provenance technique
because extensive geochronologic, geochemical, and isotopic studies throughout
the orogen establish an explicit basis for comparing sediment sources against
the provenance data to be collected. Because no clear consensus has been reached
on the Mesozoic and younger paleogeographic evolution of the western Cordillera,
provenance results will address longstanding questions of terrane translation
and rotation. The scientific merit of the proposed study lies in the development
of an integrated sedimentary provenance technique that will be generally
applicable to basin evolution studies in convergent systems worldwide.

The proposed basin provenance analysis integrates sedimentary petrography with
detrital zircon analysis, whole-rock major and trace-element geochemistry, and
neodymium isotopic analysis to develop a detailed approach to studying
convergent margin basins that should be transferable to similar systems around
the world. The robust geochemical and geochronologic dataset resulting from a
combination of multiple provenance tools includes information from all grain
sizes and compositions within a basin?s stratigraphy. Integrated provenance
analysis that includes the more homogenized fine-grained component of basin
strata will permit better correlation within and between basins. Cretaceous
basins whose sedimentary provenance may provide crucial links to source regions
include the Methow basin in southern British Columbia and northern Washington
State, the Ochoco basin in eastern Oregon, the Hornbrook Formation in southern
Oregon and northern California, and the Great Valley Group in California. With
the exception of the Great Valley Group, the provenance of these Cretaceous
Cordilleran basins has been studied largely at a reconnaissance level, and none
of these basins have been studied through integration of all proposed provenance
tools. Together, these various provenance methods permit documentation of the
evolution of sediment sources through time and space within a single basin,
improved stratigraphic age control, and better correlation within a single basin
and between basins.

