* 0846607
* CAREER: Rationally Designed Conjugated Polymers Based on Benzobisazoles
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Malika Jeffries-EL, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2014
* USD 554,217.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY. Conjugated polymers are of tremendous scientific and
technological importance for use in applications such as photovoltaics cells,
light-emitting diodes and thin-film transistors. The ability to modify the
electronic properties of conjugated polymers through chemical synthesis allows
for the optimizaton of their properties for specific applications. However, iin
spite of the large number of synthetically accessible conjugated polymers, the
values remains an important goal in the field. Among existing conjugated
polymers, poly (benzobisazoles) are well suited for use in organic semi-
conducting applications because they combine photoluminescence and efficient
electron transport with excellent thermal stability. Historically, fully
conjugated poly (benzobisazoles) are insoluble in aprotic solvents, limiting
their use. Recently, the Jeffries-EL group has demonstrated that soluble poly
(benzobisazoles) can be synthesized via an approach that allows for easy
variation of the side chains. This CAREER award will support efforts to (1)
design and synthesize novel soluble poly (arylene benzobisazole) polymers, (ii)
investigate the influence of polymer structure on the optical, electronic and
physical properties of these materials, and (iii) foster interest in polymer
science through an outreach effort targeting underrepresented students in the
8th - 12th grade. this research will elucidate the relationship between polymer
structures and electronic properties providing a rational basis for synthesizing
conductive polymers with optimized properties for organic
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNIAL SUMMARY. Conjugated polymers are
being explored both academically and commercially for use in semi-conducting
applications. The motivation behind their use is the ability to make large area
films using solution-processing techniques such as inkjet printing, which
translates into a significant reduction in the cost of device manufacture. This
CAREER award will (i) support research intended to increase basic knowledge for
designing conjugated polymers with optimized properties for use as "plastic"
electronics (ii) provide interdisciplinary research experiences for both
undergraduate and graduate students, and (iii) foster interest in polymer
science through a creative outreach effort targeting underrepresented students
in the 8th - 12th grade.