* 0846359
* CAREER: Experimental studies of the rheology and flow properties of liquefied biomass in wall-bounded turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2015
* Christopher White, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 03/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0846359 &lt;br/&gt;White&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better understanding of the
fundamental fluid physics of liquefied biomass in wall-bounded turbulent flows
is of practical importance for the scale-up of biorefineries and the design of
biomass pipelines. Both are needed to accomplish the United States biofuel
objective of providing 30% of the nation's transportation fuels with biofuels.
To meet the goals of the project, The PI plans to improve the temporal and
spatial resolution of ultrasound correlation velocimetry, evaluate the rheology
and structure of liquefied biomass fluids, and characterize wall-bounded
turbulent biomass flows. These studies will provide previously unobtainable
information that will enable predictive estimations of the transport of
liquefied biomass in wall-bounded turbulent flows. The role of turbulence in
energy sector technologies will be the theme of the educational and outreach
activities. Drawing on the research topics, the objective is to educate students
and educators through industrial research opportunities, workshops, and outreach
that understanding the effects of turbulence and their control is critically
important to current and future energy systems. The broader impacts of the
research are to acquire and transfer fundamental knowledge to allow greater use
of 'homegrown' renewable fuels in the US; acquire and improve a UCV system
allowing the study of a variety of other rheological, multiphase, opaque fluid
flow problems; and attract and train highly qualified students interested in the
fields of energy, turbulence, and complex fluids. Integration of education and
research activities is achieved by offering industrial research opportunities
for the PI's graduate students, syllabus enrichment, K-12 outreach, continuing
education, and participating in University outreach days by including lab tours
and demonstrations. Lastly, the PI will actively recruit target minorities to
work in his labs and potential Ph.D. students through Project REIS@UNH (Research
Experience In Science at UNH), a collaboration between UNH and the Harlem
Children Society; and postings in several publications targeting minority
populations.