* 0846958
* CAREER: Synthesis, Structures, and Properties of Crystalline Boron-Based Porous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Xianhui Bu, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 01/31/2015
* USD 597,707.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The proposed research aims to develop a family of crystalline boron-imidazolate
based nanoporous materials with compositional and topological features that
mimic porous zeolites. These materials are unique because they are capable of
integrating the advantages of coordination polymers (e.g., compositional and
topological diversity) and covalent organic framework materials (e.g.,
lightweight). The synthetic strategy involves two major steps. The first is to
create a library of boron-imidazolate molecular building blocks capable of
serving as tetrahedral or trigonal vertices. These various pre-synthesized
molecular building units will then be assembled with metal cations or clusters
into three-dimensional infinite porous frameworks. This strategy is especially
suited for the creation of ultra-light porous materials using the lightest
possible elements from the periodic table (e.g., Li and B) and permits the
development of materials with a variety of compositional and topological
features. These crystalline porous materials will be structurally characterized
and their various properties, particularly porosity and gas sorption
characteristics, will be characterized to determine their application potentials
in energy and environmental applications such as hydrogen storage, carbon
dioxide sequestration, and selection gas separation.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The proposed research program aims to create a family of sponge-like porous
materials for energy and environmental applications. Such materials may serve as
high capacity adsorbents for on-board fuel storage or waste gas sequestration
and they may also selectively trap toxic and radioactive metals for
environmental remediation. The award will help the PI to design curricula and a
range of research activities in solid state and materials chemistry that will
provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, leading
to publications and scholarly presentations involving these students. Because a
large fraction of students in the PI's university and laboratory are from
underrepresented groups, the program will broaden the participation of these
students and promote diversity in solid state and materials research.