* 0846584
* CAREER: Unique Nanostructured Materials from Molecularly Engineered Bottlebrush Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Javid Rzayev, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2014
* USD 475,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The goal of this project is to utilize densely grafted copolymers with
bottlebrush architecture for the fabrication of nanoporous objects and
nanostructured materials with exact structural and functional control. The
research supported by this CAREER grant will focus on (1) the synthesis of
multi-component bottlebrush copolymers, (2) molecular templating of shape-
persistent bottlebrush macromolecules, and (3) melt-phase self-assembly of
bottlebrush block copolymers. Advanced bottlebrush copolymers with tailored
chemical framework will be synthesized by a combination of living radical and
ring-opening polymerization techniques. Multi-component bottlebrush copolymers
will be converted to standalone open-end tubular nanoobjects with well-defined
structural parameters (length, diameter and pore size) and functional
composition. The bottlebrush macromolecular scaffold will enable the preparation
of structures otherwise unattainable under thermodynamic control of self-
assembly. The molecular design will be expanded to prepare radially amphiphilic
nanotubes and stimuli-responsive molecular cages. The prepared nanostructures
will serve as versatile building blocks for the fabrication of nanodevices and
as encapsulating agents in drug delivery applications. Melt-phase self-assembly
of diblock bottlebrush copolymers will be investigated for the preparation of
periodic nanostructured materials with large domain spacings and hierarchical
systems. An array of characterization techniques, including ultra-small X-ray
scattering and transmission electron microscopy, will be utilized to study melt
phase behavior of these macromolecules. This research will help to establish the
relationships between the shape of constituent bottlebrush copolymers and their
packing tendencies, which is an essential prerequisite for the fabrication of
tailored materials on their basis. Core-shell and other advanced bottlebrush
copolymers will allow for the fabrication of complex network and composite
structures, which will be aimed for photonics and ultrafiltration applications.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The promise of nanotechnology cannot be realized without the availability of
tailored materials that are precisely structured at the nanometer length scale.
The research described in this proposal will provide access to new polymeric
nanomaterials that are not attainable by any other methods and that will be of
potential utility in a wide array of applications, such as nanodevices and
nanoelectronics, drug delivery, photonics and communications, and water
purification. The research program supported by this CAREER grant will
simultaneously integrate educational initiatives to promote polymer and
nanotechnology education in the Buffalo area. Nanotechnology workshops will be
organized for middle and high school teachers to provide them with professional
development opportunities and content gain. The aim is to increase public
awareness and appreciation of polymeric materials and their impact on
nanotechnology and other advanced applications, and promote the use of polymers
to enhance science and technology education in general. The partnership with
Buffalo Public Schools, the poorest urban school district in New York State,
will maximize the impact on underrepresented minorities and low-income students.
Polymer education at the undergraduate level will be promoted by providing
research opportunities for undergraduate students, and by organizing freshman
seminar series.