* 0846655
* CAREER: Formalizing and Resolving Computational Intensity of Spatial Analysis to Establish a Cyber-GIS Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Shaowen Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2015
* USD 470,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Spatial analysis is essential to the acquisition, transformation, and use of
spatial data, information, and knowledge for scientific discovery and decision-
making in many fields (e.g., ecology, environmental science and engineering,
geography, geosciences, public health, and social sciences). As the size of
spatial data and complexity of relevant analysis approaches have significantly
increased, spatial analysis has become much more computationally intensive and,
as a result, conventional methods for spatial analysis are often intractable
within desktop computing environments. Resolving the computational intensity of
spatial analysis thus represents a tremendous challenge.

Dr. Shaowen Wang, Assistant Professor at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign will begin at five-year CAREER award to study the computational
intensity of various geospatial analyses that occur over a distributed, parallel
processing network. Computational intensity is defined as the magnitude of
computational requirements of a problem based on the evaluation of its
computational complexity and characteristics of input and output.
Cyberinfrastructure promises to resolve the computational intensity of spatial
analysis and facilitate collaborative spatial problem-solving. This promise,
however, depends on significant research and education advances yet to be made
based on bridging the fields of cyberinfrastructure, Geographic Information
Science (GIScience), and spatial analysis. The purpose of this project is,
therefore, to enable computationally-intensive spatial analysis through a Cyber-
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) framework that couples cyberinfrastructure,
GIScience, and spatial analysis capabilities based on the development of new
computational intensity theory and knowledge. In particular, the objectives of
the project are three-fold: 1) formalize a novel theoretical construct --
computational intensity map by integrating the representations of spatial and
computational domains to guide the development of efficient and generic methods
and algorithms for parallel and distributed processing of spatial analysis; 2)
create spatial middleware components to encapsulate parallel and distributed
spatial analysis and manage the complexity of cyberinfrastructure for large-
scale spatial problem-solving; and 3) enhance spatial analysis to support
geospatial problems, numbers of collaborators, and the amount of
cyberinfrastructure resources through a service-oriented approach. Dr. Wang will
tightly integrate research and education through investigations into
representative computationally-intensive spatial analysis methods, including
geostatistical modeling, local spatial clustering detection, spatial
interpolation, and spatially-explicit agent-based modeling. Education materials
based on computational intensity maps, parallel and distributed spatial analysis
methods and algorithms, and Cyber-GIS software will synergistically provide
comprehensive support for training next-generation researchers, teachers, and
students to solve computationally-intensive spatial problems.

This project will transform the current state-of-play of the three fields
GIScience, spatial analysis, and cyberinfrastructure, while creating a new
subject domain of computational intensity. A novel theoretical approach to
computational intensity will enhance spatial analysis methods integrated with
cyberinfrastructure and GIS. The Cyber-GIS framework will be established by
developing innovative algorithms and software components based on this approach.
Both real and synthetic data within a science application context of discovering
geographic patterns of global climate change impact on large-scale coupled human
and natural systems will be used to evaluate this framework. The project will
gain fundamental knowledge for coupling the capabilities of GIS, spatial
analysis, and cyberinfrastructure and will, therefore, guide the development of
emerging spatial cyberinfrastructure. While this project will outreach to
underrepresented and minority groups as well as general public through an on-
line Cyber-GIS platform, it holds a great promise to enable widespread
scientific breakthroughs that are important to the nation and society.