* 0846235
* CAREER: The Interaction of Nitric Oxide with Cytochrome P450
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Nicolai Lehnert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2014
* USD 576,136.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program and the Molecular and Cellular Biology program supports work by
Professor Nicolai Lehnert at the University of Michigan to probe the interaction
of nitric oxide (NO) with cytochrome P450. The goal of this project is to obtain
fundamental insight into the spectrum of redox transformations of NO that can be
catalyzed by cytochrome P450s. The investigations utilize both the enzyme
cytochrome P450cam and synthetic model complexes. Magnetic circular dichroism
and resonance Raman spectroscopy are used to establish the relative donor
strengths of the thiolate ligands in different model complexes and P450cam wild
type and mutants. Ferrous and ferric heme nitrosyls are prepared and their
spectroscopic properties, electronic structures, and reactivities are studied as
a function of the thiolate donor strength. Biologically relevant reactions of
these nitrosyl complexes are then investigated, including in particular the
reduction of NO to N2O as mediated by P450nor (NO detoxification) and the
reaction of ferrous heme nitrosyls with O2 and superoxide (nitrosative stress).
A new undergraduate course on the role of metals in life is being developed to
attract underrepresented minority students to the basic sciences. The class
focuses on the relation between fundamental biological and chemical processes
and questions of high current impact in society like health, the environment and
alternative energy sources. Follow-up programs for hands-on research experiences
in these areas are designed for these students. Nitric oxide is a double-edged
sword in biological systems: it is of central importance for many signaling and
regulating processes, but at too high concentrations it also constitutes a
deadly threat to the organism. The clarification of the fundamental reactions
between cytochrome P450s and NO is of key importance for biological chemists to
determine how P450s could participate in the biological network of NO signaling,
transformation and detoxification. In particular, it is expected that the
reactions between NO and cytochrome P450s identified in the research could
potentially be relevant to human physiology.