* 0846943
* Adaptation and Self-Regulation in Multichromophoric Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas Moore, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 547,500.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professors Devens J. Gust, Anna L.
Moore and Thomas A. Moore of Arizona State University for a research project
that involves the synthesis and study of complex molecules consisting of
covalently linked chromophores, electron donors and acceptors, and photochromic
molecules that change their structure upon exposure to light. Each of these
components can exchange information with others via intramolecular energy and
electron transfer. It is these interactions that will allow complex phenomena to
emerge. Several different classes of molecular systems have been identified as
most promising for study. In one of these systems, Professor Gust and his
collaborators will design, synthesize, and spectroscopically investigate
molecules that absorb light and convert it to electrochemical energy in the form
of a charge-separated state, as occurs in photosynthetic reaction centers. In
another, "molecular triodes" and related structures will be studied. In these, a
light-induced output such as fluorescence or photoinduced charge separation will
be modulated by a second wavelength of light that is also absorbed by the
molecule. These molecules will be analogs of electronic triode amplifier tubes
or transistors, and their design will challenge our understanding of the factors
influencing intramolecular energy and electron transfer. And finally, it has
been recently demonstrated that the earth's magnetic field affects the lifetime
of biradical states formed by light-induced intramolecular electron transfer.
This discovery may help uncover how birds and other mammals can navigate using
the earth's magnetic field. However, the chemical basis of the observed effect
is not yet understood. Professor Gust and collaborators will prepare and study
new molecules designed to uncover the mechanism in collaboration with
researchers at the University of Oxford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
the proposed research will be results that lead to a better understanding of
emergent phenomena, a topic that cuts across many fields of chemistry, physics
and biology. The research will involve students at the undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral levels. Of special importance is the training of students from
groups traditionally underrepresented in chemistry. Some of the recruiting and
training will be in collaboration with several units of WAESO, (Western Alliance
to Expand Student Opportunities), an NSF-LSAMP program centered at Arizona State
University. Additionally, formal and informal programs for exchange of research
students will be instituted with several Latin American universities. Experience
has shown that highly-talented, successful students from Latin America serve as
excellent role models for domestic Hispanic students, giving them the guidance
and confidence necessary to achieve their potential. Informal student exchange
programs with several European universities are currently in place, and will be
continued and expanded in the new project.