* 0846609
* Analysis of Terrestrial Gamma-Ray Flashes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* David Smith, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 433,700.00

This investigation is focused on analysis of both archived and ongoing
observations of Terrestrial Gamma-ray Flashes (TGFs), which are brief but
intense bursts of radiation associated with lightning and visible from Earth
orbit by suitably instrumented satellite platforms. These gamma rays were first
detected in the 1990's and are thought to result from electrons accelerated to
very high energies through a process termed "relativistic runaway." They may
conceivably be either a cause of lightning (by serving as a trigger that first
overcomes the insulating property of air, allowing larger currents to flow) or
an effect of lightning (owing to a secondary breakdown process within zones of
strong electric fields set up by the main lightning discharge). Establishing
which of these situations applies is one objective of this work. Data on TGFs
from three spacecraft will be analyzed: (1) The Compton Gamma Ray Observatory
(no longer in orbit), whose BATSE instrument first discovered TGFs; (2) RHESSI
(currently in orbit), which represents the largest source of available TGF
observations; and (3) the recently launched GLAST spacecraft, which carries the
Gamma-ray Burst Monitor (GBM) instrument. Plans call for a more complete
statistical description and survey of background meteorological conditions for
all RHESSI-observed events, and will extend to improved spectral modeling of the
atmosphere's role in TGF propagation. Intercomparisons are also planned with
observations from a recently developed lower altitude instrument (ADELE, the
Airborne Detector for Energetic Lightning Emissions), which will be carried
aboard the NSF-NCAR GV aircraft in the vicinity of Florida thunderstorms during
August-September 2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
effort will center on improved physical understanding of mechanisms by which
highly energetic radiation (of the sort generally associated with cosmic
sources) may be generated within Earth's atmosphere in conjunction with
electrified clouds. Broader Impacts will come primarily from student
involvement, but could conceivably extend to issues of aviation/human safety in
those instances where aircraft venture close to TGF-emitting thunderstorms.