* 0846573
* CAREER: Advanced Silicon-Germanium Nanowire Heterostructures Combining Band Structure Engineering and Modulation Doping
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2016
* Emanuel Tutuc, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 01/31/2016
* USD 464,249.00

Technical: This CAREER award includes a multifaceted research project on silicon
and germanium nanowires and heterostructures. The research plan aims to develop
novel Si/Ge heterostructures at the nanoscale using bottom up growth techniques,
to investigate their intrinsic electronic properties (e.g. carrier mobility,
carrier concentration), and to design and fabricate novel, one-dimensional
electronic devices with high electron mobility. Specifically, the research will
address the following vectors in the area of nanowire growth and fabrication:
(1) Design and grow high mobility one-dimensional electron systems using radial
band-structure engineering and modulation doping in Si/Ge core/shell structures.
(2) Develop new methods to fabricate low resistance contacts to semiconductor
nanowires, which will make it possible to explore the intrinsic electronic
properties, as well as to enable high performance nanowire transistors. (3)
Investigate the magneto-transport properties of nanowire devices down to low
temperature as a spectroscopic method, and in particular to measure electron
density and intrinsic mobility.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance. Silicon and germanium nanowires represent a
particularly attractive platform for future device fabrication at the nanoscale
because of their compatibility to the current electronics architecture:
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS). The project offers an excellent
opportunity for training of students in an interdisciplinary environment.
Through this CAREER, the PI will integrate the results of his research
activities with the courses taught at the undergraduate and graduate level, and
with outreach activities and events; include undergraduate students as
participants in the proposed research activities, with an emphasis on diversity;
and inspire hundreds of K-12 underrepresented students in outreach activities
and events organized in collaboration with the Women in Engineering Program at
the University of Texas in Austin.