* 0846144
* CAREER: Ubiquitous Displays Via a Distributed Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Aditi Majumder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2015
* USD 632,046.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will explore a
new paradigm where displays are not mere carriers of information but rather
active members of the workspace capable of interacting with data, users, the
environment, and other displays. The goal is to seamlessly integrate such active
displays into the collaborative workspace of the future, so that they become
ubiquitous and critical components. To these ends, the PI plans to utilize a
projector augmented with sensors along with an embedded computation and
communication unit. She will investigate the challenges and capabilities
resulting from instrumenting a workspace with a network of such projectors,
including novel distributed methodologies to: (a) cover the existing surfaces
(walls, floors, etc.), which can deviate considerably from planar, white and
Lambertian, with multiple active displays; (b) provide scalability and
reconfigurability (in terms of scale, resolution and form factor) of displays;
and (c) provide a framework for shared viewing and interaction modalities for
multiple users. Achieving such objectives will require the ability to register
imagery globally with the underlying display surface via multiple local
corrections. For interaction with users, the PI will develop distributed
methodologies for gesture-tracking and use them as the cornerstone for a
gesture-based shared interaction modality for large-scale data visualization and
modification. For interaction with data, application-independent distributed
windows management middleware (tentatively dubbed overloaded windows) will be
developed. The new technologies will be combined to provide a novel "data
mobilizer" application for scanning, storing and interacting with life-size
image-like artifacts. All of these technologies will be evaluated in
collaboration with the Environment to Environment Communication (E2E) project at
National University of Singapore (NUS). Project outcomes will include novel ways
for precise and scalable digital control of light on large architectures,
distributed scene reconstruction for large inside-looking-out environments,
metrics to evaluate optimal sampling criteria for reconstructing such scenes,
design criteria to accommodate multiple viewers in a collaborative environment,
novel distributed shared-interaction modalities in such environments, and a new
distributed data management paradigm via overloaded
windows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will lead to
gesture-based multi-user interaction modalities for mobilizing data in
collaborative environments for next-generation visualization, training and
simulation applications with a display resolution that is an order of magnitude
higher than what is currently available yet which can be maintained and deployed
much more easily. The diverse potential applications include digital display
domes for education and entertainment purposes, precise digital lighting
techniques for exploration of cultural heritage such as large edifices, and
novel body-based interaction tools for creating life-size artistic expressions.