* 0846771
* CAREER:Integrated Research and Education on Nano Ionic Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Nicholas Fang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,001.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to advance high throughput electrochemical manufacturing with nanoscale
precision. Experimental characterization and numerical modeling will be
developed on the mechanics and transport properties of the solid electrolyte
stamp that governs the atomic scale dissolution and growth at the interface.
This enhanced understanding of fundamental science, will enable confinement and
control of the ionic transport in this novel nanomanufacturing process in a
programmable manner. Finally, a set of nanodevices for energy conversion and for
advanced imaging will be demonstrated using this novel manufacturing process.
The envisioned solid state electrochemical manufacturing technology promise
cost-effective and versatile process tools to fabricate metallic and ceramic
nanostructures in a single step. The success of this project will enable
practical applications of electronic, biomedical, photonics, and energy
conversion devices. The educational objectives of the CAREER project are focused
on providing new career perspectives for a new generation of students towards
the nanomanufacturing arena. Integrated with the research activities of this
nano-ionic manufacturing project are development of new graduate courses and
summer research programs of nanomanufacturing. To attract woman and minority in
high schools to engineering discipline, a new project Art Through the Mind of a
Engineer will be developed. The PI also plans to strengthen ongoing outreach
activities with high school science teachers to demonstrate science and
engineering concepts involved in implementing novel nanomanufacturing tools.