* 0846034
* CAREER: Program Comprehension in Internet-Scale Code Search for Open Source Reuse in Opportunistic Software Development
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Susan Sim, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2014
* USD 285,331.00

This project will study software developers engaged in the process of searching
the Internet for source code that can be adapted to their goals, and it will
design tools to support decision-making in this kind of work. It has become
commonplace to search the Internet for source code in the course of a software
development project. Locating the right component for as-is reuse or a reference
example at the right time can have significant impact on the how the project
progresses. There are a number of critical decision points in the search
process, when the matches returned are eliminated or selected. These judgments
require a form of program comprehension, though one that not been studied
previously. Current research in program comprehension has been concerned with
how software developers form mental models of how a single body of source code
works in order to perform a maintenance task. Program comprehension in the
context of Internet-scale code search involves discerning the characteristics of
a candidate piece of code without becoming entangled in the
internals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internet-scale code search is exploratory,
iterative, and open-ended, so both relevance and suitability judgments are made
throughout the process. Relevance judgments are made by software developers
while identifying promising candidates among the available matches. These
decisions are rapid, taking only a few seconds, and use relatively little
information. Suitability judgments are made when determining whether a promising
candidate is appropriate for the software project. These decisions are slower
and typically involve a careful cost-benefit analysis. In this project, both
types of judgments will be studied with the aim of creating better tools for
Internet-scale code search. By understanding how developers decide between
options, the cues that they use to comprehend the match, and the kinds of errors
that they make, it is possible to present matches so they can find the desired
source code more quickly and accurately. The research will have three
components: laboratory experiments to study relevance and suitability judgments
in a controlled setting; field studies to examine the search process in context;
and refinements to an existing research platform, the Sourcerer code search
engine. The evaluation criterion for this project is whether the new knowledge,
techniques, and prototypes have reduced errors in relevance and suitability
judgments during Internet-scale code search for opportunistic software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes of the research are: an
understanding of the program comprehension that occurs in the context of
Internet-scale code search; a model of the search and comprehension process; a
characterization of the cues that are used in relevance and suitability
judgments; and prototype search tools that support this process. These results
could have far-reaching impact, because opportunistic software development and
open source reuse have become widely adopted strategies. These practices allow
software developers to leverage a global supply chain for software components
and knowledge that they can use to implement new product and service ideas to
keep up with societal, economic, and corporate demands. Accurate and rapid
relevance and suitability judgments are essential for the successful application
of these strategies. The educational components of this project will prepare
students for the very different world of software development that is currently
coming into being.&lt;br/&gt;