* 0846229
* Short-, Medium- and Long-Term Neural Dynamics of Conceptual Learning
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Christopher Tyler, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Short-, Medium- and Long-Term Neural Dynamics of Conceptual
Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of learning concepts is inherently
dynamic, with both short-term neural changes as the aspects of the concept are
progressively understood, and longer-term consolidation of the material for
retrieval at future times. Higher forms of learning, such as verbal and
mathematical reasoning, can be studied only in humans because they are beyond
the known abilities of other species. Thus, non-invasive brain research
technologies that provide both high-temporal and high-spatial resolution are
required. The proposal represents an emerging domain in the neuroscience of
learning, based on a recent development that enables the methodology of
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to reveal the full range of the
neural dynamics of conceptual learning in the human brain. Until now, fMRI has
been a tool that could only study long-term neural changes because its response
is based on the slow temporal dynamics of the cerebral blood response. As a
result, it has been impossible to follow the temporal evolution of the learning
process through the complex of local cortical activations in the human brain. An
innovative approach will be taken to the analysis of neural dynamics to study
the neural information flow in the brain during the learning of both verbal and
mathematical reasoning tasks to determine how these two kinds of learning take
place. In addition, a much higher spatial resolution of the fMRI technique than
is usual in the study of cognitive processing will focus the study on the
analysis of local neural populations. Our new technical developments allow us to
resolve the neural dynamics of cognitive processing to their native temporal
resolution and track the changes in dynamics as the conceptual learning
proceeds. This novel approach is of high value in understanding the changes in
neural population dynamics underlying the learning process in general, and of
the processes of conceptual learning in particular. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current proposal will provide knowledge of the neural dynamics of cognitive
processing in the human brain that can have a transformative impact on our
understanding of the learning process. In particular, it will radically enhance
the ability to build computational models of the neural underpinnings of the
learning process, and allow the sequence of information flow in the brain to be
mapped as advanced concepts are learned for the first time. This novel
capability will promote detailed strategies for enhancing information transfer
about effective learning dynamics from the field of cognitive neuroscience to
the educational arena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;