* 0846349
* Conversion of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology Genetic Resources Collection from Ultra-cold to Liquid Nitrogen Storage
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2013
* USD 416,235.00

The MVZ Genetic Resources Collection currently is maintained in electrically
powered ultra-cold freezers, but will be transitioned in this project to liquid
nitrogen freezers. Liquid nitrogen freezers are superior to ultra-cold freezers
in several respects, including (1) lack of dependence on electricity to maintain
temperature (a critical safeguard should there be an extended loss of
electricity following an earthquake on the nearby Hayward Fault), and (2)
samples are maintained at -150 degrees C (eliminating tissue degradation that
persists at -80 C ultra-cold temperatures). The entire collection (encompassing
~100,000 tissue vials) also will be inventoried and bar-
coded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic resources collection is among the
largest tissue collections in the world, with worldwide geographical coverage.
It is a resource for researchers throughout the world who undertake genetic
studies of vertebrate species, and includes samples representing extinct
species, as well as populations extirpated by anthropogenic habitat modification
and infectious disease. This project will substantially reduce the energy usage
and carbon footprint of the Berkeley campus. The UC Berkeley Office of
Sustainability, the Campus Climate Action Partnership (Cal CAP), and the
Strategic Energy Plan will showcase it as an example of how careful management
of energy emissions can be undertaken without compromising academic
research.&lt;br/&gt;