* 0846978
* CAREER: Holomorphic Curves in Algebraic Geometry and Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Aleksey Zinger, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2015
* USD 443,068.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0846978&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Aleksey Zinger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The invention of pseudo-
holomorphic curves techniques in the&lt;br/&gt;1980s revolutionized symplectic
topology, profoundly impacted&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry, and led to
astounding connections with string&lt;br/&gt;theory. This project has three
distinct directions, motivated by&lt;br/&gt;this interplay between different
fields. The primary one is a&lt;br/&gt;detailed study of deformations of such
curves, for arbitrary as&lt;br/&gt;well as generic complex structures. It aims
at the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;understanding of properties of pseudo-holomorphic
curves,&lt;br/&gt;including Gromov-Witten invariants (counts of such curves)
and&lt;br/&gt;more qualititative aspects of their behavior (e.g.
existence,&lt;br/&gt;uniruledness, etc.). The aim of another direction is to
apply&lt;br/&gt;techniques employed in the PI's proof of the string
theory&lt;br/&gt;prediction for the genus 1 GW-invariants of a quintic
threefold&lt;br/&gt;in many other setting, testing additional mirror predictions
and&lt;br/&gt;going beyond them. The third direction would further develop
the&lt;br/&gt;PI's local excess intersection approach and its applications
to&lt;br/&gt;classical enumerative geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory
is a physical model that represents elementary&lt;br/&gt;particles by vibrating
strings with the aim of unifying the four&lt;br/&gt;fundamental forces of
nature. As such srings move in space, they&lt;br/&gt;sweep out Riemann surfaces,
also called holomorphic curves. While&lt;br/&gt;string theory is one of the main
paradigms in physics today, it&lt;br/&gt;has yet to make any experimentally
testable predictions. However,&lt;br/&gt;it has generated plenty of mathematical
predictions and led to&lt;br/&gt;fundamental developments in symplectic topology
and algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry, especially in relation to (pseudo-)
holomorphic&lt;br/&gt;curves. This proposal aims to further test string
theory&lt;br/&gt;mathematically, while deepening the mathematical understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;such curves with an eye toward applications to more
classical&lt;br/&gt;problems in geometry. Some of the projects in this proposal
will&lt;br/&gt;pursued by graduate students under the PI's
supervision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the
programs in Geometric Analysis and in Algebra, Number Theory, and Combinatorics.