* 0846255
* CAREER:  Chemical Aging of Biomass Burning Aerosol by Heterogeneous and Photosensitized Heterogeneous Reactions with Atmospheric Trace Gases
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Daniel Knopf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 682,106.00

In this laboratory-based project, the chemical transformation of biomass burning
aerosol (BBA) particles will be studied. BBA are ubiquitous in the atmosphere,
have a source strength of similar magnitude to fossil fuel burning, and can
affect the atmosphere on local to global scales. The overall goal of this
project is to obtain a comprehensive picture of the BBA life-cycle by: 1)
Determination of the heterogeneous oxidation kinetics and reaction products of
BBA with atmospheric trace gases; 2) Evaluation of the photochemical stability
of biomolecular markers; 3) Measurement of the photosensitized heterogeneous
kinetics and reaction products of BBA; and 4) Implementation of the detailed
heterogeneous chemistry of BBA into atmospheric models. The heterogeneous
oxidation kinetics experiments will be carried out with a chemical ionization
mass spectrometer (CIMS) coupled to various flow reactors with samples in the
bulk (coated wall) and aerosol phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational
objectives involve undergraduate participation in research, development of new
curricula, education of middle and high school students and teachers, and
increasing diversity in the atmospheric sciences. Middle and high school
students from local school districts, including members of underrepresented
groups, will be recruited through Stony Brook University. The students will
participate in an atmospheric sciences summer workshop on campus, which will
involve classes, experimental demonstrations, computer simulations, and hands-on
field experience such as conducting meteorological measurements and collecting
aerosol particles with subsequent analysis in the laboratory. Subsequent
exposure at conferences sponsored by the Collegiate Science and Technology Entry
Program (C-STEP) will strengthen the students' knowledge and understanding. A
summer workshop will be also be set up to educate secondary school teachers in
atmospheric sciences, air pollution, and climate change. Diversity in
atmospheric sciences will be further achieved by mentoring and providing
research opportunities to minority and low-income students at the undergraduate
level.