* 0846523
* CAREER: Integrated Experimental and Numerical Modeling Study of Non-uniform Sediment Transport in Meandering Channels
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Jennifer Duan, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 411,770.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific knowledge on sediment transport in
alluvial channels stems from experiments in straight channels. In curved
channels, sediment interacts with highly three-dimensional flow and induces
point bars and meandering planform evolution. To date, no theory is able to
satisfactorily explain and quantify the interactions among flow (mean and
turbulence), sediment transport by size fractions, point bar dynamics and the
sequential migration of bends. Among many numerical models applied to curved and
meandering channels, formulations for sediment transport by size fractions have
been based on data from straight laboratory flumes and never tested with sinuous
channels. Current understanding of sediment sorting through meandering channels
limits the capability of numerical models in simulating the evolution of bed
material gradation, bed morphology, and bend planform. Towards a complete
understanding of sediment transport in meanders, this project aims to address
the following questions: How does flow influence sediment transport? How much
does sediment transport deviate from the near-bed mean flow? What are the
spatial distributions of sediment load? What are the size gradations of bed
load, surface, and substrate material? How do they correlate to sediment
transport rate by size fraction? How does spatially varied sediment flux
constitute point bar dynamics? How does meandering migration response to the
growth or dampening of point bars?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be
conducted in several series of self-formed meandering channels with sinuosities
ranging from 1.25 to 3.7. Well-graded sediment mixtures will be fed into these
sinuous channels to enable investigation of three-dimensional hydrodynamic flow
field, distributions of surface and substrate material, sediment transport
characteristics for different size fractions at the streamwise and lateral
directions, gradual formation, growth, and dampening of point bars and pools
near the apex and channel crossing, planform evolution as bank erodes and point
bar progresses. The experimental results will be integrated into a numerical
model to simulate the processes of meandering migrations in both experimental
flumes and a natural river. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
will contribute to scientific understanding of river meanders and provide
valuable guidance in river restoration design. The merit is not only in basic
research but also in engineering practice. The project will acquire an
experimental facility and a computer model needed for new courses, engage
undergraduates in research, establish a longer-standing mentoring program for
women students, develop a computer animation exhibition for science museums, and
outreach to high school students. The objectives are to encourage creativity and
innovation, stress computing in engineering teaching, increase the visibility of
women in engineering, and attract most talented high school graduates to Civil
Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;