* 0846244
* CAREER: Integrated Modeling for Watershed Management
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Jonathan Goodall, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 408,042.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0846244&lt;br/&gt;Goodall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;The principal objective of this proposal is to advance integrated modeling as
an approach for building next generation watershed models to support
environmental management. Integrated modeling is a systems-based approach for
constructing models through the use of predefined modeling components. Each
component represents some spatially-explicit system process, and the modeler
defines how these components are coupled to simulate system response. Because
components can be developed and maintained by different groups, yet can still be
coupled within a modeling system, integrated modeling offers a transformative
approach for constructing next generation, community-supported environmental
models. This project will address a fundamental question in integrated modeling,
that is the transfer of boundary conditions between spatially and temporally
misaligned components, and produce results that will be used in future efforts
in integrated modeling. This project will focus on the following research tasks
to advance the science and adoption of integrated modeling: (1) to investigate
scaling issues in integrated modeling, in particular algorithms for transferring
values between coupled process-level components that operate on different
spatial or temporal scales; (2) to prototype a set of process-level components
for an integrated modeling system and apply these components to improve
understanding of the performance and accuracy of integrated modeling approaches;
and (3) to educate a new generation of environmental modelers in integrated
modeling techniques to foster a community of integrated watershed modelers. If
successful, this project will provide important guidance to integrated watershed
modeling activities in the U.S. and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational merit of this project will be to engage and mentor a new generation
of watershed modelers in integrated modeling approaches. In addition to
incorporating the basic skills and methods needed for integrated modeling into
the engineering courses that I teach, the project will organize and host a
summer workshop where an interdisciplinary group of graduate and undergraduate
students will work together to prototype an integrated model for a local
watershed. The educational and research activities will be integrated throughout
the project duration by having the tools that result from the research plan used
by students in the educational plan, and by using the feedback received from the
students in the educational plan to enhance the user-friendliness of the tools
developed in the research plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research will be to the U.S. environmental policy arena through the
interest of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in integrated modeling
approaches, to various scientific disciplines including the hydrologic and
surface dynamics communities through their efforts to build cyberinfrastructure,
and to the international water management community through collaborations with
an international standards organization. Also, this research will involve
underrepresented groups by both utilizing existing programs at the University of
South Carolina that aim to involve minority students in graduate research and
through my leadership in the formulation of a watershed management plan for a
local watershed in South Carolina that is home to a significant percentage of
minority residents.