* 0846818
* CAREER: Two-Photon Pumped Lasing Using Semiconductor Nanostructures by Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jian Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research is
to lay a solid foundation for the development and application of a new
generation of two-photon pumped lasers based on engineered semiconductor
nanostructures, whereby the strong electronic and/or optical confinements in
nanocrystal quantum dots, nano-rods, wires, and disks will impact the nonlinear
coherent upconversion process for greatly enhanced lasing
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The research
project is targeted at developing a new generation of two-photon pumped laser
devices based on semiconductor nanostructures, whereby the strong electronic
and/or optical confinements in nanocrystal quantum dots, nano-rods/wires, and
nanodisks will impact the nonlinear coherent upconversion process for greatly
enhanced lasing performance. Particular efforts will be made to (1) understand
the mechanism of two-photon absorption-induced stimulated emission in nanoscale
semiconductor materials, (2) study the two-photon lasing dynamics (gain, mode,
spectral and spatial distribution, threshold behavior, upconversion efficiency,
etc) and their relation to the structural parameters of nanoscale semiconductor
dots/rods/wires/disks, (3) enhance the upconversion efficiency and optimize the
lasing performance by tailoring the multiple variables used in nanostructure
design and processing, and (4) identify the key applications of nanostructured
two-photon lasers in biomolecular detection, optofluidic lasing, and optical
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Successful
implementation of the proposed study will bring fundamental changes to the
design and operation of two-photon pumped lasers and expand their applications
in wavelength upconversion, on-chip UV lasers, bio/medical sensing and
diagnostics, and optical storage. The study will also build on a foundation of
nonlinear optical processes and stimulated emission in low-dimension
semiconductors. The proposed work will provide focused research and learning
experience to undergraduate and graduate students by involvement in experimental
laboratory work, and help them to bridge the fundamental nanoscience with the
real-world applications of nanotechnology. In addition, The PI will work with
the Penn State's Center for Nanotechnology Education and Utilization and
contribute to the state-wide education and workforce development program on
nanotechnology in Pennsylvania.