* 0846788
* CAREER: Dynamics and Statistical Mechanics of Multicomponent Quantum Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Austen Lamacraft, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2012
* USD 236,139.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports an integrated research and education program that
emphasizes the theoretical study of the magnetic and spin properties of
ultracold atomic gases. Despite being perhaps the most novel aspect of the
alkali Bose condensates, the field of spinor condensates has been stymied in
recent years by the gap between the condensed matter physics language of order
parameters and symmetry breaking, and the experimental tools of atomic physics.
The approach proposed here will bridge that gap by developing the theory in
harmony with experiment, simultaneously advancing our understanding of these
fascinating systems while providing crucial insight into future
developments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phenomenon of Bose-Einstein condensation
effectively amplifies one-particle quantum effects to the thermodynamic level.
The spontaneous coherence of spatially separated macroscopic condensates, which
leads to interference fringes when the two clouds overlap, is one example of
this type behavior. If instead of spatially separate gases, we consider atoms in
different spin states then the analogous effect can be viewed as spontaneous
magnetic order. The final state of the gas is selected by the details of the
spin-dependent interparticle interactions, resulting in a phase diagram of novel
magnetic orders that grows in complexity with increasing spin. Recent
experiments have demonstrated this spontaneous symmetry breaking in the magnetic
ordering of ultracold gases, as well as the effect of the magnetic dipole
interactions on the resulting states. .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this award will expose undergraduate physics majors to the subject
of ultracold gases, one of the most exciting areas of physics today. The
educational potential of this branch of physics is enormous, both because of the
excitement surrounding the field of ultracold atoms and because it offers an
accessible way of understanding many advanced concepts in modern physics. A new
textbook will be written on collective phenomena in ultracold systems, and a new
course will be developed on this topic at the University of Virginia., providing
a much needed introduction to the study of collective phenomena in ultracold
systems. The course will build on the university?s strengths in atomic physics,
and revitalize the teaching of many-body physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
an integrated theoretical research and education program to study the interplay
of Bose-Einstein condensation and magnetism in atoms trapped by beams of laser
light and cooled down to temperatures of millionths of a degree on the absolute
scale of temperature. Ultracold atoms in a Bose-einstein condensate act in
concert and behave like they have melded into a superatom. This superatom state
enables experimentalists to explore quantum mechanical effects that ordinarily
occur on the tiniest length scales, e.g. those of a single atom, on easily
accessible length scales. The PI?s research focuses on the magnetic properties
of atoms and the kinds of magnetism that can appear in the superatom state. The
study of these effects may have impact on our understanding of magnetism in
materials. It will likely lead to the discovery of new phenomena and new states
of matter, some of which may occur in materials as well. These new states of
matter exhibiting quantum mechanical behavior may be useful in developing a new
paradigm for computing and may lead to new device technologies based on
manipulating quantum mechanical states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this award will expose undergraduate physics majors to the subject
of ultracold gases, one of the most exciting areas of physics today. The
educational potential of this branch of physics is enormous, both because of the
excitement surrounding the field of ultracold atoms and because it offers an
accessible way of understanding many advanced concepts in modern physics. A new
textbook will be written on collective phenomena in ultracold systems, and a new
course will be developed on this topic at the University of Virginia., providing
a much needed introduction to the study of collective phenomena in ultracold
systems. The course will build on the university's strengths in atomic physics,
and revitalize how the physics of systems of many interacting particles, like
atoms and electrons in materials, are taught.