* 0846561
* CAREER:  A Research and Education Program on Nanoscale Thermal Transport:  Developing a High Spatiotemporal Resolution Photo-Thermal Microscope
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Ronggui Yang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0846561&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project seeks to advance
research and education programs in nanoscale thermal transport through the
following specific tasks: 1) Develop a high throughput, high temporal resolution
(10 femtosecond) and high spatial resolution (10 nanometer) photo-thermal
microscope using advanced tap-top extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lasers, 2) Study
thermal transport processes in innovative materials and devices that are
critical to microelectronics and energy technologies, with use of the new photo-
thermal microscope, and 3) Educate the public, including undergraduate and K-12
students as well as non-engineers, about what nanotechnology can and cannot do
in various thermal and energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The reliability and the performance of innovative nanostructured
materials and devices depend strongly on thermal transport at nano- and
ultrafast scales. While tremendous progress has been made in the past two
decades to characterize thermal transport in nanostructures, simultaneous high
temporal and high spatial experimental characterization techniques involving
engineered nanostructures, although desirable, have not yet been achieved. This
research seeks to develop a high throughput, high temporal resolution and high
spatial resolution photo-thermal microscope. This new characterization tool will
enable researchers to not only better understand the underlying physical
mechanisms in nanoscale and ultrafast thermal transport, but also better
manipulate heat carriers in small structures and at short time scales. An
integrative theoretical and experimental program that uses this new tool will be
pursued to study and manipulate thermal transport in nanostructures. This could
potentially lead to transformative applications in information technology and
energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed plan for
integration of research and education activities is designed to target
participants over a wide range of age groups and scientific expertise including
the general public, K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate students, as well
as members of the engineering and scientific research communities and industry.
Moreover, particular attention will be given to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups. The activities made under the auspices of this award
will dovetail with the Integrated Teaching and Learning (ITL) program at the
University of Colorado to launch a number of outreach programs including: 1)
Development of new courses and programs related to Nanotechnology for Energy,
Nanotechnology for Thermal Management, and Advanced Imaging and Characterization
and 2) Recruitment of students from underrepresented group through ITL to design
and build nanoscale thermal transport experiments that promote active learning
in nanotechnology. The discoveries of the research team will be disseminated in
professional conferences and journals, integrated into both undergraduate and
graduate courses, and included on the Nano-Therm web, a live and interactive
online encyclopedia dedicated to dissemination of advances in nanoscale thermal
transport to the public, including professionals and K-12 students.