* 0846631
* CAREER: Scalable and Optimal Co-Design of Control and Communication Protocols in Cyber-physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Vijay Gupta, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-physical systems (CPS) - complex
dynamical systems interacting across communication networks - are the next
generation of engineering systems, with applications spanning critical
infrastructure control, tele-medicine, traffic control, advanced automotive
systems, process control, energy conservation, environmental monitoring, and
distributed robotics. Current frameworks for designing the algorithms for
controlling the dynamical systems on one hand, and the communication and
networking protocols on the other, are disparate and insufficient to guarantee
reliability, scalability and efficiency in such systems. In response to this
need, this project proposes a scalable and optimal approach for the co-design of
control and networking protocols in CPS. In particular, by using a fusion of
techniques from control and networking, the project will design control-aware
communication protocols, controllers that explicitly consider network
constraints and algorithms to optimally allocate communication resources for
distributed control and estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-physical systems are the foundation of the
21st-century industry. By addressing a fundamental bottleneck in their design,
this research will directly impact the society in profound ways. A new inter-
disciplinary graduate course, an update of the undergraduate control laboratory
course through new experiments and new projects for the EE senior thesis project
course are part of a curriculum development plan to incorporate such
perspectives into education. Concrete plans to motivate domestic high school
students to pursue engineering careers and to increase the participation of
minority and female students in engineering are also
outlined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;