* 0847388
* CAREER: Multiscale methods for high-dimensional data, graphs and dynamical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Mauro Maggioni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,161.00

Maggioni&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0847388&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under
the American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
The investigator&lt;br/&gt;addresses fundamental problems arising from the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;analysis of multiscale geometries of sets, and
multiscale&lt;br/&gt;decompositions of function spaces on such sets. The
complexity&lt;br/&gt;of the geometry of these sets, which are embedded
in&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional spaces, are noisy, and often have
different&lt;br/&gt;dimensions at different locations, is analyzed at
multiple&lt;br/&gt;resolutions. He develops robust mathematical and
statistical&lt;br/&gt;quantitative multiscale methods of analysis, yielding
estimators&lt;br/&gt;of intrinsic dimensionality that are extremely robust to
noise&lt;br/&gt;and succeed with high probability even for small sample size.
He&lt;br/&gt;develops algorithms for multiscale processing of high-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;point clouds much as is done for low-dimensional
functions, by&lt;br/&gt;means of a geometric multiscale transform. He studies
and&lt;br/&gt;approximates functions on data by constructing data-
driven&lt;br/&gt;multiscale dictionaries, generalizing approaches familiar
in&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional Euclidean spaces. He develops
efficient&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for computing these multiscale decompositions
and&lt;br/&gt;dictionary expansions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many important
application problems directly require the&lt;br/&gt;analysis of high-dimensional
data sets, dynamical systems, or&lt;br/&gt;large graphs, or they are posed on a
framework of&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional data sets, dynamical systems, or large
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;Such problems arise for instance in different disciplines
and&lt;br/&gt;real-world situations where instruments or simulations
produce&lt;br/&gt;large amounts of data. The investigator develops novel
methods&lt;br/&gt;for the analysis of high-dimensional data sets and of
statistical&lt;br/&gt;models with a large number of variables, under the
assumption&lt;br/&gt;that the number of free parameters (which in some
sense&lt;br/&gt;represents the intrinsic dimensionality or complexity) of
the&lt;br/&gt;data is small compared to that of the ambient space. He
further&lt;br/&gt;applies these methods to algorithms that are able to
learn&lt;br/&gt;functions on such data from examples, or learn models of
complex&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems (e.g. molecular dynamics, protein
folding,&lt;br/&gt;neuronal activity, etc.), or learn behavior patterns in
social&lt;br/&gt;networks. This Career award is funded by the Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;program in the Division of Mathematical
Sciences/Directorate of&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical and Physical Sciences and by the
Office of&lt;br/&gt;Cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;