* 0847126
* CAREER: Developing High Resolution Infrared Instrumentation to Explore Solar Activity
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2016
* Wenda Cao, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2016
* USD 488,835.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) will upgrade the focal plane instrumentation
suite (specifically the InfraRed Imaging Magnetograph, or IRIM) from the now-
retired 65-cm telescope at the Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO). The flexible
structural design of the upgraded instruments would allow the IRIM to be
available for use with BBSO's New Solar Telescope (NST) now nearing completion,
as well as with other solar telescopes whenever NST is not available. IRIM
possesses a Fabry-PÃ©rot based narrow-band tunable filter to provide high
resolution 2D spectroscopic and polarimetric imaging in the near infrared (NIR).
Given the NST's expected adaptive optics capability once it is operational, the
PI will install IRIM on the NST with the objective of increasing the spatial
resolution and temporal cadence of the NST's spectroscopic and polarimetric
measurements of the Sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NIR imaging observations with high
resolution and high Zeeman sensitivity are rare in solar physics. The IRIM is
one of the few instruments able to provide such scientific data to the solar
community in campaign mode. With the upgraded IRIM, the PI will study energy
transport mechanisms and energy release processes in white light flares in the
NIR, as well as center-to-limb variations of facular contrast in the NIR and
their relationship to magnetic flux density. The PI expects his observational
results to help validate current models of solar and stellar flares, as well as
improve small-scale magneto-convection modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enhance
undergraduate and graduate education in astronomy and general science, the PI
will create an astronomical instrument teaching laboratory on the NJIT campus.
This new laboratory will involve students in the entire process of astronomical
instrument design, development, assembly, calibration, and commissioning. The PI
will also enhance the existing NJIT astronomy and astrophysics curriculum by
adding a course on "Astronomical Instruments and Observational Techniques,"
which will encourage cross-disciplinary education in Physics, Optical Science
and Engineering, Computer Science, and Computer Engineering. The PI's research
group will include two undergraduate students and one graduate student, each of
whom will participate in this project's instrumental development and scientific
objectives. This effort will thereby educate and train the next generation of
solar physicists and instrument engineers, using unique observing and laboratory
facilities at NJIT and BBSO. The PI's team will also contribute to community
education and outreach through solar and space physics presentations provided
during the BBSO's public summer tours and through the teaching laboratory on the
NJIT campus.