* 0847658
* CAREER Towards a GZK Neutrino Detector at the South Pole
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kara Hoffman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2014
* USD 499,900.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly one hundred years after the
discovery of cosmic rays, neutrino telescopes are becoming an integral part of a
multi-messenger approach to discovering their still elusive origins. Neutrinos
are unique astronomical messengers which may provide critical information in
identifying sources of cosmic rays and the physics processes out of which they
are born. Neutrinos retain their directional information through magnetic fields
and point back to their source. They can travel long distances from their
sources without significant attenuation. The observation of neutrinos from an
astrophysical source would be unambiguous evidence for hadronic acceleration,
since cosmic proton accelerators are expected to produce cosmic rays, gamma rays
and neutrinos with similar luminosities. Recent data from HiRES and AUGER seem
to support the existence of the "GZK cutoff", the modification of the cosmic ray
spectrum due to the photoproduction effect and hence one expects a flux of
ultra-high energy neutrinos from the charged pion
decays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the low flux at extremely high energies,
novel techniques must be employed to build a cost effective array large enough
to gain a statistically meaningful number of events at GZK energies. One such
technique uses the Askaryan effect where the Cerenkov radiation in the radio
frequencies (RF) is used to measure the energy and direction of the showers that
result from the neutrino interactions. This award provides funds to continue
research and development towards a detector to sense the RF emission from
neutrino induced showers in RF transparent media such as ice. Such an RF sensor
at the South Pole would significantly extend the flux sensitivity of the IceCube
array. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this project include
involvement in public outreach, working to expand U. Maryland's QuarkNet program
to a larger audience and visiting local high schools to talk to students and
teachers about research and experiences as a scientist.