* 0847170
* The California-Arizona Minority Partnership for Astronomy Research and Education (CAMPARE)
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Christopher Impey, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,237,695.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the California-Arizona Minority
Partnership for Astronomy Research and Education (CAMPARE) program is to advance
Astronomy research and education among Hispanic and other minority students by
creating a partnership between California State Polytechnic University (CPP), a
large, ethnically diverse, Hispanic-serving institution, located in eastern Los
Angeles County, and the University of Arizona (UA) Department of Astronomy,
located in Tucson, Arizona. This mission will be accomplished through a variety
of activities including summer research experiences for CPP students working
with UA faculty, access for CPP students and faculty to telescopes at UA's
Steward Observatory, and collaborative education research with CPP and UA
faculty on how "Astro 101" is taught. All of these activities are aimed toward
creating a network of instructors, undergraduates, and K-12 students in order to
increase the presence of Hispanic and other minority students in Astronomy
graduate school, and to recruit and inspire local K-12 students in Southern
California to attend college and major in Astronomy or other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of an Hispanic-serving
institution, such as CPP, located in a region of explosive growth in Hispanic
population, and an Astronomy Department, such as UA, with a strong track record
of involving undergraduates in research, and which also happens to be
geographically close and in a heavily Hispanic state, will allow for the
creation of a program that will reach one of the largest concentrations of
diverse students in the country, and have a real impact on their futures. The
CAMPARE program will stimulate Astronomy education and research at every level:
among K-12 students, among undergraduates, and among the instructors who serve
these populations, achieving benefits beyond the limits of academia. It is hoped
that this program can become a model for other minority-serving California State
University schools, and for Hispanic and minority-serving institutions
nationwide.