* 0847524
* CAREER: Canonical metrics, complex Monge-Ampere equations and geometric flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Jian Song, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2015
* USD 426,952.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0847524&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Jian Song&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on a number of
projects on canonical metrics&lt;br/&gt;and stability, geometric flows and
complex Monge-Ampere&lt;br/&gt;equations. Such problems are fundamental in
complex analysis and&lt;br/&gt;complex geometry, in tight relation to partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations, algebraic geometry and mathematical physics.
The&lt;br/&gt;recent progress and influx of new ideas from Ricci
flow,&lt;br/&gt;pluripotential theory and the minimal model program in
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry have unravelled a deep, rich and unifying
structure.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the limiting behavior of the
Kahler-Ricci&lt;br/&gt;flow and its connection to the classification theory
for&lt;br/&gt;algebraic varieties, inspired by Perelman's breakthrough
in&lt;br/&gt;Hamilton's program to resolve the geometrization conjecture
by&lt;br/&gt;Ricci flow. In particular, the PI aims to study the
relation&lt;br/&gt;between the formation of finite time singularities of
the&lt;br/&gt;Kahler-Ricci flow and the algebraic surgery in the minimal
model&lt;br/&gt;program in algebraic geometry. The PI also intends to
continue&lt;br/&gt;his study on canonical metrics of Einstein type on
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;varieties and understand the analytic and geometric aspects
of&lt;br/&gt;the singularities of such special metrics. The PI also plans
to&lt;br/&gt;study the uniform approximation problem of the Monge-
Ampere&lt;br/&gt;geodesics in infinite dimensional symmetric space by those in
the&lt;br/&gt;finite dimensional Bergman spaces. The precise understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;this problem will give new insight into Yau's conjecture on
the&lt;br/&gt;relation between Kahler-Einstein metrics and certain stability
in&lt;br/&gt;the sense of geometric invariant theory. The outcome of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will develop new tools and give
profound&lt;br/&gt;insights and understanding of geometry and the structure of
the&lt;br/&gt;universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems in the proposal arise
naturally from our attempts to&lt;br/&gt;understand nonlinear differential
equations from geometry and&lt;br/&gt;physics. The solutions to these problems
will have strong impact&lt;br/&gt;on other fields of sciences such as physics
and cosmology in the&lt;br/&gt;deep understanding of our universe. The method of
analyzing&lt;br/&gt;singularities of nonlinear equations will have wide
applications&lt;br/&gt;in physics, engineering and economics. Furthermore, the
PI plans&lt;br/&gt;to disseminate the exciting research at the interface of
geometry&lt;br/&gt;and analysis to a broad audience through lectures
and&lt;br/&gt;workshops. The proposed project will bring in research
and&lt;br/&gt;teaching innovation in mathematics from various disciplines
and&lt;br/&gt;have an immediate beneficial effect on undergraduate and
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students at Rutgers as well as in the regional
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;community. The PI will also organize and participate in
the&lt;br/&gt;integrated research/education programs and activities that
will&lt;br/&gt;promote the education level of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;