* 0847390
* CAREER:  Multi-Structured Hydrogels to Control Biochemical and Biomechanical Cues to MSCs:  An Integrative Plan to Promote Diversity
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Stephanie Bryant, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2016
* USD 507,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847390 PI: Bryant, Stephanie ORG:
Colorado&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Multi-structured Hydrogels to
Control Biochemical and Biomechanical Cues to MSCs: An Integrative Plan to
Promote Diversity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This proposal
describes an integrated research and educational plan based on the PI's
expertise in biomaterials design for tissue engineering and together will
provide unique and exciting opportunities for promoting diversity in STEM
disciplines at the University of Colorado. The theme of the PI's overall
research plan is to design innovative and intelligent hydrogels for applications
in tissue engineering, which mimic nature's unique way of guiding complex tissue
development and maintaining homeostasis. The proposed research builds upon
recent developments in stem cell research, which suggest that stem cell
interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) provide both biochemical and
biomechanical cues to guide differentiation. Towards this end, the PI will build
a fundamental connection between the hydrogel environment (via its chemistry and
structure) and the translation of mechanical forces (in the form of dynamic
compressive strains) through the hydrogel to the cells to guide stem cell
differentiation in 3D. This fundamental knowledge will be used to develop
innovative multi-structured hydrogels where the structure and chemistry are
spatially controlled to regulate both biochemical and biomechanical cues in 3D
and differentially guide stem cell differentiation into cartilage and bone in a
single hydrogel for osteochondral tissue engineering. The 3D hydrogel stem cell
niches developed by this work will enable certain biochemical (the ECM) and
biomechanical cues to be isolated and their roles elucidated in MSC
differentiation. By systematically controlling the hydrogel niche the PI will be
able to elucidate fundamental mechanisms involved in mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
differentiation that involve their ECM and biomechanical environment. From this
fundamental knowledge this research will build innovative and complex 3D
hydrogels for tissue engineering which (1) recapitulate these cues in 3D to
mimic, to a certain degree, the translation of biomechanical signals within a
normal joint and (2) are designed to manipulate stem cell fate to drive MSCs
down differentiated lineages within a single hydrogel. The proposed work will
develop a new class of scaffolds for regenerating osteochondral tissues.
Overall, this research will impact that the training of 4 graduate students and
at least 15 undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed
educational activities are closely intertwined with the PI?s overall research
theme, which together will build a strong and diverse research program. The PI
will work closely with Adams State College, a Hispanic Serving Institution, in
rural Colorado to develop a nurturing path for students, particularly those who
are from Hispanic or Latino origin, from low-income families and/or first
generation college students, to pursue engineering careers. The proposed plan is
rooted in creating strategies to increase participation in the pre-engineering
program at Adams State College (ASC) by closely integrating the PI?s research in
tissue engineering with educational programs. Through close collaboration with
ASC, the PI will create opportunities for ASC students to explore the University
of Colorado at Boulder (CU) campus and enhance their academic skills through a
10-week summer research program at CU-Boulder. Together, these objectives will
prepare ASC students to transfer successfully to CU-Boulder into Engineering and
obtain a B.S. degree in Engineering. The proposed educational activities will
begin a life-long partnership with a rural Colorado college, ASC, and create a
pilot summer program that ultimately can be expanded to broadly impact other
rural colleges.