* 0847985
* Episodic Tremor and Slip of the Cascadia Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Gina Schmalzle, Schmalzle               Gina           M
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2011
* USD 160,000.00

Dr. Gina Schmalzle is awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the University of Washington.
She will work on Slow Slip Events (SSEs) and Episodic Tremor and Slip (ETS)
observed on Cascadia subduction zone. These events, observed in subduction zones
worldwide, slowly release significant stress throughout the earthquake cycle in
a matter of days to weeks. In contrast, earthquakes release stress in a matter
of seconds to minutes. How SSE and ETS events redistribute stresses and
contribute to large earthquakes in subduction zones is largely unknown. Recent
advances in GPS and seismic networks have led to many interesting observations
regarding SSE and ETS events. For example, SSE and ETS events in Cascadia have
variable recurrence times along the coastline that spans from the Mendocino
Triple Junction to north of Vancouver Island. Another interesting characteristic
of ETS events is its sensitivity to lunar tides. This study will investigate
these two observations: variable recurrence time along the coast and effects of
lunar tides. This research will use existing geodetic and seismic data sets
combined with an aggressive modeling approach to explain these important and
fundamental observations that are critical to understanding the earthquake cycle
of subduction zones and are crucial in seismic hazard assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also includes teaching Research Methods of
Seismology and GPS. This class covers theory and field methods of seismology and
GPS, providing undergraduate and graduate students an opportunity to collect and
analyze Cascadia field data.