* 0847580
* CAREER:Simulation Studies of the Time Evolution of Polymer Morphology at Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Naushad Ali, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2014
* USD 432,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports research and education involving the computational and
theoretical study of the dynamics of molecular layering in thin films near vapor
and solid interfaces. As an example, the order in a polymer liquid near a solid
interface will exhibit a transition from solid-like, molecular layering in the
fluid near the interface to more liquid-like order further from the interface.
The extent over which this transition occurs is commonly denoted as the
penetration depth, and is found to be directly related to the temperature, the
solid-liquid molecular interactions, and the surface structure of the solid.
Given that the magnitude and extent of the layering has pronounced effects on
the electrical, mechanical, and optical properties of the film, understanding
the stability or time-evolution of the molecular layering in the film is
extremely important. A major motivation for the current approach comes from a
recent computer simulation study by the PI that shows that the extent of
layering in an alkane film next to a solid substrate oscillates in time with an
amplitude and period that strongly depend on
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic-scale computer simulations will be used
to study two major topics: is the observed oscillation in the extent of the
layering with time a general property of other polymer melts near solid
surfaces, and what are the nucleation kinetics involved in the formation and
growth of the ordered monolayers near the polymer melt/vapor interface during
the surface freezing phase transformation. This research will provide an
atomistic-scale explanation to the structure and dynamics of polymer molecules
near interfaces. Our detailed investigation on the adsorption of polymer films
on different surfaces will provide us with the means of understanding how
nucleation barriers can be altered by appropriate surface
templates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the education component,
undergraduate and graduate students involved in the project will be trained in
this area of materials research that is interdisciplinary between chemistry,
physics, and materials science, and the students will also develop computational
skills applicable to these disciplines. Major efforts will be made to recruit
minority and female students. Additional educational outreach efforts are
planned that will develop a seminar program on "Physics in Africa" for inner
city schools with a goal of increasing enrollment of African-American students
in STEM degree programs, as well as a collaborative effort at SIUC to develop a
computational science course that will integrate computer simulations into a
science methods course for certified and in-training high-school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports research and education involving the computational and theoretical
study of how polymeric liquids are structured near a solid interface, and how
this ordered structure changes with time. One of the major differences between
liquids and crystalline solids is that liquids show no ordering over long
distances as solids do. At a liquid-solid interface (e.g., a solvent in a glass
container), however, the molecules in a liquid usually align into thin films
with the alignment decreasing with distance from the solid surface. This
research will use computer simulations to examine how this ordering for
polymeric liquids changes with time. Given that the magnitude and extent of the
layering has pronounced effects on the electrical, mechanical, and optical
properties of polymer films, it is extremely important to understand the
stability or time-evolution of the molecular layering in the film. This research
will not only contribute to the fundamental understanding of molecular ordering
at interfaces, but it will also have huge potential in addressing problems
encountered in industry, such as producing uniaxially oriented mesostructured
films which are very desirable for electronics, optics, and
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the education component, undergraduate
and graduate students involved in the project will be trained in this area of
materials research that is interdisciplinary between chemistry, physics, and
materials science, and the students will also develop the computational skills
useful for these disciplines. Major efforts will be make to recruit minority and
female students. Additional educational outreach efforts are planned that will
develop a seminar program on "Physics in Africa" for inner city schools with a
goal of increasing enrollment of African-American students in STEM degree
programs, as well as a collaborative effort at SIUC to develop a computational
science course that will integrate computer simulations into a science methods
course for certified and in-training high-school teachers.