* 0847736
* CAREER: Preparation of Materials Composed of Mechanically Interlocked Nanoscale Species
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Michael Mayer, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 546,784.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professor Michael F. Mayer at Texas Tech University whose &lt;br/&gt;
proposed research project is to establish new, controlled synthetic methods to
access new compounds composed of interlocked molecular species and new polymeric
materials with mobile slip-links (sliding crosslinks) and apply them to the
study and advancement of the theory of rubber elasticity. &lt;br/&gt; Materials
composed of mechanically interlocked molecular-level species often possess novel
and substantially different bulk physical properties than materials composed of
identical but otherwise non-interlocked molecular-level species. Unfortunately,
the current ability to controllably synthesize interlocked molecules is quite
limited and synthetic control over the type of entanglement and degree of
interlocking is virtually non-existent in macromolecular and polymeric species.
This research will result in new processes for accessing classes of polymers
known as polypseudorotaxanes, cyclic and acyclic polyrotaxanes, daisy-chain
polymers as well as innovative polymeric materials with mobile slip-link
crosslinks ? a novel type of polymer crosslink that has not been available in
rubbery bulk materials but has been of great interest for several
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The new ability to produce polymeric materials
with mobile slip-links (sliding crosslinks) will result in new materials which
may be ideal candidates for experimental probing to aid development of
theoretical models of polymer entanglements. This transformative methodology
may, therefore, help advance the understanding of rubber-like elasticity in
polymeric materials, a long-standing pursuit of polymer science. Furthermore, by
virtue of the unique molecular structure of the proposed materials, the
materials are expected to possess novel viscoelastic properties which may make
them suitable for a variety of niche applications. The proposed educational
activities center on digitally recording and uploading chemistry content to the
internet. This will positively impact both the producers and the consumers of
the content. The producers, for example chemistry majors, student affiliates of
the ACS, undergraduate researchers and Welch Summer Scholars (high school
students), will benefit from participating in a truly modern form of pedagogy.
The farthest-reaching benefit will be for the consumers, identified as chemistry
students, broadly defined, from local, national and international locations, who
may freely participate in informal, cyber-enabled, inquiry-based chemistry
education in both English and Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;