* 0847366
* EAR-PF: TURBULENT AIR ENTRAINMENT IN PYROCLASTIC DENSITY CURRENTS
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Benjamin Andrews, Andrews                 Benjamin       J
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2011
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Benjamin Andrews is awarded an NSF
Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop an integrated program of
research and education at Berkley University. His investigation will focus on
pyroclastic density currents, a common and potentially devastating hazard of
volcanic eruptions. When erupted, mixtures of pumice, ash, and gas are denser
than the atmosphere, and can travel down the flanks of volcanoes at speeds in
excess of 100 miles per hour. Quantitative knowledge of air entrainment
processes in pyroclastic density currents is critical to understanding and
predicting current behaviors. Although previous studies have examined density
currents, most of those laboratory experiments have been improperly scaled for
application to pyroclastic flows or ignored expansion of entrained fluid, and
many computational models have treated entrainment as a constant rate process.
This research examines turbulent air entrainment in pyroclastic density currents
with the goals of quantitatively relating entrainment and turbulence to flow
temperature, eruption rate, and particle size and density. In the proposed
experiments, density currents comprising hot, fine-grained particles in air will
be directed through an air filled tank to simulate pyroclastic density current
transport. Instruments in the tank will monitor the flow structure, velocity
field, and temperature during simulations, and measure the resulting deposit
thicknesses after simulations. From those data, Dr. Andrews will describe how
air entrainment varies with time, space, and particle properties, and how it is
controlled by the local, turbulent velocity field. By varying eruption rates and
particle sizes, densities, and temperatures the experiments will model
pyroclastic density currents and capture the dynamics of entrainment and
expansion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has significant benefits for
volcanic hazard prediction and mitigation, as pyroclastic flows can destroy
anything in their paths, and ash plumes can pose a significant threat to
aviation. The proposed experiments will be the first quantitative study of air
entrainment and density evolution within pyroclastic density currents. The
results of this research will improve predictions of where pyroclastic density
currents are emplaced, how fast they travel, and how high ash plumes ascend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will be introduced to both field
and laboratory work through this research. Dr. Andrews will lead a week-long
undergraduate field course at Lassen Volcanic National Park with the goals of
teaching field volcanology methods and facilitating student research on
pyroclastic deposits. Two students will be directly involved in the pyroclastic
density current experiments through Berkeley's Undergraduate Research Apprentice
Program. Those students will study specific controls on entrainment and flow
behavior, and then develop their research projects into honors theses.