* 0847442
* Copper Delivery for Photosynthesis in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Marinus Pilon, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 01/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Copper is an essential cofactor for plant growth due to its essential role in
photosynthesis. When copper uptake is not sufficient, plants use a combination
of three strategies to adjust: Plants modify their physiology to reduce their
need for copper, they attempt to increase copper uptake, and they prioritize
delivery of copper to the most essential proteins, especially those that
function in photosynthesis. The team has already discovered key copper-
transporter molecules and has found that a class of small RNA molecules called
microRNAs function in the regulation of the use of copper. In this project the
investigators aim to characterize how the components that were identified work
together in order to adjust to impending copper deficiency. For this project a
combination of genetic and biochemical approaches will be used in the model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The project will likely reveal important novel
mechanisms by which organisms adjust to micro-nutrient deficiency. Copper
deficiency affects crop yield and biomass production, which has an impact on the
possibility to make biofuels. Deficiency also affects the nutritional value of
edible plant parts. Therefore the project has relevance to the well being of
humans. The project will train graduate students as well as undergraduates and
post-doctoral researchers and will involve national and international
collaborations. Many of the discoveries in biochemistry that have led to
improvements in human health and well being have arisen from research in the
area of plant science. In order to raise awareness of the importance of basic
plant science, the research team will organize workshops aimed primarily at
teachers and local farmers around the themes of nutrition and plants,
photosynthesis and biofuels and plant research from genomics to ecophysiology.