* 0847759
* CAREER: Gradients and Umbilical Cord Stem Cells in Osteochondral Tissue Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2014
* Michael Detamore, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 04/30/2014
* USD 409,170.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847759 PI: Detamore, Michael ORG: University of
Kansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Gradients and Umbilical Cord Stem
Cells in Osteochondral&lt;br/&gt;Tissue
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The long-term scientific
objective is to apply a gradient-based approach to the field of tissue
engineering to regenerate tissues in the joints of patients suffering from
sports injuries and arthritis. The first step toward this objective is to apply
methods for generating 3D bioactive signal and mechanical stiffness gradients to
accelerate osteochondral tissue formation. The overall strategy will be to
measure the responses of stem cells to specific combinations of signal and
stiffness gradients. The stem cells to be evaluated are human umbilical cord
mesenchymal stromal stem cells (hUCMSCs), an exciting new cell source in
musculoskeletal tissue engineering. Gradients will be achieved by one of two
means: a diffusion-driven hydrogel system and a novel microparticle-based
scaffold. Combinations of signal and stiffness gradients will be explored,
culminating in a construct in the shape of a mandibular condyle. Gradients have
been used in a variety of other disciplines, and are crucial to guiding cell
behavior in fundamental biological processes such as embryonic development and
wound healing, but have yet to be investigated in musculoskeletal tissue
engineering. hUCMSCs remain virtually unexplored in musculoskeletal tissue
engineering, and will have broad application. Successful completion of this
project will lead to a better fundamental understanding of hUCMSCs and gradient
strategies, which will have a tremendous impact, offering the deliverable of a
new cell source and a new paradigm of chemical and mechanical gradients for
musculoskeletal tissue engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The
educational objectives of the proposal are to (1) create a new project for high
school girls at an existing summer engineering camp, (2) establish a formal link
between the School of Engineering and an existing undergraduate research program
(IMSD) for underrepresented groups, and (3) expand the burgeoning bioengineering
graduate program at KU. The PI took an active leadership role in spearheading a
multidisciplinary bioengineering graduate program that began in the Fall of 2007
at the University of Kansas. Graduate students recruited for this project are
likely to be from this degree program, identified as an educational and economic
priority for Kansas. The aforementioned undergraduate initiative will impact
underrepresented groups across the School of Engineering. Elements of the
research project will be incorporated into the tissue engineering course already
developed by the PI, and will provide a new hands-on experiment in the PI?s
annual ?Project Discovery? program, a week-long engineering summer camp for
female high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;