* 0847515
* CAREER: Block Copolymer/layered Silicate Nanocomposites: Thermodynamics, Dynamics, and Structure-Property Relationships
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Eric Cochran, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 475,000.00

ARRA STATEMENT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports a project to explore a new class of polymer composites, comprised
of block copolymers densely grafted to the surfaces of highly exfoliated layered
silicate particles. The PI hypothesizes that this novel class of materials,
block copolymer/layered silicates (BCPLSs), holds the potential to lead to high
performance/high service temperature polyolefin-based engineering thermoplastics
with unprecedented materials properties, arising from a synergistic combination
of factors: Mechanical reinforcement provided by the silicate particles,
enhanced thermal properties arising perturbations to the chain-conformations,
and the ability of block copolymers to stitch multiple materials properties into
a single compound. In BCPLS materials each filler particle is intimately coupled
to a dense brush of polymer chains; consequently, emergent properties arise not
only from mechanical reinforcement mechanisms but also intrinsic perturbations
to conformational characteristics of the polymer chain. The use of block
copolymers is advantageous since this imparts to the system the inherent
tunability of these fascinating materials through the choice of constituent
blocks and block sequences, and brings high degrees of processability above the
order-disorder transition. Moreover, the confinement of BCPs to the opposing
faces of discrete layered silicate particles fundamentally changes the
thermodynamics of self-assembly and the resultant morphologies. This unique
combination of features is currently absent from the community, and this
research is an important opportunity to make seminal contributions to the
fundamental understanding and utilization of these new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports a project to explore a new class of polymer composites,
comprised of block copolymers densely grafted to the surfaces of highly
exfoliated layered silicate particles. The PI hypothesizes that this novel class
of materials, block copolymer/layered silicates (BCPLSs), holds the potential to
lead to high performance/high service temperature polyolefin-based engineering
thermoplastics with unprecedented materials properties. In BCPLS materials each
filler particle is intimately coupled to a dense brush of polymer chains,
eliminating particle aggregation and enhancing the properties by constraining
the conformations of the polymer chains, in addition to well-known composite
reinforcement mechanisms. This project will generate the fundamental knowledge
needed to harness the potential of these materials. Another important objective
is to heighten awareness of and interest in STEM careers at the K?12 level. This
will be accomplished by integrating this research into an on-campus program for
mentoring K?12 science teachers, and the collaborative development of
interactive workshops to be delivered electronically to K?12 classrooms
throughout Iowa using the Iowa Communications
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;