* 0847861
* SGER: Exit Poll Research and the African American Voter in the 2008 General Election
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Duane Cooper, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2009
* USD 69,235.00

As a result of the success of Senator Obama, African American voters are
registering to vote in large numbers. Early indications suggest that there will
be a record turnout from every sector of the African American community.
According to the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, fully 75% of
African Americans of voting age say that they have given a lot of thought to
this election. This compares to only 58% of the same population as reported in a
similar poll in 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using exit polls, this project will
examine the manner in which African Americans voted in the 2008 Presidential
election at selected precincts in Georgia and Mississippi as well the factors
that influenced their decisions. Researchers have argued that African American
political socialization is different from that of white Americans.
Traditionally, scholars have identified black churches, families, schools, and
peer groups as the major agents of political socialization within the former
population. Other researchers have pointed to major political actors such as
Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm and civil rights activist Jesse Jackson as being
important factors. This project attempts to differentiate the impacts of
traditional socialization factors versus the impacts of
personalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exit poll process and results will be
incorporated into the researcher?s interdisciplinary seminar at Morehouse
College. Students will conduct the survey, process data and present results to
the college. In addition, the researchers are partnering with Tugaloo College in
Mississippi and students at that institution will be involved in the same
process as those at Morehouse.&lt;br/&gt;