* 0847409
* CAREER: Combining HI and Optical Galaxy Surveys: A Census of Baryons in the Local Universe
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jessica Rosenberg, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 08/31/2014
* USD 869,163.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Jessica Rosenberg (George Mason University) will use two large overlapping
surveys which probe the galaxy population at optical and 21-cm (HI) wavelengths
to study the baryons in galaxies. The nature and distribution of the baryons in
galaxies can test predictions of the Lambda-Cold Dark Matter (Lambda-CDM) model
while also providing a probe of the astrophysical processes that affect the
state of the baryons in galaxies. Ultimately, this project will address two of
the most important questions in extragalactic astronomy and cosmology today: (1)
is the Lambda-CDM model correct? and (2) how do the astrophysical processes
governing star formation and galactic feedback affect the evolution of galaxies?
This can be done because there are now large area surveys in both optical and
radio (21-cm) wavelengths, so that studying the stars and gas simultaneously in
a statistically significant sample of galaxies in a single volume of space is
finally possible.

This study will break new ground in our understanding of the fundamental
components of galaxies in the local universe, and will have a legacy value to
the entire astronomical community in the form of readily available catalogs
containing the combined optical and HI data for more than 30,000 galaxies in the
overlap region between the Arecibo Legacy Fast Arecibo L-band Feed Array
(ALFALFA) survey and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). There will also be a
longer term impact on the recruitment, training, and mentoring of the next
generation of scientists and science teachers. In addition, Dr. Rosenberg will
work to increase the number of women and minority physics majors at George Mason
University as one of the goals of this project.