* 0847205
* CAREER: Development of a High Efficiency Mass Spectrometry System
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Zheng Ouyang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 06/30/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Analytical & Surface Chemistry Program supports this CAREER award to
Professor Zheng Ouyang at Purdue University to explore new instrumentation
configurations for mass analysis. Theoretical modeling, numeric simulation, and
experimental characterization are used to develop methods and devices for high
efficiency ion transfer and mass analysis, challenging the sensitivity
limitations of commercial instruments. Instrumentation improvements also target
miniaturization of mass spectrometers. Technologies developed will potentially
result in significant increases in sensitivity, enabling new approaches to the
most challenging problems in biological science, where ultra high sensitivity is
required to analyze samples available only in extremely small amounts.

This work interfaces with an Analytical Instrumentation Development (AID)
Training Program which encourages educational development based on
instrumentation prototyping and research. Students with different backgrounds
work together to develop prototype instruments based on new analytical
technology. Derived instruments are provided to outside end-users for testing
and development of applications. The resulting integration of education with
research illustrates the transition of learning to real problem solving and
provides a test of a new model for training young instrumentalists for
analytical instrumentation research. Mechanisms of building a self-sustainable
training program will be explored.