* 0847534
* CAREER: Directed Self-Assembly of Block Copolymers by High Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Chinedum Osuji, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 475,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a 5-year plan centered on
the directed self-assembly of block copolymers (BCPs) using magnetic fields, and
the use of aligned materials as templates for the synthesis of semiconducting
nanowires. Today?s materials science is predicated on the ability to control the
structure of matter on multiple length scales. The history of metallurgy and
ceramic science illustrate the evolution of this capability through to today?s
bulk and thin film single crystal growth processes. The trajectory in polymer
science is nascent by comparison - surprisingly, practical and scalable methods
for processing BCPs with controlled grain size and orientation are still
lacking. The absence of these capabilities hampers the development of new
technologies that harness the self-assembly of functional BCPs and
nanocomposites such as in non-linear optical materials, membranes and
photovoltaics. This proposal directly addresses the above mentioned gap. It
takes a novel approach to directed self-assembly via the use of high magnetic
fields using a dedicated instrument to conduct critical in-situ studies of
alignment dynamics in a hierarchically ordered polymer system. It entails
rational design of materials based on tailoring interfaces between self-
assembled microdomains and pursues the synthesis of perpendicularly aligned
nanowires using large-area thin film templates as a step towards the realization
of ideal photovoltaic geometries. The objectives are: (1) Rational design,
synthesis and characterization of model liquid crystalline (LC) BCPs for field
alignment; (2) Quantitative studies of temperature and field-dependent alignment
of materials via in-situ scattering and ex-situ microscopy; (3) Synthesis of
compound semiconductors CdS and ZnS within macroscopically field-aligned BCP
films. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will contribute to emerging technology solutions in fields such as
photovoltaics, non-linear optics and membranes. It specifically takes aim at the
production of semiconducting materials which can be used for next generation
solar cells. The project will include interactions with a national lab, the
National High Magnetic Field Lab, via visits by students and the PI. Mentoring
student researchers is an important component of this proposal. In particular,
active participation of all supported students in the community of science
locally, regionally and nationally will be an integral part of their training
and will strengthen their desire for lifelong learning. The proposed work forms
the basis for a new teaching and outreach thrust by the PI centered on polymer
materials science. A new course on Polymer Physics which includes a lab module
will continue to be offered by the PI. The PI will engage in outreach targeting
middle and high school students at the community level, and under-represented
students at Yale. Through partnership with the New Haven Science Fair, a new
summer research program for local high school science teachers has been
proposed. The impacts overall are: (1) Development of fundamental science with
applications in solar cells; (2) Education of undergraduate and graduate
students in materials science and polymer science; (3) Development of new
materials/polymer science curriculum; (4) Improved materials science training of
middle-high school students and teachers; (5) Recruitment and mentoring of
underrepresented groups at the undergraduate and graduate level; (6) Strong
integration of new researchers into their science community at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;