* 0847855
* Photoinduced electron transfer in DNA photolyase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Stanley, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 08/31/2012
* USD 467,770.00

This award funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division supports research by Professor Robert Stanley from Temple
University to study electron transfer-mediated repair of DNA. DNA is an
extraordinarily stable molecule, a property required in its role as a genetic
storage medium. In spite of this stability, DNA is constantly being damaged by a
variety of environmental agents. Of these, ultraviolet (UV) light is among the
most mutagenic, leading to a crosslinking of adjacent pyrimidines to generate
Cyclobutylpyrimidine Dimers (CPDs). All organisms have a robust ability to
repair CPDs. DNA photolyase (PL) is a protein that binds and repairs CPDs with
exquisite specificity. Uniquely, photolyase uses visible light as an energy
source. Once bound, the CPD is repaired in about two billionths of a second
after the absorption of the catalytic photon. This photon is absorbed by the
protein-bound Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide (FAD), a vitamin B2 derivative which
transfers an electron to the CPD. This critical ultrafast electron transfer step
is not well understood. Professor Stanley and his students will use state-of-
the-art biophysical, biochemical, and molecular biology methods to determine the
details of this electron transfer mechanism at the molecular level. In
particular, fluorescence Stark spectroscopy will be utilized for the first time
in the study of flavoproteins to discover the direction of the electron
transfer, thereby revealing the identity of the initial electron acceptor.
Mutants will be made to elucidate the role of amino acids around the flavin in
the repair reaction. This approach, coupled with an analysis of the excited
state electronic structure obtained using Stark spectroscopy will provide the
clearest picture of how and why photolyase functions. More broadly, this
application of Stark spectroscopy to PL will be directly applicable to other
light-driven flavoproteins (e.g. blue light photoreceptors) which utilize
different photochemical mechanisms but which, like PL, begin with light-driven
charge redistribution in the flavin. Some of these proteins may be responsible
for regulating our circadian clock or providing birds with the ability to
migrate using the Earth's magnetic field for guidance (photomagnetoreception).
Still other proteins are known to regulate photosynthesis at the gene level. Two
collaborators join this effort. Professor David Beratan of Duke University will
provide computational models to guide the interpretation of the experiments.
Professor Yvonne Gindt and her group of undergraduate researchers at Lafayette
College will perform electrochemical measurements on modified proteins to gauge
the effect of chemical and mutational changes on the redox properties of the
FAD. Postdoctoral and graduate students will gain a breadth of experience that
is a hallmark of biophysical chemistry, learning techniques that include Stark
and subpicosecond ultrafast laser spectroscopy, enzymology, molecular biology,
and modern computational methods. Important experiments will be performed by a
cadre of talented undergraduate students both at Temple and at Lafayette College
in Easton, PA. These budding scientists will gain research experience by
purifying the photolyase protein and performing chemical and molecular
biological modifications to probe the true function of the FAD. All participants
will present their results twice a year in a "mini-conference" setting, to take
place alternately in Philadelphia and Easton and involving the Duke group
through video-conferencing. The PI has mentored many young scientists, including
women and members of underrepresented minorities. To reach a non-scientific
audience about the importance of science to society, the PI has been closely
involved in the TURF-Crews program at Temple for several years. This program
mixes presentations by undergraduates from non-scientific fields with those by
science majors to engender multidisciplinary interactions.

