* 0847070
* CAREER: Three-dimensional optical image guided spectroscopy for biological material analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Julia Lyubovitsky, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0847070&lt;br/&gt;Lyubovitsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;The objective of this integrated research and educational program is to
understand the mechanisms that form proteins in living tissues. This
understanding is critical for inducing tissue growth for wound healing or
disease recovery, and for other biomanufacturing applications. The specific
focus of the project is to develop a non-invasive optical microscopy method that
will enable biological researchers, for the first time, to literally see how the
proteins form and disassemble. This capability can have a transformative impact
on biological research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT. To understand
the complex process of protein assembly, researchers need to be able to
visualize processes at very small scales on the order of microns (1/1,000,000
meter) and smaller. An interaction of light with matter can produce the needed
pictures of protein components without harming the samples. However, it is still
not known what exactly generates the signals used to make protein pictures. The
goal of this project is to establish comprehensive approaches for studying how
proteins are formed in living tissues. The approach will be based on a multi-
photon optical microscopy method that combines nonlinear optical phenomena of
second harmonic generation and two-photon fluorescence signals integrated with
Raman spectroscopy to study protein assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACT. The ability to non-invasively monitor and understand the structure,
composition and function of protein-derived biological materials and adhesives
will have significant impacts on biological research and bioengineering. It will
make it possible to establish scientific principles for the design,
construction, modification, growth, and maintenance of living engineered
tissues, implants and novel adhesives. The project also incorporates initiatives
to train graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college students from diverse
backgrounds. The Principal Investigator will develop course curriculum that
requires students? in-depth understanding of subject matters related to optical
microscopy and its biological applications. Students of various ages and the
general public will gain a greater appreciation of how diverse fields interact
to produce high impact engineering research on the fundamental assembly
mechanisms of protein-based materials.&lt;br/&gt;