* 0847710
* CAREER:  Cloud and Fog Processing of Organic Matter
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Pierre Herckes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 569,117.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the fate
of organic matter in a cloud/fog system. First, scavenging efficiencies of
particulate organic matter by fogs and clouds will be determined and
parameterized based on simple measurable quantities like cloud liquid water
content and/or water soluble organic carbon fraction. Second, product and
kinetic studies will be conducted to evaluate the potential for reactions within
droplets that lead to the formation of secondary organic aerosol matter. Third,
the homogeneous aqueous phase chemistry of selected organic species, namely,
nitrosamines will be investigated. These can form in clouds during the
nighttime. During the day, they are eliminated by cloud photolysis. Both
formation and destruction kinetics will be studied in laboratory experiments.
The results on benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes (BTEX) and
nitrosamines will be evaluated against field experiments. This includes the
partitioning of the target species in the cloud system, as well as, the
concentrations of parent and daughter species. Results of the field work will be
used to guide laboratory experiments, and identify any gaps in data. Finally,
the project will involve multiple, routine cloud measurement sites complemented
by intensive, short-term field studies in a variety of environments throughout
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will reach out to K-12
students through educational class modules that teach about the formation of
clouds and their role in the water cycle, their impact on air pollution and
their role in climate processes. This will feature classroom demonstrations
adapted to for the appropriate ages. Arizona State University (ASU) graduate
research assistants and the Principal Investigator will create these modules in
cooperation with the Science is Fun program at ASU. This program is a well
established program that disseminates instructional modules on a broad range of
topics to thousands of children throughout Arizona. A web-interface will allow
students and the general public to check on the latest status of our field
experiments including real time images from web cameras, movies of cloud events,
chemical composition data. Furthermore, undergraduate university institutions
will be critical participants in achieving this project's scientific goals. Most
of the routine environmental sampling will rely on the cooperation of non-PhD
granting institutions at different locales. Students and faculty from these
institutions will be crucial to the successful completion of the research goals
through field sampling of cloud samples. These undergraduate students will be
hosted at ASU to participate in sample analysis through internships. The same
options will be made available to ASU undergraduate students, with particular
attention given to recruiting through minority outreach programs. Results from
the research and outreach activities will benefit the PI's classroom instruction
in environmental chemistry: the active involvement of the graduate students in
both research and outreach will help train the next generation of teacher-
scientists.