* 0847776
* CAREER:Quantum Polar Molecular Gases from One- and Two-Electron Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 05/31/2014
* USD 740,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an
experimental research program to produce polar molecular gases with the goal of
investigating quantum matter with strong and long-range interactions, and of
performing sensitive tests of fundamental theories of physics. Lithium (one-
electron atom, Li) and ytterbium (two-electron atom, Yb) are cooled and confined
in a common atom trap and subsequently linked using optical field induced
scattering resonances to form diatomic LiYb molecules. These strongly-
interacting molecules are placed in periodic optical lattice potentials for
studying extensions to the fundamental Hubbard model of condensed matter
physics, incorporating inter-particle long-range interactions. The trapped
paramagnetic molecules are also to be used as a very sensitive probe for the
electron electric dipole moment (EDM), the value of which crucially impacts
models of fundamental particle physics. These experiments will contribute to the
development of trapped polar molecules for quantum
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concurrent with the research component,
related education and outreach is being performed. Graduate and undergraduate
students gain valuable research experience, preparing them to join the work
force in academics and industry as the next generation of scientists and
engineers. Undergraduate lecture and laboratory courses are being enhanced
through an increased computational component and incorporation of context-rich
problems based on modern cutting-edge research in atomic and optical physics.
The research program is leveraged to encompass educational and outreach programs
through the University of Washington's partnership with the Seattle MESA
(Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement) program. This involves periodic
lectures, lab tours, and summer internships, for underrepresented and
disadvantaged high-school students from the Seattle area, in an effort to
attract them to scientific college programs and careers.