* 0847841
* Collaborative Research: Individual Differences in Executive Functions and Expressions of Racial Biases
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Joshua Correll, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 154,563.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project outlines a
series of studies investigating the role of individual differences in executive
functions (EFs) in expression of implicit racial bias. Executive functions refer
to higher-order control processes that regulate thought and action. Although an
individual's performance on laboratory-based implicit bias tasks is typically
interpreted as a straightforward manifestation of his/her underlying automatic
bias, recent preliminary evidence suggests that performance on all such tasks
implicates executive control processes, such as the overriding of dominant or
pre-potent responses. According to the team of researchers involved in this
project, racial bias, as assessed by implicit bias tasks, is a complex construct
jointly affected by automatic bias and individual differences in EF abilities.
The research they will carry out seeks to vigorously test this emerging
theoretical view by conducting a large-scale individual differences study of the
relationship between EF abilities and expressions of racial bias. The aim of
this research is threefold: to investigate the extent to which behavioral
manifestations of race bias are associated with individual differences in
related but separable EF abilities; to investigate several neurocognitive
processes associated with cognitive control as mechanisms through which EF
abilities affect expression of race bias; and to determine whether individual
differences in EF abilities moderate the impact of manipulations that
temporarily deplete executive functioning. The work will involve 5 collaborators
and include nearly 500 research participants at three geographic locations. What
sets this project apart theoretically from existing work is that rather than
treating EF as a unitary ability, the current research adopts a multi-component
view of EF that suggest it can be decomposed into correlated yet separable
subcomponents, such as inhibition, updating, and shifting. By examining both
behavioral and neurocognitive (ERP) indices of implicit bias, this project has
the potential to provide the first-ever systematic and comprehensive analysis of
the EF-bias relationship.