* 0847109
* CAREER:  Using Globular Clusters to Unravel the Mysteries of Galaxy Formation, Galaxy Structure, and Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Katherine Rhode, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* joan wrobel
* 09/30/2015
* USD 681,439.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Katherine Rhode (Indiana
University) will carry out a multi-year, wide-field imaging survey of the
globular cluster (GC) systems of giant galaxies. The primary objective is to
determine the total number, specific frequency, spatial distribution, and color
distribution of each galaxy's GC system. The data will be used to establish how
these properties vary with galaxy morphology and environment, to test models of
how galaxies form and evolve, and to constrain fundamental quantities like the
redshift at which the first GCs formed in the Universe. The survey data will
also be used for two other science applications: (1) follow-up spectroscopy to
measure the radial velocities of the GCs and use them to trace the structure of
the galaxies and their dark matter halos; and (2) combining the optical images
from the survey with X-ray data to study the X-ray sources - including X-ray
emitting black holes - in giant galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes significant components of service to the community, public outreach,
and education. In preparation for the survey, Dr. Rhode is leading an effort to
produce a well-integrated system for transfer, analysis, visualization and
storage of "One Degree Imager" (ODI) camera data. The goal is to make it
possible for anyone in the astronomical community to analyze ODI data without
having to purchase and maintain expensive hardware or write specialized software
to work with these large images. The solutions created for the ODI will pave the
way for other Gigapixel camera projects and will benefit other disciplines that
use large images to do research. Dr. Rhode's team will create high-quality color
images of each galaxy with accompanying text and use these to inform educators
and the public about galaxies in general and the specific research that is
enabled by these types of images. Finally, the survey will allow graduate and
under-graduate students to engage in research aimed at exploring some of the
most fundamental questions in astrophysics and cosmology, using data from a new
instrument. The students will be encouraged to participate in both the research
and outreach activities of the project.