* 0847691
* Genetic bases and ecological significance of plant-microbe interactions in the rhizospere
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Michael Shiaris, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2014
* USD 701,545.00

Microbes living in the plant rhizosphere, the soil in direct contact with a
plant's roots, influence nutrient cycling and availability, the plant's
susceptibility to disease, and plant growth. Plant roots, in turn, provide
resources that support the microbial community, and produce signals that affect
plant-microbial interactions. Currently, little is known about the genes and
biochemical pathways in plants that influence the development of specific
rhizosphere communities, nor the impact that these communities have on the
growth, reproduction and competitive ability of plants. Using Arabidopsis
thaliana and an important domesticated species, lettuce, and its wild, weedy
progenitor (Lactuca serriola), the investigators will identify key genes in
plants that affect the microbial communities in the rhizosphere. Specifically,
the project will: 1) characterize the composition, successional patterns and
robustness of the microbial communities that establish in the rhizosphere of
specific plant genotypes; 2) identify quantitative trait loci and candidate
genes in the plants that control the differences in microbial populations
associated with roots; 3) examine the impact of these plant-microbe interactions
on growth and the competitive abilities of plants. This project will cement a
multi-investigator research initiative that will enhance student training and
engage faculty in multidisciplinary research and teaching. University of
Massachusetts, Boston has a high proportion of low income, under-represented
minority and first generation college students, and the investigators are
dedicated to their training. Research initiatives developed in this project will
be integrated into several active training programs aimed at community college
students, secondary school teacher training and enhanced undergraduate research
experiences. Project results will advance the understanding of how plant-microbe
interactions alter the soil quality and growing conditions of plants, and
demonstrate the relevance of rhizosphere ecology to a broad cluster of applied
disciplines, from sustainable agriculture to restoration ecology and management
of invasive species.