* 0847772
* Proposal for Supporting US-Based Graduate Students to Attend the 2008 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2008), Pisa, Italy December 15-19, 2008
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Dimitrios Gunopulos, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

International travel support is requested for U.S. based graduate strudent
participants to attend the 2008 International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM
2008), which will be held in Pisa, Italy, December 15-19, 2008. ICDM has
established itself as the world's premier research conference in data mining. It
provides an international forum for presentation of original research results,
as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative, practical development
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;The conference covers all aspects of data mining,
including algorithms, software and systems, and applications, as well as related
areas such as data management, machine learning and bioinformatics. The
conference proceedings are published by IEEE. The conference seeks to
continuously advance the state of-the-art in data mining. With the growth of the
Web, the Internet, and data intensive technologies such as Sensor Networks, and
Bioinformatics, Data Mining is an extremely important area in Information
Technology. A strong representation of U.S. researchers and students at the
Conference is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this important area.
The total number of ICDM participants in the past has been in excess of 300,
with a majority of the participants from the U.S., then Europe and Asia. It is
expected to provide scholaships to 15 U.S. based graduate student participants.
This grant will partially support the travel costs for the qualified U.S. based
graduate student participants.&lt;br/&gt;