* 0847868
* Research and Educational Use of North Carolina State University Mycological Herbarium Through Improved Computerization and Internet Presence
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Larry Grand, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 252,064.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A user-friendly, electronic database will be developed to provide teachers,
regulatory agencies, and researchers with easy access to a unique collection of
fungi that cause plant diseases and wood decay The database will become
available on the following website
<http://www.cals.ncsu.edu/plantpath/activities/labs-projects/myherb/>. The
collection at North Carolina State University was established in 1970 and
represents the most comprehensive assemblage of wood decay fungi in the
southeastern United States. Fungi were collected from diverse, often unique
habitats, identified with geographic locations recorded, and preserved for use
by educators and scientists.

Internet access to this valuable collection and the baseline of data it
establishes will benefit state and federal regulatory agencies concerned with
the introduction of invasive species of fungi that harm humans and plants. The
collection may also lead to the identification of fungi that can be used to
convert wood into bio-fuels, improve soil health, and serve as indicators of
climate change. In addition to its use by the scientific and regulatory
community, the database will also be an important resource for educating and
training high school biology teachers, students, and the general public about
the importance of fungi to society and for understanding their distribution and
biodiversity in unique ecosystems.