* 0847799
* CAREER:  A mechanistic understanding of sediment transport in mountain streams with applications in river restoration and science education
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2016
* Elowyn Yager, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 455,000.00

In mountainous drainage basins, steep channels (gradients of 3-20%) occupy the
majority of the total channel length and influence the downstream delivery of
sediment and water to metropolitan areas and hydropower facilities. The volume
and grain sizes of sediment supplied from these streams also impact the success
of downstream river restoration projects. Basin-scale sediment transport
predictions are needed in restoration design to account for the effect of
sediment supply on aquatic habitat, water quality, and channel stability. Most
sediment transport equations are based on empirical fits to data measured at the
reach-scale, do not include the mechanics of grain motion, and were developed
for lower-gradient channels. It is hypothesized that bedload transport equations
for steep, rough streams need to include: 1) the range of turbulence and grain
properties that control the initiation of grain motion, 2) the spatial
variability in stresses and bedload transport rates on patches, and 3) the
effect of temporal and spatial variations in sediment supply. Flume experiments
will be used to test this hypothesis, further elucidate the interaction between
turbulence and bedload transport, and inform theoretical and empirical models
that predict sediment flux at the reach scale. Such models will be tested in
local and international field locations and will transform predictions of
landscape evolution and river restoration design by providing accurate and
mechanistic estimates of sediment flux in steep streams. The intellectual merit
of this research is a fundamental and predictive understanding of the processes
that control turbulence and sediment transport in steep streams. The framework
of sediment transport and river restoration will be used to educate graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students on the importance of water resources and
functioning stream ecosystems. Four education objectives are proposed: 1) a
series of graduate student classes that develop critical thinking, scientific
writing, and interdisciplinary team skills, 2) international research experience
for undergraduate and graduate students, 3) programs to educate K-12 students on
river processes, and 4) a new Women in Science Camp that encourages young women
to enter careers in math, science, and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;