* 0847127
* CAREER: Charging and Coagulation of Dust Grains I Astrophysical and Laboratory Environments
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Lorin Matthews, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 05/31/2015
* USD 457,333.00

The field of complex plasmas provides a rich field for inquiry into the areas of
space and laboratory physics. The ability of dust grains immersed in a plasma
environment to organize themselves into complex structures provides insights
into the physics of systems as diverse as the formation of planets in
protoplanetary disks to the structure and phase transitions of crystalline
solids. Recent astronomical evidence has shown that our planetary system is not
unique in the galaxy. Rather, it seems more the rule than the exception for a
star to be accompanied by orbiting planets. The planets must necessarily form
from the disk of gas and dust left over from the formation of the parent star.
Thus the formation of planets initially depends on how micron-sized grains,
immersed in a plasma and radiative environment, are able to collide, stick and
organize themselves into larger, more robust structures which may then
agglomerate under gravitational interactions. The objective of this research is
to develop a detailed model for the coagulation of charged fractal aggregates in
a protoplanetary disk. This will be achieved by a combination of numerical
modeling and experimental research directed at furthering the understanding of
the microphysics involved in the charging and coagulation of fractal aggregates.

The charging and growth of fractal aggregates are necessarily linked and must be
included self-consistently to correctly model the interaction of charged
aggregates. The charge distribution on aggregates influences their orientation
as they collide and stick, which in turn determines how open or compact the
fractal structure is, a major influence on the coagulation rate. Numerical
models will be used to determine the charge and charge arrangement on irregular
dust aggregates. The results of the charging models can then be incorporated
into existing coagulation models. New algorithms will be added to the
coagulation models to allow for the dipole-dipole interactions between charged
grains, the coupling of the fractal grains to the gas environment, and include
various collision outcomes (sticking without restructuring, crushing,
disruption, etc.) to determine limits on fractal grain growth. Laboratory
experiments run concurrently with the numerical simulations will provide a check
on theoretical models and provide additional data to improve the models.

The results of this project will provide new and fundamentally original
information about the self-assembly and growth of charged dust grains. This
project will have implications not only for understanding dust growth as an
initial step towards planet formation, but will also contribute to the
understanding of the self-ordering and growth of dust in controlled laboratory
plasma environments, such as those found in plasma semi-conductor manufacturing
and magnetically confined plasma fusion experiments. Grain aggregation is also
an important process in understanding atmospheric processes both here on earth
and on other bodies in the solar system. The coagulation of charged grains may
also prove relevant to understanding processes such as catalysis and pollution
control. Graduate, undergraduate, technical, and high school students working on
this project will receive training and experience that will prepare them for
careers in academia, industry, or government laboratories. They will learn not
only physical principles and experimental protocols, but will also develop
critical skills such as computation and modeling, practical experience with
vacuum systems, instrumentation and diagnostics, and technical writing and
presentation skills.

