* 0847879
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Potential for Wireless Signal Sharing Communities to Expand Digital Inclusion Efforts
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Gwen Shaffer, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 01/31/2010
* USD 8,970.00

The expectation for ever-present broadband connectivity is growing along with
the proliferation of "always-on" mobile devices such as PDAs, laptops and cell
phones. The International Telecommunications Union predicts people worldwide
will soon live in "ubiquitous network societies," where interconnected
appliances and devices provide relevant content and information whatever the
location of the user. While some public spaces currently offer wireless
internet, broadband subscribers typically lose guaranteed connections each time
they leave their access points. One increasingly popular solution, shared
broadband signals, relies on a model of peer-to-peer networking. Instead of
information passing from "one to many," it may travel from "many to many." This
form of viral networking is beginning to take hold at the grassroots level of
media activism, as well as within the elite realm of venture capitalism.

This dissertation project funded by the Science, Technology and Society Program
develops a deeper understanding of a complex phenomenon: the potential for peer-
to-peer signal sharing to expand digital inclusion in the United States. Semi-
structured interviews provide enhanced understanding of the mesh networking
movement. The project incorporates the perspectives of multiple stakeholders --
people who opt to share their WiFi signals, federal regulators, incumbent ISPs,
and both non-profit and for-profit entities that facilitate peer-to-peer
networking. The project also surveys people who participate in this movement.

The intellectual merit of this research lies in its efforts to expand and deepen
the literature on how ad hoc networks can help close the digital divide. An
extensive literature review reveals that few academic studies have focused on
the role organized wireless signal sharing initiatives can play in deploying
broadband to disenfranchised communities. Among the studies that do exist, the
focus is on ISPs -- that is, the supply-side of broadband access. This research
extends knowledge by delving into the demand-side of the peer networking
movement as a means of better understanding potential pathways to connectivity.

The broader impacts of this research are underscored by the fact that digital
communications are becoming integrated into nearly every aspect of American
life. They intersect with our economic, social and cultural lives. In fact, full
participation in these realms is impossible without internet access, skills
training and relevant online content. The study approaches WiFi signal sharing
as more than a promising "last mile" technology. Rather, the research draws
attention to its potential to disrupt the telecommunications industry by
enabling consumers to take advantage of broadband signals without subscribing to
an ISP.