* 0847413
* CAREER:Ecological Diversification of Marine Mammals (Orders Cetacea and Sirenia) through Cenozoic Climate Change: Evidence from Geochemical Analysis of Fossil Material
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Mark Clementz, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2015
* USD 541,824.00

CAREER:Ecological Diversification of Marine Mammals (Orders Cetacea and Sirenia)
through Cenozoic Climate Change: Evidence from Geochemical Analysis of Fossil
Material&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark T. Clementz, Department of Geology &amp;
Geophysics, University of Wyoming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Cetaceans (e.g., whales,
dolphins, porpoises) and sirenians (e.g., sea cows: manatees, dugongs) are major
consumers in nearshore and offshore foodwebs and play a strong part in
regulating the structure and composition of these communities today. Their
earliest influence on aquatic ecosystems occurred at 50 Ma, when the first
whales and sea cows appeared in the fossil record. Both geochemical and
morphological evidence suggest that these groups already had a strong affinity
for life in the water. New discoveries of members of each order in India and
Pakistan at or shortly after this event have led to a significant accumulation
of fossil material documenting most of the critical steps within the transition
from terrestrial to marine ecosystems by whales and sea cows. This wealth of
collected material makes it now possible to examine the evolution of these
groups in a more rigorous, quantitative manner. This, in turn, can provide new
insights into the relationship between ecological change and morphological
evolution for these groups. &lt;br/&gt; The primary goal of this project is to
compare the evolutionary ecology of these two groups of marine mammals (Orders
Cetacea and Sirenia) in the context of environmental conditions and Cenozoic
climate change. With the appearance of whales and sea cows in the Early Eocene,
the evolution and diversification of both groups occurred across major episodes
of significant climate change as the Earth moved from the greenhouse conditions
of the early Paleogene and into the icehouse conditions of the Neogene and
today. In order to effectively evaluate the impact that this climate change may
have had on the evolution of each, I plan to examine specimens of whales and sea
cows as components of marine food webs. This requires that I not just understand
the diet or trophic position of individuals or species, but of entire, coeval
marine communities. Key localities representing well preserved marine vertebrate
fossil accumulations (i.e., ?bone beds?) have been identified from Eocene,
Oligocene and Miocene deposits in the USA (California, Oregon, South Carolina),
Egypt and New Zealand for inclusion in this study. I will primarily rely on
geochemical analysis of fossil tooth enamel as a proxy for ecological
information. This approach involves the analysis of the stable isotopes of
calcium, carbon, oxygen, and strontium to define the trophic position, diet, and
salinity tolerances, respectively, of each individual examined under this
project. Thus, my research component will focus on reconstructing marine food
webs from these time periods as well as defining the role of whales and sea cows
within them. At the same time, my teaching component will also emphasize an
integrative, big-picture approach to educate K-12 and college students on the
concepts of evolution, ecology and climate change. This will be done through a
combined effort of research in the field and lab and classroom activities,
including theater education, to provide students with multiple methods of mental
stimulation and assessment. These efforts will be achieved by incorporating
these teaching activities and lessons into the current UWyo paleo research
program, which will be possible through the assistance of post-doctoral fellows,
graduate students, undergraduates, and high school interns funded through this
proposal and other sources available at UWyo. The combined research and teaching
efforts are intended to provide an opportunity for students to gain a greater
appreciation for scientific thinking as well as a better understanding of the
processes shaping the natural world around them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;