* 0847876
* Spatio-Temporal Regulation of Tip Growth in Pollen Tubes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Peter Hepler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual merit. This project focuses on the control of pollen tube growth in
flowering plants. Pollen tube growth, which is confined to the extreme apex of
the tube and is fast, occupies a crucial position in plant development because
it delivers the sperm cells to the egg apparatus for fertilization. The process
thus is essential for sexual reproduction and also for food production because
the development of the fruits, nuts, seeds and grains that we eat requires a
prior fertilization event. Successful tube growth and sperm delivery can only
occur if expansion at the tip, driven by high turgor pressure, is continuously
balanced by deposition of new wall materials. An important observation has been
the discovery that the growth rate and the underlying physiological processes
oscillate, making it possible to determine which processes lead and which follow
the increase in growth rate. The ultimate goal is to elucidate the mechanisms
that regulate cell wall expansion. The processes that seem particularly
important include secretion of new wall material, mitochondrial production of
energy, actin organization, calcium influx, and pH changes. Although it is
possible that a single process acts as the sole pacemaker, it seems more likely
that the oscillatory behavior is an emergent property dependent on the
interaction of many different processes. As a consequence a multifaceted
approach will be employed to determine how parallel events interact. Firstly,
the above five processes will be probed during growth reorientation. The goal is
to determine which process begins first, and where in the cell it becomes
evident. To perturb pollen tube growth endogenous chemotropic factors, imposed
ion gradients, and elevated osmoticum will be used. A structural analysis of
cytoplasmic components and cell shape will be included. Secondly, energy
metabolism, specifically the oxidation/reduction of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NAD(P)H), will be examined, and its effect on growth
assessed. Companion studies with inhibitors and with an extracellular oxygen-
selective electrode will further probe the characteristics of energy metabolism.
Thirdly, the role of calcium in mitochondrial energy metabolism will be
examined. Because some NAD(P)H dehydrogenases are calcium sensitive, the inter-
relationship between mitochondrial calcium, cytosolic calcium, and NAD(P)H will
be explored. Intellectual merit accrues from the ability of the research to
elucidate structures and physiological processes that contribute to the control
of pollen tube growth. The research takes advantage of the accessibility of
pollen tube growth in vitro, the apical location of the growth events, and the
oscillatory nature of the growth rate and underlying physiological processes. It
further exploits the extensive toolkit of genetic and fluorescent probes, high
resolution imaging and microelectrode techniques to decipher cause and effect
relationships between interacting events. Although the pollen tube is
specialized for the delivery of sperm cells, it shares mechanisms with other
tip-growing cells, notably root hairs, and also very likely with diffusely
growing plant cells. Information gained from this study will therefore have wide
reaching relevance.

Broader impacts. The broader impacts of the research activity derive in large
part from its significant educational components. The Principal Investigator has
had extensive experience guiding students. In addition, he holds a close
connection to a consortium of 10 universities in the northeast US involved in
the recruitment and retention of under-represented minorities into graduate
education. The co-Principal Investigator has worked extensively in promoting
science education with inner city school students, undergraduate and graduate
students, and middle school teachers. He currently directs several
undergraduates in honors research. Finally, the investigators have involved a
pool of research motivated undergraduates at nearby Hampshire College, including
under-represented minorities in their Baldwin Scholars Program. Through these
different avenues, interested undergraduate students from all ethnicities will
be encouraged to participate in the research/discovery process.