* 0847443
* CAREER: New Trigger Instrumentation and Precision Measurements with the CMS Detector at the Super-LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Matthew Jones, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 05/31/2015
* USD 494,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This CAREER proposal describes a detailed research plan that will allow
precision measurements with the CMS experiment to be carried out in the
challenging environment of very high luminosity proton-proton collisions. The
proposal integrates the analysis of CMS data, the validation of detector
performance models and the design of upgraded tracking detector and trigger
hardware with the development of new pixel detector sensors that is already
being carried out at Purdue University. It extends the excellent sensor
development and detector fabrication facilities to include electronics
development for data acquisition systems and will provide training for
undergraduate physics and engineering students through the development of
hardware that will significantly reduce the cost of equipment needed for the
national QuarkNet program. Finally, this proposal builds on an existing Service-
Learning course that provides assistance to high school teachers through the
involvement of undergraduates which has been shown to significantly increase
teacher and student participation on outreach efforts. It is planned for the
Service-Learning concept to be presented to other QuarkNet centers with
assistance to these centers in setting up programs that follow this model.