* 0847387
* CAREER: Asymptotic invariants of residually finite groups
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Miklos Abert, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 01/31/2010
* USD 57,134.00

Abert will investigate the asymptotic behavior of natural invariants on the
subgroup lattice of residually finite groups. Examples for such invariants are
rank, cost, Betti numbers, Heegaard genus, amenability, spectral gap, bounded
generation and girth. The historical background of the project is subgroup
growth and profinite groups (Lubotzky, Segal, Shalev and Wilson), finitely
presented groups and topology (Luck and Lackenby), orbit equivalence (Weiss,
Popa and Furman) and self-similar groups (Grigorchuk and
Nekrasevich).&lt;br/&gt;A group is called residually finite, if the intersection
of its subgroups of finite index is trivial. This means that finite images
approximate the group structure. Important examples are finitely generated
linear groups, and specifically, arithmetic groups. The core object of interest
is a descending chain of finite index subgroups. There is an interesting
interplay between the combinatorics of the finite coset actions in the chain,
the dynamics of the measure preserving action on the boundary of the
corresponding coset tree and the structure of the discrete group. This interplay
allows one e.g. to apply rigidity theorems in measurable group theory and get
new graph theoretical results. The proposed activity also has connections to
percolation on transitive graphs and the theory of
3-manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group theory is an old and central
mathematical principle, born in the early 19th century. The set of symmetries of
an arbitrary object forms a group, so groups arise virtually in all areas in
mathematics and also in certain parts of physics and chemistry. Abert will study
residually finite groups; these are natural meeting points of finite and
infinite groups. The proposed activity lies at the crossroads of group theory,
graph theory and dynamics and has strong connections to certain areas in
probability theory and topology; as such, it is highly interdisciplinary. As
part of the project, Abert will work with gifted undergraduate and graduate
students and expose them to parts of his research through creative problem
solving. The project is also coordinated&lt;br/&gt;with the University of
Chicago VIGRE Program. The ultimate goal is to work out a core format for
inquiry based learning on research level.