* 0847253
* CAREER: Integrating Biomaterials and Biology for Control of Cell Function in 3D Matrices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Hyunjoon Kong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847253 PI: Kong, Hyunjoon ORG: Illinois-
UC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Biomaterials and Biology for Control of
Cell Function in 3D Matrices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The extracellular matrix (ECM)
in human tissues plays a critical role in protecting and nourishing cells by
providing cell adhesion sites and sequestering growth factors. Artificially
constructed ECM-simulating biomaterials are often combined with cells and growth
factors for use in biological studies and clinical treatments of tissue defects
and several chronic diseases. However, the biological role played by growth
factors remains unclear due to limited understanding about complex cellular
microenvironment. This lack of understanding also limits the therapeutic
efficacy of growth factors. In order to establish a more thorough understanding
of the role of growth factors in regulating cell function, the proposed research
goal is to create a cell-encapsulating hydrogel that allows researchers to
regulate growth factor-induced signal transduction in cells by engineering the
cellular microenvironment. The PI specifically hypothesizes that the hydrogel
stiffness modulates the extent of growth factor binding to cells and
subsequently affects the efficacy of the growth factors in stimulating cell
growth and differentiation. Experiments to examine this hypothesis will require
decoupling the currently interdependent gel stiffness and permeability to
nutrients by building hydrogels with nearly constant chain density but with
varying crosslink density. It is expected that changes in crosslink density will
not materially affect diffusion through the gel at a given chain
density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: A successful demonstration that
matrix elasticity and growth factor efficacy can be decoupled would open the way
to advances in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. The proposed
educational goal is to create a cross-disciplinary biomaterials curriculum for
college students plus a variety of outreach programs designed to fill the
knowledge gap with motivated and diverse scientists. The educational plan will
leverage existing institutional outreach programs for pre-college students,
including women and minorities, and science teachers to ensure successful
completion. The goals of this CAREER proposal will be accomplished by
implementing four research and educational projects: (Project 1) designing and
creating a biomaterial that decouples the interdependency between biomaterial
stiffness and nutrient transport; (Project 2) establishing a set of integrative
biomaterial design principles that describe growth factor-induced signal
transduction with biomaterial stiffness; (Project 3) creating a cross-
disciplinary course entitled ?Biomaterial-Biological Systems Interactions in
Biology and Medicine? and providing students with research opportunities to
serve as a model that other institutions may adopt, adapt, and build upon; and
(Project 4) introducing pre-college students and teachers to the science between
biomaterials and biology to inspire them and increase the number and diversity
of students in the biomaterial field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;