* 0847467
* CAREER: The Life Cycle of Star Clusters: New Windows into Star Formation and Galaxy Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Rupali Chandar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 07/31/2014
* USD 728,970.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Rupali Chandar (University of Toledo) will use space- and ground-based data
to make a detailed study of the properties of star clusters in 20 star-forming
galaxies, covering most types and environments found in the nearby universe.
This program will explore a new hypothesis, based on preliminary results from
two very different galaxies, that the basic physical processes of star cluster
formation and disruption are essentially the same, whether they operate on open,
super-star, or globular star clusters, and regardless of the type of galaxy or
environment in which they form. If correct, this picture revises some long-held
beliefs about the formation and disruption of star clusters. Regardless of the
outcome, this research will take a major step forward in understanding the
physics of star and cluster formation, the life cycle of clusters, and the
stellar content within galaxies.

Dr. Chandar will make the extensive set of reduced, integrated-light spectra of
star clusters in nearby galaxies which will result from this research available
to the public in order to enable many follow-up projects. As part of this
program, Dr. Chandar will also develop two new education initiatives: (1) "Girls
in Science", an outreach event aimed at middle school girls, will incorporate
data from the research portion of this proposal into hands-on activities, and
(2) "Beyond the Solar System", a new teacher training initiative focused on
topics related to this proposal and aligned with State and Federal science
standards.