* 0847809
* CAREER: Resource Attainment and  Social Context in Negotiating Illness Among Marginalized Populations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Celeste Watkins-Hayes, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 411,473.00

SES-0847809&lt;br/&gt;Celeste Watkins-Hayes&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will study the economic experiences and related social processes of
people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA), how their financial conditions and economic
survival strategies evolve over time, and how these processes shape and are
shaped by their health and well-being. This theorized relationship between
economic survival strategies and health maintenance raises critical policy,
programmatic, and societal questions about how researchers, policymakers, and
society will address the epidemic?s next frontier: ensuring that the economic
and social factors that increase the risk of HIV infection do not further hinder
individuals? abilities to take care of themselves and contribute to their
communities after diagnosis. HIV infections have risen particularly alarmingly
among African American women in recent years, creating additional post-diagnosis
economic and social challenges because of their social locations. This
multidisciplinary, comparative ethnographic research project and integrated
educational initiative will explore how living with HIV shapes the economic
realities and related social experiences of infected women while educating
students, the HIV services community, and the public about this important but
often ignored facet of the fight against AIDS. The study will focus on 105 women
living with HIV/AIDS who represent a diverse sample in terms of race,
socioeconomic class, age, reported mode of infection, and time since diagnosis.
The PI and a graduate student research team will conduct the in-depth interviews
in order to build a large qualitative database on the economic survival
strategies of women living with HIV, likely the first of its kind. The
educational objectives will be accomplished through (1) the creation of a
sociological research lab; (2) course offerings that include a service-learning
exercise pairing undergraduate students with local AIDS Service Providers for
educational event planning for clients and other stakeholders; and (3) a
research dissemination apparatus that utilizes media, Internet technology, and
traditional tools such as newsletters, fact sheets, policy briefs, books, and
academic papers to inform multiple groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study has
the potential to inform sociological research on the ways in which health status
has an impact on economic status, illuminating the role that institutions play
in mitigating, supporting, or challenging the economic standing of women with
HIV. The PI has significant plans for community participation in the research,
leading to possibilities for innovation in service delivery and the development
of policy options.