* 0847951
* Acquisition of computing environment for geophysical research at Northwestern's Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Craig Bina, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 74,572.00

0847951&lt;br/&gt;van der Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks ~$75K
funding to purchase upgraded computing equipment for data storage, data
analysis, networking and computational science. Equipment will be utilized in
the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at Northwestern. The equipment
will be used to update the computing backbone utilized by researchers, post-
docs, and students and will be incorporated into course offerings and outreach
activities. The Department currently has a heterogeneous mix of individual
systems and servers. The requested upgrade would unify the computing and storage
systems with modern capable equipment. The requested computing equipment will be
incorporated into disciplines ranging from seismology, tectonics, tomography,
planetary science and Earth interior geophysics. Specific projects are outlined
by the PIs and include thermal perturbation geophysical effects and phase
relations in subduction zones, stress field and buoyancy force analyses,
planetary interior structure analyses, extra-terrestrial planetary tectonics and
magmetic analyses, seismic-tsunami coupling and dislocation modeling, plate
boundary deformation modeling and analysis, seismic hazard assessments, plate
movement studies using GPS and earthquake data, seismic data bank analysis for
modeling and visualization, and developing and validating tomographic models.
The upgraded computer network will not only allow greater research capabilities,
but will support undergraduate and graduate research and through web site and
service hosting, will help serve the community. The upgraded systems will
support societally-relevant research in earthquake and tsunami
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;