* 0847382
* CAREER: Integrated Study of Shallow Subduction Seismogenesis and Locking Along the Middle America Trench
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2015
* USD 606,842.00

The processes that control shallow interface coupling, and near-trench
earthquake rupture, in both the largest megathrust and tsunami earthquakes, are
poorly understood. The amount of seismic coupling that builds up to sustain
these events is highly variable. Thus, we cannot simply define the magnitude and
rate of recurrence of earthquakes. Additionally, coupling changes dramatically
along subduction zones, with rupture of locked patches having diverse effects
that are both scientifically important and societally relevant. In rare events,
such as the Java 2006 earthquake, the shallowest portion of the interface fails,
causing dramatically increased tsunami potential. These events, called ?tsunami
earthquakes?, are enigmatic because the processes that control the shallow
seismogenic locking are poorly understood.

This study will illuminate regions of locking along the megathrust region by
examining the relationship between observed locking, past large earthquakes,
current small earthquakes, and variations along the subduction interface. The
Northern Costa Rica and Nicaraguan region was chosen because of the wealth of
data, recent occurrence of a rare tsunami earthquake, and the unusual proximity
of land to the seismogenic interface. The project will be a five-year effort
that integrates seismic, geodetic and modeling results, utilizing the diverse
geophysical tools for which Newman has expertise. To do this he will improve the
regional GPS velocity field with a new campaign in 2010; He will combine
existing earthquake datasets, seismic tomography and profiles, along with new
events to develop a continuous plate interface model. He will use the seismicity
to perform a state-of-the-art analysis of the spatial and temporal variability
in the seismicity-rate distribution, and determine its validity as a proxy for
locking. If confirmed, the tool will be used to identify such characteristic
changes along the seismogenic interface offshore Nicaragua, in the zone of a
recent large tsunami earthquake, and where GPS has no resolution.

Intellectual Merit: Through analysis of existing and ongoing recordings in Costa
Rica, the project will: 1) Develop a new seismicity constrained subduction
interface model, for use in further modeling, and interpretation; 2) Explore
interseismic changes in earthquake rates throughout the seismogenic zone, for
use in understanding regional and time-dependent changes in activity, stress,
and observed aseismic slip; 3) Examine the history of large interface
earthquakes to determine the regional variability of coupling; and 4) Develop a
new regional GPS velocity field for interseismic convergence, and identify any
transitory long-period temporal character of convergence. This research will
build on in an ongoing 12 station seismic array in Costa Rica that includes four
Georgia Tech-owned broad-band seismometers, and will be done in collaboration
with an ongoing continuous GPS network in the region. The results will be
modeled using the seismically defined interface, and locking results will be
compared with seismicity rate mapping to further determine the spatial and
temporal variability in the region. If validated as a unique proxy for interface
stresses, seismicity-rate (b-value) mapping will be useful for effectively
identifying locked zones in offshore regions where geodetic techniques are
currently very expensive and less utilized.

Broader Impact: This project will improve our understanding of the mechanical
controls on shallow subduction seismogenesis and tsunami hazard, having direct
societal benefit. Two Georgia Tech graduate students will be supported by this
project, where they will be trained to perform research and disseminate results
through papers and presentations. The project will support scientific training
and infrastructure in Costa Rica. The PI is a beginning investigator, and the
project will help develop a dynamic geophysics research group at Georgia Tech.
Knowledge gained through the project will be incorporated in courses at Georgia
Tech. The program will develop a Georgia educational seismic network that will
be used with learning modules to enhance the earth science curriculum in Georgia
schools. The schools reached by this program will include a diverse
socioeconomic group of students, with the initial target school being a charter
school near downtown Atlanta that has primarily low income and minority
students.