* 0847465
* Present and Potential Functions of Bacterial Transporters
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* L.Nicholas Ornston, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The project will
test the hypothesis that nutrient transporters possess functional versatility
and genetic malleability that allow them to serve as wedges in the evolutionary
divergence of bacteria. Individual transporter genes will be studied in bacteria
in which all transporters with overlapping or potentially overlapping activities
have been deleted. The properties conferred by each transporter will then be
determined. Mutant genes that confer altered growth phenotypes will be selected,
and these genes will be sequenced to determine amino acid sequence substitutions
that caused the change in transporter activity. This work will be conducted with
Acinetobacter baylyi, a bacterium that offers singular advantages for genetic
investigation because of its nutritional breadth and its extraordinarily high
competence for natural transformation. In the future, genetic constructs in A.
baylyi will allow the procedures to be adapted to determine the functions of
transporters from other bacteria, including those with complex genomes or those
that are difficult to grow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central question in
bacteriology is what makes an organism stand apart? Obvious sources of
differences are in genomes where gene rearrangements mark discontinuities in the
evolutionary divergence of cell lines. Less obvious, but perhaps as significant,
are differences in activities, such as transmembrane transport, that determine
how a cell adapts to an often shifting environment. Transmembrane transporters
are well suited for accommodating evolutionary divergence because they are
poised to have direct contact with the environment, they are abundant
(frequently encoded by genes accounting for 10% or more of a genome), and they
possess a redundancy that may allow one transporter to maintain an activity
while another transporter with overlapping function adapts to a new challenge.
To understand the extent to which transporters contribute to evolutionary
divergence depends upon knowledge about both their functions and the genetic
simplicity with which they can shift from one activity to another. Present
information, based upon an overwhelming amount of genome sequence data, provides
only a glimpse of the necessary knowledge because sequence similarities are poor
predictors of similarities in transporter function. This project is designed to
develop a system for learning how a major subset of transporters contributes to
physiology and potential genetic adaptation in A. baylyi. A merit of the system
is that it will provide a foundation for study of genes easily cloned from other
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The project will have a broad
impact on scientific training and research. Yale graduate students on rotation
through the lab and undergraduates will participate in the research. The A.
baylyi genetic system is the basis for teaching laboratories around the world
because natural transformation provides a swift demonstration of what a gene is
and what it does. Support for this research program will facilitate the
continued supply of bacterial strains for introductory college teaching and to
create upper level teaching laboratories on the genetic analysis of transport.
Key research findings will be integrated into classes at local high schools as
part of the Yale Outreach Program. Funding will allow further participation in
the Yale SURF summer research program, which introduces minority undergraduate
students to investigative science. Results of the research will be disseminated
through presentations at national meetings and the scientific literature.
Bacterial strains will assist other laboratories in cloning and characterizing
other genes for bacterial transporters and will thereby provide a useful
resource for further research in the scientific community. Results from the
project are likely not only to give insight into a basic question of transporter
evolution, that is how substrate specificity evolves, but also to provide a
knowledge base that will contribute to bioremediation and biotechnological
applications, both of which depend upon transport and processing of metabolites.