* 0847685
* CAREER:  Molecular Motors and Protein Motion: From Mechanisms to Collective Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Meredith Betterton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2015
* USD 425,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award will support an integrated research and education program in the
field of theoretical biophysics, with interdisciplinary support from the
Division of Materials Research, the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosystems, and the Division of Mathematical Sciences. The research component
will address addresses the theory of directed and diffusive protein motion,
active gels, and DNA target recognition, with emphasis on incorporating polymer
elasticity effects into models of protein motion on DNA and crowding and
collective effects in protein motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
have applications in important biological problems such as gene expression, DNA
copying, DNA repair, and cell division. It will contribute to the broader effort
in the community studying molecular motors to understand diverse motor proteins,
and to develop theoretical tools to predict the behavior of systems of
interacting proteins. It will also contribute to understanding both the function
of motor proteins in crowded cellular environments, and the role of nucleic-acid
motors in macromolecular complexes. This work is strongly interdisciplinary,
because the research bridges statistical physics, theoretical chemistry, and
molecular biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component aims to
increase the connection between physics and biology in introductory physics
courses at CU-Boulder. Integrating biologically relevant course materials will
help students understand that physics is important in many fields, including
biology and medicine. The second education aim is to integrate biophysics into
the undergraduate physics curriculum at CU-Boulder by developing a biophysics
course. The physics department does not currently teach a biophysics course, so
this aim will enhance the education of students at CU-Boulder. The proposed
education work will be carried out in collaboration with the Physics Education
Research group at the University of Colorado to incorporate cutting-edge
educational methods and assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will support an integrated research and
education program in the field of theoretical biophysics, with interdisciplinary
support from the Division of Materials Research, the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosystems, and the Division of Mathematical Sciences. The research
component of this award addresses novel problems in theoretical biophysics
involving the directed and random motions of proteins and related biomolecular
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have applications in important
biological problems such as gene expression, DNA copying, DNA repair, and cell
division. It will contribute to the broader effort in the community studying
molecular motors to understand diverse motor proteins, and to develop
theoretical tools to predict the behavior of systems of interacting proteins. It
will also contribute to understanding both the function of motor proteins in
crowded cellular environments, and the role of nucleic-acid motors in
macromolecular complexes. This work is strongly interdisciplinary, because the
research bridges statistical physics, theoretical chemistry, and molecular
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component aims to increase the
connection between physics and biology in introductory physics courses at CU-
Boulder. Integrating biologically relevant course materials will help students
understand that physics is important in many fields, including biology and
medicine. The second education aim is to integrate biophysics into the
undergraduate physics curriculum at CU-Boulder by developing a biophysics
course. The physics department does not currently teach a biophysics course, so
this aim will enhance the education of students at CU-Boulder. The proposed
education work will be carried out in collaboration with the Physics Education
Research group at the University of Colorado to incorporate cutting-edge
educational methods and assessment.&lt;br/&gt;