* 0847807
* Improved accessibility and rapid computerization of the SDNHM entomological collection
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Paisley Cato, San Diego Society of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 253,174.00

The San Diego Natural History Museum?s collection of over 1 million preserved
insects and spiders contains significant historical material for a binational
region that is immensely biologically diverse and experiencing pressure from
unprecedented population growth and development. The collection is the largest
of its kind in the region (San Diego and Imperial Counties through the southern
tip of Baja California in Mexico), yet it is poorly inventoried, not accessible
online, and has other urgent needs that restrict the usefulness of this one-of-
a-kind resource. This project will improve overall accessibility through
reorganization of the collection and an online inventory for offsite data
retrieval. Additionally, the project will re-house fluid-preserved collections
for better long-term storage and develop an online image catalog for our most
scientifically valuable material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
enhance the utility of and accessibility to the only major entomological
collection in southernmost California and Baja California, an area widely
regarded as a biodiversity hotspot. The online availability of collection
information will facilitate collaborations with researchers at Mexican
universities, regional conservation groups, and government agencies.
Furthermore, the proposed reorganization of the collection will result in large
amounts of educational material that will be shared with binational non-profit
environmental-education organizations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;