* 0847793
* CAREER:  Spectroscopic Measurements of Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Precursor Gases through Laboratory and Aircraft Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Rainer Volkamer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2015
* USD 651,618.00

Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) forms in the atmosphere through chemical
reactions of gaseous compounds and comprises a large fraction of the organic
aerosol. Observed SOA amounts are one to two orders of magnitude larger than
predicted by atmospheric models, leading to the fundamental questions: What are
the sources and chemical identities of SOA precursors and how do they form SOA?
These questions will be addressed through field studies with instrumentation
developed by the principal investigator (PI) and laboratory experiments in
simulation chambers. An Airborne Multi-Axis Differential Optical Absorption
Spectrometer (AMAX-DOAS) will be built and used to measure column data for
glyoxal (CHOCHO) and other gases, and to constrain their horizontal and vertical
distributions in the boundary layer and the free troposphere. An LED-based
Cavity Enhanced DOAS (LED-CE-DOAS) will be developed for the sensitive and
selective measurement of trace gases. This instrument will be used to measure
CHOCHO in laboratory experiments to explore its sources and photochemically-
enhanced sink reactions, and to study SOA formation from relevant precursor
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) (e.g., isoprene, acetylene, aromatic
VOCs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's educational component will consist of
enhancing the college readiness of students underrepresented in math and
science-based careers. Two fluent Spanish speakers, the PI, and the director of
the Science Program at Boulder High School will team up to support students
underrepresented in science prior to college, when critical skills needed to
succeed in graduate studies - or the lack thereof - can still be identified and
corrected. Working relationships with K-12 teachers will also be established.
The materials developed will be catalogued in the Digital Library for Earth
Science Education (DLESE) and submitted for peer review to the DLESE Community
Review System.