* 0847912
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Habitat Modification and Gene Flow In An Endangered New World Primate
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Don Melnick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,271.00



Landscape change and heterogeneity are hypothesized to play central roles in
primate evolution. Thus, studies of primate ecology and evolution should
explicitly consider landscape heterogeneity, especially as primate habitats are
increasingly lost and modified. Central American Squirrel Monkeys (Saimiri
oerstedii) are endangered primates experiencing severe historical and ongoing
habitat modification in the Central Pacific of Costa Rica. This study will 1)
describe patterns of gene flow among wild populations of S. oerstedii, 2)
describe the effects of landscape heterogeneity on gene flow patterns, and 3)
improve future studies of primate ecology and evolution in heterogeneous
landscapes by integrating theory and tools from landscape ecology with models of
population genetics. Fecal samples from wild S. oerstedii populations will be
collected non-invasively for DNA extraction, genotyping, and sequencing.
Landscape genetics methods will be used to characterize localized gene flow
patterns for S. oerstedii and correlate those patterns with measures of
landscape heterogeneity. By conducting one of the first landscape genetics
studies in a primate, the proposed research will help develop and refine
landscape genetics methods for primates and will inform future studies of how
heterogeneous landscapes influence primate ecology, population divergence, and
evolution. The results of this project will also be incorporated into a science-
based conservation management plan for S. oerstedii in collaboration with Costa
Rican researchers. Specifically, information on dispersal patterns provided by
this project will help to identify isolated populations of S. oerstedii that
need particular attention, and guide the construction of biological corridors
between fragments of forest.

