* 0847329
* CAREER: Health Determinants and Research Design
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Douglas Almond, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 613,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

What determines human health is known only in part. Even where causal pathways
have been identified, great uncertainty frequently exists regarding the strength
of the relationship. Compelling and precise estimates of these relationships are
needed to inform public policies that will improve population health. This
project would improve understanding of these relationships, using natural and
quasi-experiments. The project highlights projects on the use of Ramadan to
study the effects of maternal nutrition, the effects of heating subsidies in
China to study the effects of pollution on prenatal development, and the impact
of obesity report cards on obesity and health in Arkansas.

This CAREER proposal argues that refutable research hypotheses can be evaluated
in an observational setting where identifying variation is plausibly exogenous.
Ideally, the research hypothesis has strong implications which can be evaluated
in available (i.e. pre-existing) data. The most compelling empirical comparisons
do not require sophisticated econometric fixes. Instead, good natural
experiments can identify treatment effects with minimal statistical adjustment.
The cleanest of experiments, where the treatment is randomly assigned, requires
only the comparison of means to estimate causal effects. This controlled
experiment should be emulated wherever possible. Operationally, the proposed
approach seeks to unearth comparisons in an observational setting where
unadjusted impact estimates are quite similar to regression-adjusted impact
estimates.

Broader Impact: The project will have substantial impact through collaborations
outside the usual Economics teaching and research communities. For example, the
investigator is working with the Arkansas Center for Health to determine how
health information might help reduce childhood obesity. International
collaboration is also integral, as illustrated by the proposed study of Chinese
air pollution near the Huai river with researchers at Tsinghua and Beijing
University. Also, because the health questions engaged are vitally important,
substantial interest from policymakers (and the popular press) is likely.