* 0847722
* CAREER:  Culture and Conservation: Transnational Environmentalism, Sacred Lands, and Community Organizations in Tibet
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Emily Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2015
* USD 490,780.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under what conditions do people become
environmentalists? What causes translocal and transnational efforts to protect
biodiversity to be adopted and connected with local interests? What are the
implications of trends in global conservation practice toward both scaling-up
and relying on community and non-governmental organizations? This Faculty Career
Early-Development (CAREER) award will support basic research and educational
activities that address these questions. The research to be pursued will advance
basic understanding of the emergence of environmentalism and the encounter
between transnational conservation projects and locally situated actors through
a systematic examination of the recent proliferation of community environmental
organizations and articulations of environmental identities on the Tibetan
Plateau in the context of new transnational biodiversity conservation efforts
and a growing Chinese environmental movement. More specifically, the
investigator will examine the interplay of translocal and transnational efforts
to save China's biodiversity through the declaration of biodiversity hotspots,
community-based conservation initiatives, and mobilization of elements of
Tibetan traditional culture and religion, particularly sacred lands. Using
ethnographic and other qualitative methods, including textual analysis and
interviews and participant observation with Chinese environmentalists,
conservation staff, and grassroots Tibetan community organizations across four
provinces over a period of five years, the investigator will examine the
cultural and political implications of promoting culture as conservation,
thereby contributing to knowledge about globalization by tracing the ways in
which environmental ideas travel and are adopted and articulated with local
interests in particular times and places. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As both
biodiversity loss and global efforts to prevent it intensify, the theoretical
implications of the study will be useful for a wide variety of settings. The
research will contribute to the interdisciplinary field of political ecology by
improving basic understanding of transnational biodiversity conservation
efforts, environmental identities, and the relationship between sacred
landscapes, indigenous identities, and environmental protection. It will be the
first study of China's environmental movement that goes in depth beyond a
handful of NGOs and activists based in Beijing and Yunnan and that examines the
key role of Tibetan culture and nature in its formation. Furthermore, it should
provide a new way of analyzing the environmental movement and globalization in
China beyond standard framings of civil society and democratization on the one
hand and neoliberalism on the other. In addition, the project has a significant
educational component, including a new undergraduate class that will enhance
students' knowledge about theories and debates in human and nature-society
geography through learning about Tibet. The award also will provide learning and
research opportunities for four undergraduates, including underrepresented
minorities, who will participate in summer research with environmental activists
in China. The project also will produce an ethnographic film about grassroots
environmentalism in Tibet, which will be suitable for use in geography and
anthropology classes for teaching about cultures of nature and issues of
representation of the nature-society relationship. Two doctoral students will be
educated and trained, and project results will be disseminated to scholarly
audiences as well as to educators and conservation organizations in both the
U.S. and China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;