* 0847997
* Hierarchical Self-Organization of Functional Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Charles Drain, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 584,730.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Charles M. Drain of the City
University of New York (CUNY) Hunter College for a research project that will
continue pushing the limits of self-assembly and self-organization to create
functional photonic materials and prototypical devices that contain various
porphyrinoids and other highly stable dyes. Porphyrinoids such as porphyrins,
phthalocyanines, and porphyrazines are a class of remarkably robust dyes that
have a broad range of chemical, physical, and photonic properties. The range of
properties is significantly expanded by the binding of metal ions and by
peripheral substitution. One of the goals of the research is to understand
fundamental principles of supramolecular chemistry related to the hierarchical
organization of molecules and atoms. Conceptually, there are four levels
describing the organization of matter: (1) molecular structure, (2)
supramolecular structure, (3) self-organization into solid-state materials and
(4) self-organization of these materials onto surfaces in devices, which
includes interconnections to the macroscopic world. The correlation of
hierarchical structure with photonic properties will lead to new design
principles and materials with enhanced functions. These results will lead to a
better understanding of hierarchical organization in natural systems, and
provide a roadmap to the construction of other complex self-organized materials
with designed functionality. The systematic comparison of the photonic
properties of component molecules, discrete self-assembled arrays and self-
organized materials, is an explicit part of the proposal. Though every
supramolecular design may not result in the predicted structures, unexpected
results can be very informative in terms of understanding intermolecular
interactions and the response of these materials to environment changes and
deposition onto surfaces. The results of the proposed research will
significantly increase the repertoire of self-assembly/organization concepts
that underpin the design of hierarchical functional materials for an array of
applications beyond photonic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
the proposed research include the training of a diverse population of students.
Because of Professor Drain's vigorous, proactive recruiting of a diverse
population of students, his lab consists of approximately 50% women and 50%
minorities in STEM areas. Former minority undergraduates are now in Ph.D.
programs or have graduated from universities such as Rockefeller, Berkeley,
Columbia, and Cornell. Thus, the education and training of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM continues to be a hallmark of Professor
Drain's research program. A new Analytical chemistry lab at Hunter College is
proposed (30-40 majors per year will take the course) that will focus on state
of the art instrumentation and assays that are specifically derived from the
prior NSF-sponsored research on porphyrin materials.