* 0847211
* SGER:   Securing Spectrum Usage in Future Radio Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2011
* Yingying Chen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 01/31/2011
* USD 163,164.00

SGER: Securing Spectrum Usage in Future Radio Systems&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future wireless devices will be highly-
programmable with the exposure of the protocol stacks to the public. Adversaries
can easily purchase low-cost wireless devices to launch a variety of attacks
with little effort. These attacks will compromise the advantage of dynamic
spectrum access for the greater good. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
regulate and monitor future radio operations to ensure the spectrum is properly
used. This work will explore new paradigms of securing future radio systems that
take advantage of domain-specific information. Particularly, this work will
utilize location information to assist in detecting anomalous behaviors when
enforcing spectrum etiquettes because location has unique characteristics of
describing the current physical status of a wireless device, hard to falsify,
and not reliant on cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
key contribution of this work is to design efficient mechanisms and develop
effective frameworks that can both detect anomalous activities in spectrum usage
as well as localize adversaries without requiring overhead on wireless devices.
This work represents a significant contribution to future radio systems because
it departs from traditional cryptographic-based security solutions, and utilizes
properties that are unique to wireless communications to secure spectrum
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work can provide a foundation
in exploring various properties related to wireless communications that can
augment traditional security mechanisms. This work will involve the development
of the new curriculum in emerging wireless systems. The project will
continuously encourage the involvement of both undergraduate and graduate
students in research, and especially encourage female students to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;