* 0847851
* Studies on Electrophilic Metal Complexes in Lewis Acid-Catalyzed C-C Bond-Forming Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Richard Eisenberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2012
* USD 410,000.00

In this collaborative project, the catalytic behavior of cationic octahedral
iridium(III) complexes will be investigated in C-C bond-forming reactions.
First, thorough investigation of the mechanism of Nazarov cyclization will be
conducted, using Ir(III) complexes as a tool to study the complex sequence of
steps involved in the reaction. Second, selective methods to conduct new tandem
sequences and new methods for enol alkylation using Lewis acidic Ir(III)
complexes will be developed. Finally, chiral catalysts for asymmetric Nazarov
cyclizations and multi-step sequences based on cationic Ir(III) systems will be
synthesized and studied, including new C2 symmetric complexes closely related to
the known catalysts possessing adjacent labile binding sites on the catalyst
metal center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research collaboration of
Professor Alison Frontier and Professor Richard Eisenberg of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Rochester. Research in the catalysis of
electrophilic Ir(III) complexes aids in the development of new synthetic
methodologies needed for the preparation of commodity and fine chemicals.
Increasing molecular complexity through catalysis represents a key means of
creating new useful compounds of potential impact beyond the research
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;