* 0847882
* Digitization, Rectification, and Re-curation of the Georgia Southern University Herpetology Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Lance McBrayer, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2013
* USD 154,037.00

A National Science Foundation grant has been awarded to Georgia Southern
University to digitize and re-curate the Georgia Southern University ? Savannah
Science Museum Herpetology Collection. This collection is a valuable historical
record of the biological diversity of coastal Georgia and South Carolina. The
locality data from the collection of approximately 35,000 specimens will be
digitized and the collection completely re-curated. All specimenswill be removed
from old storage media, inspected, individually tagged,and placed in proper
storage containers and media. All paper and online&lt;br/&gt;data records will
be cross-checked for accuracy, and the database shared via an online meta-search
portal such as Herpnet. These improvements will dramatically increase the use
and exposure of the collection such that its value to the scientific community
will be strengthened. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancement of the collection will
also improve instructional and outreach opportunities. The project will augment
the graduate and undergraduate curriculum by providing a large, searchable
database of natural history data for use in teaching. In addition, the project
will generate broader collaborative efforts with constituents who have interests
in collections, data mining, and outreach. Finally, completion of these efforts
will allow for more visitations to local schools for presentations on
herpetology, and the integration of herpetological resources into existing
outreach programs available at the University.