* 0847890
* SGER:  Southern and Coastal Extent of Picophytoplankton Populations in the South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Lisa Moore, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2010
* USD 45,059.00

The most abundant and ubiquitous members of the marine phytoplankton belong to
two cyanobacterial genera, Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus, which together
contribute more than half of the primary productivity in the open ocean. Each of
these genera, which form a distinct picophytoplankton clade within the marine
cyanobacteria, can be further subdivided into multiple phylogenetic clades
(referred to as genotypes or ecotypes), some of which have clear physiological
characteristics that can be related to their ecological distributions. However,
the boundaries of the horizontal distributions of the various genotypes are not
fully understood, and discrepancies between studies in the South Atlantic
require further examination of the picophytoplankton distributions, particularly
of the Prochlorococcus populations. In a research cruise during Dec 2008 to the
Patagonia shelf region from ~40 deg S, 57deg W to ~53 deg S, 55 deg W near the
Falkland Islands, the PI will be able to examine the southern extent of
picophytoplankton populations as well as the distributions across the shelf
break front going east into oligotrophic waters. At stations representing
different water types, samples will be collected for flow cytometric analysis of
picophytoplankton populations, will be filtered for later qPCR analysis of
Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus ecotypes, and will be cryopreserved for
isolations using high throughput culture methods.

This SGER project will provide a new dataset of the southern and coastal extent
of picophytoplankton populations, and possibly address the question of whether
Prochlorococcus populations are extending further south into colder waters than
initially observed more than a decade ago. Additionally, it will enable a MS
student to participate in the research cruise and get experience with field
research, provide funds for supplies and shipping samples, and provide a MS
student stipend to analyze the samples.