* 0847711
* CAREER: Bioactive Weight-Bearing Bone/Polymer Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Scott Guelcher, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2015
* USD 508,500.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847711 PI: Guelcher, Scott ORG:
Vanderbilt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Bioactive Weight-Bearing
Bone/Polymer Composites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: A common
location of disabling fractures occurs in the vertebral bodies of the spine,
accompanied by painful spinal instability and pronounced bowing of the spine.
Injectable poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) bone cements stabilize compression
fractures in vertebral bodies and restore support to the spine. However, PMMA
cements can induce tissue necrosis arising from high polymerization
temperatures, and can promote bone resorption near the implant/bone interface
due to stress-shielding. Consequently, a physiological alternative to existing
materials is needed that: (1) has biomechanical properties comparable to those
of trabecular bone to stabilize the fracture and minimize stress-shielding, (2)
is administered by minimally invasive surgical techniques, and (3) actively
participates in the healing process by integrating with recipient bone and
remodeling. Composites comprising mineralized allograft bone particles (MBPs)
and resorbable thermoplastic polymers have mechanical properties comparable to
trabecular bone and actively participate in the healing process. However, these
biomaterials are fabricated by compression-molding at elevated temperatures and
therefore cannot be injected. To overcome these limitations, a family of
composites comprising MBPs and resorbable polyurethane (PUR) networks will be
designed and developed. They are processed as reactive liquids at ambient
temperature and cure in situ at 37 C, which renders them suitable for injection.
Reactive liquid molding also enables control over binding between the polymer
and both the reinforcing MBPs and host trabecular bone, thus strengthening the
implant after cure. Dynamic mechanical, compression, bending, and rheological
properties will be measured. Remodeling of the composites will be investigated
in vitro in a co-culture model of osteoblasts and osteoclast-like cells. A key
component of the project will focus on establishing relationships governing the
effects of the bone-polymer interfacial structure on mechanical properties and
in vitro remodeling of the composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The
project will integrate research and education through activities aligned with
the goals of the Vanderbilt School for Science and Math (VSSM) and the
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (CBE). The VSSM, a part-time
high school located on Vanderbilt campus and dedicated to public school students
grades 9-12, is a joint venture with Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools
(MNPS). In conjunction with core instructors at the VSSM, the PI will develop
grade-appropriate (e.g., 9-12) curriculum components incorporating biomaterials,
regenerative medicine, and bioprocess engineering. Scientific knowledge
discovered during the execution of the project will also be disseminated through
the development of two required undergraduate courses: Introduction to
Engineering and Bioprocess Engineering. Both courses will be developed to
support recent changes to the undergraduate curriculum in the PI?s home
department (CBE). Additionally, through research assistantships, graduate,
undergraduate, and high school (through the School for Science and Math)
students will gain experience in the design, synthesis, and characterization of
biomaterials for bone regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;