* 0847386
* CAREER:  Ground-truthing Ozone and Particulate Matter Sensitivities to Emissions Trends
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Daniel Cohan, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 497,768.00

The research will consider recent abatement efforts in the United States as a
real-world experiment in emissions perturbations, developing innovative
techniques to ground-truth pollutant sensitivities to emissions trends. An
iterative inverse modeling method with four-dimensional data assimilation will
be extended and applied to quantify long-term emissions trends and to evaluate
ozone and particulate matter (PM) responsiveness to those trends. The inverse
modeling will identify leading contributors to uncertainty in sensitivities and
investigate potential adjustments to improve the accuracy of photochemical
modeling. Scientific investigations and environmental decision-making rely on
environmental models to accurately simulate not only pollutant concentrations
but also their sensitivities to emissions. Simulating sensitivities is
especially challenging for air pollutants such as ozone and PM that exhibit
nonlinear and highly variable responses to multiple precursor emissions. Whereas
models are routinely evaluated against observations for pollutant
concentrations, much less is known about the accuracy of pollutant sensitivities
that cannot be directly observed.

Broader impacts will include an education plan that will engage a significant
number of fifth-grade students in hands-on, inquiry-based learning about
meteorology and air pollution. Students will develop hypotheses and conduct
hands-on measurements to investigate how weather and pollutant conditions vary
on their school campuses. Lesson plans will be developed and implemented at a
pilot school and then used to train teachers from across the Houston region to
teach scientific environmental inquiry at their own campuses. The principal
investigator will also engage undergraduate and graduate students in scientific
learning and research through vertically-integrated research experiences and the
development of new curriculum and colloquia.