* 0847216
* CAREER: Manipulating Molecules and Motivating Students; Explorations of Energy Conversion through Adaptive Control and in New Educational Platforms
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Niels Damrauer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2014
* USD 655,031.00

In this award the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry supports the development of a fundamental chemical sciences research
effort in the group of Professor Niels Damrauer at the University of Colorado to
understand how charge and energy flow in complex condensed-phase molecules
following absorption of light. Femtosecond pulse-shaping methodologies will be
called upon to interrogate and control photochemical pathways in novel
coordination complexes. Systems exhibiting photoinduced electron transfer
reactivity are selected and new metal complexes are synthesized wherein internal
motions are expected to modulate the rate of a photoinduced electron transfer
reaction. Photochemical control is expected if adaptively shaped laser fields
can manipulate these motions. Additional systems are developed that exhibit
excited-state relaxation pathways competing with electron transfer. This aspect
of the program aims to develop spectroscopic methods for studying dynamical
phenomena at reactive branching points between productive and non-productive
channels. Finally, efforts are made to develop pulse-shaping two-dimensional
electronic spectroscopy of inorganic chromophores and to link the observations
to both opportunities and mechanisms for control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
educational outreach component of this program, curricula relating to
sustainable energy production are being developed for dissemination to middle
school students in Colorado and to assist in professional development for
teachers of grades 5-8. The societal and environmental urgency of the topics
considered should motivate young minds to engage in fundamental scientific
exploration and to seek further scientific training in high school.