* 0847379
* CAREER: Statistical Learning as a Foundation for Lexical Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Katharine Graf Estes, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 09/30/2015
* USD 680,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the first years of life, infants
learn a remarkable amount about the structure of their native language. The
precocious nature of early language acquisition has motivated the exploration of
the forces driving these amazing feats of learning. One promising mechanism is
statistical learning, the process of detecting structure in the environment by
tracking patterns present in the input. Recent investigations have revealed that
infants possess powerful statistical learning capabilities that allow them to
track patterns in the sounds and words of linguistic input. However, the manner
in which infants use statistical learning to solve real challenges in language
acquisition is not yet clear. This project investigates how infants use
statistical learning to perform two fundamental tasks in early language
development: detecting words in fluent speech and linking the sounds of words
with meanings. The experiments incorporate several infant testing methodologies,
including measures of word segmentation, object label learning tasks, and online
measures of word learning and recognition. The experiments also integrate the
use of carefully controlled artificial languages and natural native language
statistical regularities to probe the robustness of statistical learning to
inconsistency and acoustic variation, two hallmarks of natural speech that
present significant challenges to the detection of statistical regularities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this project will shed light on how
infants track the statistical regularities of their native language and how
those regularities shape early language development. More broadly, this
investigation will contribute to the understanding of the bases of language
acquisition. Furthermore, revealing the nature of fundamental language
acquisition mechanisms has significant implications for understanding the
developmental course of language impairments. Characterizing the processes that
drive early language acquisition in typically developing infants will inform the
search for the bases of language deficits. In addition, this project integrates
educational opportunities for students with the research program, specifically
focusing on the recruitment of research assistants from promising high school
students and undergraduates who belong to groups underrepresented in higher
education and in research. Students will participate throughout the research
process, from recruiting and testing participants to disseminating the results
to the public and scientific communities. Involvement in a research group
provides students with unique opportunities to develop strong academic ties and
academic skills, to participate in mentoring relationships, and to develop new
ways of thinking.