* 0847953
* RUI:   Comparative micromechanics of gecko setae:   Effects of rate, substrate, and environment
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Kellar Autumn, Lewis and Clark College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 05/31/2015
* USD 607,680.00

Gecko toe pads are sticky because they bear a hierarchy of structure that
functions as a smart adhesive. The adhesive on gecko toes differs dramatically
from that of conventional pressure-sensitive adhesives (PSAs), which are soft
polymers that degrade, foul, self-adhere, and attach accidentally to
inappropriate surfaces. In contrast, gecko toes bear angled arrays of branched,
hair-like fibers (setae) formed from stiff, hydrophobic keratin that act as a
bed of angled springs with an effective stiffness similar to that of PSAs. Setae
are self-cleaning and maintain function for months during repeated use in dirty
conditions. Adhesion in setae requires maintenance of a shear load directed
toward the body of the gecko. Thus, gecko setae resist inappropriate bonding and
are capable of easy and rapid attachment and detachment. Prior research is based
predominately on data collected from a single species, the tokay gecko, on
smooth surfaces at ambient relative humidity. Functionally, the diversity of
setal designs in over 1000 species of gecko is not well understood. Also, theory
and data conflict with regard to the effects of van der Waals forces and
humidity on gecko adhesion. These are topics of central importance in
understanding the mechanisms of gecko adhesion and in the design and application
of gecko-like synthetic adhesives (GSAs). This project focuses on identifying
general, testable principles underlying the novel attachment system that geckos
use to climb. It will test the validity of four theoretical models of setal
structure and function by measuring material properties and contact mechanics of
a diverse sample of gecko setae, and by utilizing GSAs as physical models. The
project will tease apart the effect of humidity and temperature on keratin
mechanical properties from the effect of surface hydration by measuring changes
in stiffness and frictional adhesion as a function of humidity, temperature, and
substrate hydrophobicity. The research will advance understanding of the
micromechanics of gecko setae under a range of biologically relevant
environmental conditions, enabling transformative advances in adhesion
technology and the physics of friction. Engineered adhesive nanostructures
inspired by geckos may become the glue of the future and perhaps the screw of
the future as well.