* 0847258
* CAREER: Metallonitrene/Alkyne Metathesis and Beyond: Transition Metal Catalyzed Oxidative Amination For Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Simon Blakey, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This project is directed toward the discovery of new chemistry for catalytic
C-N, C-C and C-O bond formation using high oxidation state transition metals
with reactive nitrenoid or amide ligands and the application of these new
methods to the synthesis of chemically and medicinally relevant targets. As an
integral part of this research we aim to establish an in depth understanding of
the requirements for the formation of reactive metallonitrenes and understand
how different transition metals and their ligand environments affect the
reactivity of the nitrene ligands. Complementing the tangible scientific and
technological gains arising from the successful implementation of this research
program is the implicit development of human potential and education of our next
generation of scientific leaders. Although a prominent educational component of
this program involves the advanced scientific training of graduate students in
an environment that fosters creativity and rigor, this project will also
encompass efforts by the P.I. to develop and implement new curriculum and
pedagogy at the undergraduate level, with a focus on scientific method and
problem solving as a means of understanding fundamental organic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Simon Blakey of the
Department of Chemistry at Emory University. Professor Blakey's research efforts
revolve around the development of new cascade reactions for the formation of
selected chemical bonds between carbon, nitrogen and oxygen, building complex
molecular architecture from simple building blocks. These reactions are expected
to be transformative, with the potential to impact the discovery of new
medicines, streamline processes for the large scale synthesis of important
nitrogen containing compounds and access new functional motifs for applications
in materials chemistry.