* 0847120
* CAREER:  Effects of the Magnetosheath Properties on the Dynamics and Plasma Transport Produced by the Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability and on the Plasma Sheet Anisotropies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Katariina Nykyri, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 483,699.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary science objective of this
project is to gain a global understanding of the Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability
(KHI) on Earth's magnetosphere-ionosphere system. In particular the effects of
the solar wind parameters and resulting magnetosheath properties on the KHI will
be studied. The effects generated by i) KHI and ii) Kinetic-Alfv√©n waves (KAW).
The effects of the magnetosheath properties on ion temperature anisotropies
observed within the plasma sheet will also be determined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will use several years of Cluster and
Themis spacecraft data from low-latitude magnetopause crossings and
magnetosheath. Data analysis methods include various variance analysis
techniques, transformation to the deHoffman Teller reference frame, Walen
relation, multi-spacecraft methods, and a variety of spectral analysis methods.
The data analysis results will be compared with 2-D and 3-D high-resolution
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations. The particle dynamics due to KHI will be
studied by using test-particles within a 3-D, local MHD code and comparisons
with observed ion distribution functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
magnetosheath processes will be studied by doing a statistical study of the
magnetosheath properties and by utilizing global hybrid (fluid electrons,
paritlce ions) simulations. In addition, the MHD-scale KHI will be compared with
hybrid and fully kinetic simulations of the instability. The KHI at Mars and
Venus will also be studied with these simulations and data from Mars and Venus
orbiters will be utilized for comparisons with the simulation results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address several topics: 1) The statistical
study of the occurrence of the KHI at the Earth's magnetosphere and the
associated magnetosheath and plasma sheet properties; 2) The influence of the
Mach numbers and plasma beta on the plasma transport produced by the KHI; 3) The
effects of the KHI and magnetosheath processes and properties on the dawn-dusk
asymmetries of the plasma sheet; 4) The coupling of the magnetospheric KHI into
the ionosphere; 5) Comparison between MHD, hybrid and kinetic simulations of the
KHI; 6) The study of the Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability at Mars and Venus. These
topics are of central importance for understanding the global magnetospheric
dynamics, cross-scale coupling of space plasmas, and plasma dynamics in the
vicinity of non-magnetized planets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the study
will be an important contribution to the goals of the Geospace Environment
Modeling (GEM) program. This research fits under several current GEM Focus
Groups: Plasma Entry and Transport into and within the Magnetotail; Foreshock,
Bow Shock and Magnetosheath; MIC Global Coupling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
statistical studies will form the core of the Ph.D thesis work of a graduate
student in a new Ph.D program in Engineering Physics starting in Fall-2009 at
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU). The resulting research papers will
be published in refereed scientific journals devoted to space science and plasma
science. The project will develop a web site and the student research will be
highlighted there. The project will include a public outreach program by
organizing a space sciences seminar series at Daytona Beach Museum of Arts and
Sciences starting in the Fall of 2009. The study integrates research and
education by including undergraduate students in a summer research program. In
addition, the PI will develop a graduate course: "Spacecraft Data-Analysis
Methods", where students can learn single- and multi-spacecraft data-analysis
techniques by utilizing spacecraft data. The ERAU promotes equal opportunities
for the underrepresented groups.