* 0847847
* Improvements to the Division of Arthropods Collection, Museum of Southwestern Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Lightfoot, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 453,444.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Museum of Southwestern Biology is located in a geographic region of high
environmental heterogeneity and arthropod diversity. Additionally, the arthropod
fauna of the Southwest is not as well known as other regions of the United
States. The Museum of Southwestern Biology has become an active institution
documenting insect diversity for several decades for researchers in ecology and
taxonomy, but has never had adequate storage space for all its material. The
funding from this NSF grant will allow us to purchase needed cabinets, drawers
and other equipment to store our collections securely and make them more
available for study. The funding also includes money for students to assist us
in preparing specimens and entering collection information into our database
(http://www.msb.unm.edu/arthropods/index.html).

Museums are essential partners in research involving DNA analysis, species
relationships and distributions. Their holdings document species introductions
and extinctions, which are critical for conservation planning. Undergraduate and
graduate students receive invaluable training in taxonomy by working with whole
specimens, images and databases maintained by museums. Internet access to these
databases benefits K-12 students and the general public by providing accurate
information and a way to learn about local and regional biodiversity.