* 0847182
* CAREER: Multimessenger astronomy through gravitational-waves: a student centered approach
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Szabolcs Marka, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2015
* USD 656,075.00

Nearly hundred years after the debut of Einstein's theory of general relativity,
gravitational waves are viewed as one of the most intriguing but still elusive
astrophysical phenomena. They are expected to be emitted by extreme
astrophysical sources such as merging black hole binary systems, spinning
neutron stars, gamma-ray bursts or supernovae. Certain aspects of these
astrophysical phenomena are detectable in other forms such as gamma-rays, making
our scientific endeavor even more promising. However, in order to decipher the
detailed inner workings and understand the complete astrophysical process
involved in these cataclysmic comic events, their observation through
gravitational waves is essential. This award will support active engagement in
the quest for the first detection of gravitational waves coincident with gamma-
ray burst and neutrino events. The data collected by the global network of
gravitational wave detectors, including the Laser Interferometric Gravitational-
wave Observatory (LIGO), will also allow the advance of fundamental science
prior to regular detections of cosmic events through gravitational waves by
setting astrophysically interesting upper limits to the gravitational waves
produced. To increase the repertoire of promising progenitor candidates, the PI
and his students will also investigate data analysis techniques related to
gravitational waves emitted by eccentric encounters of black hole binary
systems.

This award will allow the PI to develop an innovative course at Columbia
University specifically designed to enhance the critical foundations of students
in experimental science. The curriculum is inspired by gravitational wave
research and emphasizes real life experience for students in the laboratory. The
course will focus on ingenuity and mission critical skills of experimental
research; it will closely integrate lectures, experimentation, teamwork,
proposal/planning/publication and other related practical skills. Students of
all ages (from high school to graduate school) will be offered a diverse
educational experience in the forefront of experimental research.