* 0847195
* CAREER: Controlling Coherence and Correlations in Solid-state Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Gurudev Dutt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Advances in material fabrication and nanotechnology have
pushed modern electronic and optical devices to regimes where quantum properties
of matter become important. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award
supports a combined research and education program that will explore methods to
control quantum systems as well as a property known as the quantum mechanical
phase of the system in complex environments created from diamond-based materials
and nanostructures. These materials have exceptional mechanical, electronic,
optical and magnetic properties with the potential to significantly impact next
generation technologies. The quantum mechanical phase also offers a new means to
significantly augment our ability to process and store information. In this
research program, we will explore such applications by manipulating magnetic
properties (known as spin) of electrons and nuclei in these novel materials.
Educational and outreach activities are seamlessly integrated into the research
and aimed at improving the teaching of science at all levels. Graduate students
associated with this CAREER project will be trained in advanced experimental
techniques used in modern physics laboratories to study the quantum properties
of these systems. Undergraduate physics majors at the University of Pittsburgh
will participate in the research activities of the lab via the REU program. To
motivate the next generation of scientists and incorporate modern principles of
active learning, computer simulations and learning games explaining important
physics topics and current research will be developed and made freely available
to students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award funds a combined research and education
program that will explore methods to control quantum coherence and entanglement
of quantum systems in complex environments. The research program will study the
fundamental properties of quantum entanglement using electron and nuclear spins
in diamond-based materials and nanostructures. These materials have exceptional
mechanical, electronic, optical and magnetic properties with the potential to
significantly impact next generation technologies. Quantum entanglement also
offers a new degree of freedom that can significantly augment our ability to
process and store information. A central question is how are quantum
entanglement and dynamics affected by the complex solid-state environment.
Optical and magnetic resonance spectroscopy tools will be applied along with
high spatial resolution techniques to generate, control and probe entanglement
and study this question. Educational and outreach activities are seamlessly
integrated into the research and aimed at improving the teaching of science at
all levels. Graduate students associated with this CAREER project will be
trained in advanced experimental techniques used in modern physics laboratories
to study the quantum properties of these systems. Undergraduate physics majors
at the University of Pittsburgh will participate in the research activities of
the lab via the REU program. To motivate the next generation of scientists and
incorporate modern principles of active learning, computer simulations and
learning games explaining important physics topics and current research will be
developed and made freely available to students and the general public.