* 0847159
* CAREER: Spin-Polarized Currents in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2016
* Yaroslaw Bazaliy, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 427,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is made in a partnership of the
Division of Materials Research with NSF EPSCoR. It supports theoretical research
and education to investigate spin-polarized currents in nanostructures with a
focus on the spin-transfer torque effects induced by high currents exceeding
those of present day studies. The spin-transfer torque phenomenon enables spin
manipulation by electric current. Nano-structures with a number of different
spin-current interaction mechanisms will be considered. The investigation
includes structures made of ferromagnets, non-magnetic metals, semiconductors,
and superconductors. In each case, extra-strong currents will be studied with
the goal of revealing new physics and uncovering unexpected technological
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;In this integrated research-teaching project, the PI
aims to:&lt;br/&gt;1.) Establish a strong theory program in spintronics at the
University of South Carolina with extensive training of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;2.) Dramatically improve its connection with
the leading research groups in the field in a transformative way by creating a
cyber-enabled environment tailored for remote collaborations in physics.
&lt;br/&gt;3.) Promote cyber-collaboration practices in the entire physics
community and perfect collaboration techniques for future transfer to other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;4.) Use the collaborative cyber-environment to create a
virtual organization dedicated to remote training and mentoring, with the aim of
drawing more people into teaching physics and creating new meaningful teacher-
student relationships by using the social network approach, and to link this
remote mentoring program with existing physics portals.&lt;br/&gt;5.) Provide
mentoring and an effective introduction to physics and mathematics for local
members of underrepresented minority students through a joint educational
program with Benedict College, a historically black
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports fundamental theoretical research and education to explore
new phenomena that may lead to new developments in information technology. This
award is made in partnership with the Division of Materials Research and NSF
EPSCoR. &lt;br/&gt;An electron can be thought of as being a very tiny magnet.
The motion of tiny magnets or changing the direction in which they point can
lead to currents called spin currents. This research focuses on the manipulation
of the magnetic orientation of electrons in materials on the scale of
nanometers, for perspective a human hair is about 100,000 nanometers. The
interest of scientific and engineering community in spin currents and spin
manipulation stems from the continuing push to miniaturize electronic devices
which will soon be so small that quantum mechanics will be needed to understand
their fundamental operation. This opens new challenges and opportunities to
discover and exploit new phenomena to form the basis of new electronic device
technology. Manipulating electrons through its magnetic properties, or
spintronics, offers one such promising direction. &lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this award pursues one aspect of this approach by studying very
strong spin currents in nanometer scale materials with an aim to discover new
phenomena with potential application to future information technology.
&lt;br/&gt; The PI will also implement cyberinfrastructure for remote
collaboration and mentoring creating a virtual organization for remote training
of students. The PI aims to use the resulting educational network to open new
entry points into physical and mathematical sciences for underrepresented groups
and to provide a better recruiting base for American universities and industry.
This effort will be enhanced through a joint educational program with Benedict
College, a historically black college.