* 0847558
* CAREER: Controlling Mechanisms of Viral Self-Assembly and Stability
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Harry Bermudez, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847558 PI: Bermudez, Harry ORG:
Massachusetts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Controlling Mechanisms of
Viral Self-Assembly and Stability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Viruses find numerous uses as
tunable colloids and nanoscale scaffolds in materials science, where their
potent ability to interact with living cells is an attractive property.
Engineering these particles for biomaterials applications thus presents a
nanoscale construction problem. Unfortunately, viruses are inherently
metastable, because while they persist extracellularly, they disassemble upon
interacting with their host. The underpinnings of this metastability remain
unclear, but one intriguing possibility is that the capsid acts as a
conformational switch, triggered by changes in local conditions. The overall
objective of this proposal is to employ viruses as model systems to explore
mechanisms of nanoscale assembly. Capsid proteins and nucleic acids will be
modified to display fluorescent labels, and secondary structures will be
perturbed via mutagenesis and incorporation of non-native amino acids. Together
with environmental conditions (e.g., vesicle encapsulation, solution
conditions), the PI will follow and potentially control assembly of viral
particles, which in turn ultimately determines particle stability. For example,
the relative energies of assembly intermediates can lead to kinetic traps that
arrest assembly or create barriers to disassembly. The knowledge gained of viral
assembly will lead to biomimetic strategies for novel self-assemblies, to be
initially tested with DNA. Quantitative determination of the kinetics of
assembly, achieved through sensitive techniques such as fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy and fluorescence resonance energy transfer, is an important
component of this proposal. Suboptical microscopies, AFM and TEM, will also be
used to confirm and directly visualize final
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The PI recognizes outreach
efforts as long-term investments to maintain global competitiveness, and plans
to integrate them into the research program via three thrusts: (i) mentoring and
outreach to members of under-represented groups, (ii) development of an
interdisciplinary graduate course, and (iii) promotion of adult scientific
literacy. The first effort is in collaboration with the American Chemical
Society?s (ACS) Scholars program, where ACS Scholars will be mentored and hosted
in the PI's laboratory for 8 ? 10 weeks each summer. The second component will
foster research at the boundary of physical and life sciences, through a new
university course entitled ?From Biopolymers to Biological Colloids,? covering
aspects of these materials found both inside and outside the cell. Finally, to
increase adult scientific literacy, the PI has partnered with the Science,
Technology, and Society Initiative (STS) at the University of Massachusetts and
their outreach to the greater public. In all cases, familiar examples of
biologically-relevant self-assembly, such as emulsion droplets, lipid membranes,
and virus particles will provide an accessible link to understanding
nanotechnology in its various forms. Finally, the proposed research is highly
interdisciplinary, giving a broad exposure and training to graduate and
undergraduate students alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;