* 0847055
* CAREER:  Particle Finite Element Response Sensitivity Analysis of Fluid-Structure Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Michael Scott, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

This award is funded under the American recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to develop analytic sensitivity
methods for numerical simulations of fluid-structure interaction. The
sensitivity methods can be employed in the design and assessment of coastal
structures. It is also need in reliability and optimization applications for
performance-based engineering. The research approach is based on direct
differentiation of the equations that govern the particle finite element method,
followed by numerical verification and experimental validation at the tsunami
wave basin in the O.H. Hinsdale Wave Research Laboratory at Oregon State
University. Deliverables include modeling, analysis, and visualization tools for
the sensitivity of fluid-structure interaction to uncertain fluid and structural
parameters; high performance computing methods for fluid-structure interaction
sensitivity; publication of research results for wider dissemination to other
researchers and practitioners; and documentation of the approach for application
by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research, if successful,
will provide further insight in to how coastal structures respond to loads
generated by tsunami runup and hurricane storm surge, potentially leading to
improved design codes. The development of modeling and analysis tools in the
open source software framework, OpenSees, will make the results of this project
readily available to other researchers involved in fluid-structure interaction
studies. Graduate students will benefit from this project by way of classroom
instruction in fluid-structure interaction sensitivity and active participation
in the research. The project will expose undergraduate engineering students to
computing and visualization early in their academic career and an
interdisciplinary senior capstone course will be developed in order to make
civil engineering students cognizant of software engineering in professional
practice. The outreach and ambassador components of the project aim to attract
high school students interested in computing to pursue a degree in civil
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;