* 0847469
* CAREER:  Exploring exotic matter through the quantum manipulation of dipolar atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Benjamin Lev, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Houghton Pratt
* 10/31/2012
* USD 490,000.00

This CAREER award supports an experimental program to create and study exotic
forms of matter by developing the enabling technology for the quantum
manipulation of dipolar atoms. Ultracold gases of highly magnetic atoms, such as
dysprosium, offer opportunities to explore strongly correlated matter in the
presence of long-range interactions in a manner difficult to achieve in other
experimental settings. Techniques will be developed to perform the first laser
cooling and trapping---and subsequent confinement in optical lattices---of
dysprosium. This achievement will lead to the investigation of exotic states of
matter that, in several cases, underlie proposed descriptions of poorly
understood, though technologically relevant, condensed matter materials that do
not obey standard Fermi liquid theory. Specifically, investigation of the ground
states of quantum liquid crystals using fermionic Dy, as well as explorations of
the inhomogeneous phases predicted by the extended Bose-Hubbard (EBH) model,
will be possible through the cooling of Dy to degeneracy. Looking beyond quantum
liquid crystal and EBH physics, developing ultracold Dy technology will lead to
the exploitation of both Dy's telecom qubit transition and Dy's colossal
magnetic moment for the realization of telecom-band quantum information
processing and the development of ultra-high sensitivity, high-resolution atom
chip microscopy of exotic condensed matter systems.

Complementing the research program is a plan to teach physics through everyday
technology: Combining the theme of GPS technology with the technical expertise
drawn from this research program, core physics principles will be taught to
undergraduate physics majors and high school "teacher leaders" through the
development of a laboratory module on atomic clocks. This module will serve
three educational missions: contributing to the improvement of K-12 student
achievement in science by training high school teacher leaders via the EnLiST
NSF Math and Science Partnership (MSP) program at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign; augmenting the PHYS 403 Modern Experimental Physics lab that
introduces upper-level undergraduate physics majors to skills and topics
required for cutting-edge careers in science and technology; and providing
hands-on laboratory experience for participants in a Master's Science Teaching
Program, an upcoming accreditation program for Illinois teachers provided by the
Department of Physics.