* 0847523
* CAREER: Antimony-Based Nanowires and Nanowire Heterostructures: Synthesis and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Chen Yang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2014
* USD 422,522.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Technical: This CAREER project includes integrated research
and education activities. Group III-V antimony based semiconductors exhibit the
smallest band gaps and highest electron mobilities of any known semiconductors
yet their device exploration is limited. This is mainly due to the difficulties
in growing antimony-based materials with high quality and the lack of a lattice-
matched, semi-insulating substrate. Nanowire growth has the potential to
overcome these difficulties. The objective of this research project is to
synthesize antimony-based nanowires and nanowire heterostructures with high
quality and novel electronic and opto-electronic properties. The project
consists of the following research activities: investigation of the growth
methods to synthesize undoped and doped nanowires; development of successful
strategies to grow coaxial and axial nanowire heterostructures; demonstration of
different types of nanowire heterostructures; characterization of nanowires and
nanowire heterostructures using electron microscopy, optical, electrical, and
optoelectronic measurements; evaluation of their potentials for nano-electronics
and nano-photonics applications through device fabrications and performance
investigations. Success of the research is expected to contribute to the
development of a universal approach to grow nanostructures based on group III-
antimony material system in a controlled and sophisticated manner as well as
detailed understanding on properties, especially electronic properties, of group
III-antimony nanowires. Non-technical: The project addresses basic
electronic/photonic materials research issues in a topical area of materials
science with high technological relevance. The success of the research
activities will enable development of devices that will impact important
technical areas such as light emission and detection, telecommunications,
computing, and sensors. The project includes an integrated education and
outreach program that aims at addressing critical challenges in current
nanoscience education for audience ranging from graduate students to K-12. This
includes 1) the development of a new interdisciplinary course on "Physics and
Chemistry of Nanometerials" at Purdue University, 2) the integration of
undergraduate students into nano-related research programs by participation in
the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program, 3) a National
Center for Learning and Teaching of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Workshop for
7-16 teachers, 4) the development of new demonstration modules for an existing
nano-museum and the dissemination of results through various web-based tools as
the nano-HUB, and 5) an effort on mentoring underrepresented student group
through Women in Science.