* 0847638
* CAREER: Table-top High Energy Physics in Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Yong Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Award supports a project to investigate novel quantum physics, inspired by high
energy nuclear and particle physics, in graphene (a nanomaterial). Graphene is
the building block of many carbon materials such as graphite and carbon
nanotubes. Electrons in graphene can mimic relativistic particles (so called
?chiral Dirac fermions?) studied in high energy physics and described by quantum
electrodynamics (QED) or quantum chromodynamics (QCD). This project will
investigate the behavior of such chiral Dirac electrons in graphene
nanostructures under various physical conditions. One focus will be a study of
how these electrons may interact with impurities and with each other to generate
novel quantum states of matter. This research has the potential to uncover new
condensed matter physics and new methods of manipulating electrons in graphene,
a material with exceptional properties that may allow the continued scaling of
nanoelectronics to support future computing technology. Such studies may also
provide cross-disciplinary insights to some fundamental phenomena that are
difficult to observe in accelerator-based high energy physics experiments.
Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this cutting edge
research in an exciting multi-disciplinary environment learning forefront
physics, material sciences and nanotechnology. Strategic collaborations will be
formed with national laboratories, to attack interdisciplinary problems and to
enrich the educational experiences of the students involved. The educational
component also features specially designed outreach activities on nanoscience
directed toward exposing high school science teachers thereby impacting a broad
and diverse base of high school students.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This CAREER Award supports a project to study novel
relativistic-like quantum phenomena in nanostructures based on the material of
graphene. Intellectual connections with high energy nuclear and particle physics
will be explored, based on the fact that electrons in graphene can behave as
chiral Dirac fermions and may display analogous physics as those studied in
quantum electrodynamics (QED) or quantum chromodynamics (QCD). One focus of the
project is to study how such chiral Dirac electrons may interact with impurities
and with each other to generate novel quantum states of matter. This research
may uncover new physics of condensed matter systems of chiral Dirac electrons,
and lead to new methods of manipulating electrons in graphene with potential
applications in nanoelectronic devices. This cross-disciplinary research may
also provide insights to some fundamental problems that are difficult to study
directly in accelerator-based high energy physics experiments, such as
electrical breakdown of QED vacuum and chiral symmetry breaking and mass
generation in QCD. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this
cutting edge research in an exciting multi-disciplinary environment learning
forefront physics, material sciences and nanotechnology. Strategic
collaborations are formed with national laboratories, to attack
interdisciplinary problems and to enrich the educational experiences of the
students involved. The educational component features specially designed
outreach activities on nanoscience directed toward high school science teachers
thereby impacting a broad and diverse base of high school students.