* 0847842
* Mock theta functions and applications in combinatorics, algebraic geometry, and mathematical physics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Olav Richter, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2010
* USD 45,000.00

This grant supports the conference ``Mock theta functions and applications in
combinatorics, algebraic geometry, and mathematical physics", which will take
place May 25--29, 2009, at the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in Bonn
(Germany). Grant funds will be used to enable US-based researchers to
participate in this international meeting. The meeting will advance the theory
and applications of mock theta functions by bringing together world class
researchers with expertise not only in mock theta functions themselves, but also
in the diverse areas that impact this very active field. Mock theta functions
have recently become a particularly active area of research in mathematics.
These functions were introduced by Ramanujan in his last letter to Hardy in
1920, but for a long time, little was known about these functions. In 2002,
Zweger's PhD thesis provided an important link between mock theta functions and
harmonic Maass forms. This breakthrough in the subject opened the door to a rich
area of research. Since then, applications of mock theta functions to various
mathematical fields and topics in physics have led to solutions of major open
problems. Despite its recent rapid development, there are still many open
problems and further applications (in different areas of mathematics and
physics) needing investigation.

The conference will not only advance our understanding of mock theta functions,
but also provide an important and timely opportunity for participants to start
new collaborations and strengthen existing collaborations. International
connections between senior researchers indirectly benefit students and post-
docs, who may later visit institutions abroad to give talks, study, or hold
visiting positions. Junior participants will be able to start new projects with
international experts at a critical stage in their careers.