* 0847688
* CAREER: Implementing Inquiry-Based Approaches in Geoscience Education and Research
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Michael Brudzinski, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2014
* USD 515,952.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

One of the most important issues in the geosciences is the growing disparity
between the workforce needs and our ability to produce well trained students.
This project is examining whether inquiry-based approaches to education and
research can aid us in this challenge. This examination builds on an internally
funded course revision project at Miami University that is converting an
introductory geology courses from lecture-based to inquiry-based. The inquiry-
based approach is also a natural one to investigate an exciting new observation
that faults on the edges of tectonic plates produce episodic tremor and slip
(ETS) that represents a previously unrecognized type of deformation that occurs
on time scales in between impulsive damaging earthquakes and slow geologic
creeping. In response to these recent developments, this project has the
following integrated research and teaching initiatives: - expand the inquiry-
based learning approach to other courses by 1) developing a new workshop to
train high school instructors how to use an inquiry-based approach in an
advanced placement environmental science class and by 2) constructing a new
second-course at the college level that focuses on how physical processes
associated with plate tectonics relate to geologic hazards. These efforts are
critical to ensure that students are practicing the scientific method not just
memorizing the outcomes. - expand the investigations of ETS behavior by 1)
searching for ETS in a global context using newly developed detection algorithms
and by 2) investigating the spatial and temporal relationships between tremor,
slow slip, earthquakes, and geologic structures through longer-term recording of
ETS signals at fortified temporary networks. These efforts are critical for
better understanding the physics of how faults move and generate hazards. -
expand the student research experience by 1) offering undergraduate research to
a larger set of students including an investigation into what makes a successful
research project and by 2) experimenting with online research discussion both in
classes and with collaborating research groups. These efforts are helping to
identify key areas for improvement in the integration of teaching and research.
The integrated teaching and research plan of this project is designed to achieve
3 broader impact outcomes that address the key issue of preparing a
scientifically trained workforce: - encourage students to consider a scientific
career by exposing them earlier to scientific experiences that have intrinsic
motivation (i.e., AP credit or personal interest in hazards) - retain science
majors and graduate students by having them work on newly developed areas of
research (i.e., ETS) that address problems of high societal importance (i.e.,
what causes earthquakes) - improve students' scientific training through more
regular use of the scientific method. To determine whether the teaching and
research initiatives are leading to the desired broader impact outcomes, this
project is utilizing and developing an extensive set of assessment tools with
help from the Assessment Office at Miami University. The results of these
assessments as well as the tools developed to achieve the outcomes are being
made publically available, and the teaching and research findings are being
prepared for both international teaching and research conferences and in peer-
reviewed journals. The integrated initiatives are specifically designed to
maximize the number of students who can be impacted by this work, such that 10s
of students per year are being guided to function as scientists, instead of just
learning about scientific results.