* 0847076
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Integration of Nano-Engineered Materials for High Performance, Flexible Sensor Tapes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Ali Javey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2014
* USD 450,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop a versatile strategy for the large-scale fabrication of high
performance transistors and sensors on flexible plastics by utilizing nano-
engineered materials. Specifically, the roll printing technology, recently
developed by the PI?s group, will be used for the controlled assembly of
semiconductor nanowire arrays on substrates to serve as the building blocks for
the proposed device structures. The printing/transfer mechanism and the
underlying nanoscale binding interactions will be explored, and complementary
surface chemical functionalization will be utilized to further improve the
printing outcome. Additionally, the performance limits of nanowire transistors
on plastics will be explored. Finally, nanowire transistors and sensors will be
integrated for signal detection and analysis, therefore, paving the way for the
development of a printable sensor tape technology. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
may have important implications in the development of a wide range of cost-
effective, sensor tapes for health and environmental monitoring. This project
will involve the training of one graduate, one undergraduate, and one high
school student. The project will be show cased on the ?Cal Day?, during which
students from the local schools will be invited to tour the PI?s lab. The nature
of this work is highly interdisciplinary, involving the design of the molecular-
scale chemical interactions as well as device innovation. In conjunction with
the proposed research, the PI will develop a new course on ?Chemistry and
Materials Science for Electrical Engineers?, focusing on the application of
chemical and materials processes for engineering problems.