* 0847358
* CAREER: Synthesis and Study of Organic Silanols for Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Annaliese Franz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project will design and develop new catalysts for
asymmetric synthesis based on the hydrogen-bonding capabilities of silanols.
While silicon is the second most abundant element on earth, present in various
forms of inorganic silicates, the synthesis of chiral silanols is under-
developed and the properties of organic silanols have never been examined for
hydrogen-bonding catalysis. The development of metal-free catalysts is important
because they tend to be non-toxic, cheap, moisture- and air-stable, simple to
use, and capable of catalyzing a broad range of organic reactions. New chiral
organic silanols will be synthesized and examined for the stereoselective
formation of C-C bonds. Structural and computational studies will be performed
to elucidate the mechanism of activation and asymmetric induction. Mechanistic
studies will contribute to fundamental insight into hydrogen-bonding structure
and function, and provide opportunities for hypothesis driven catalyst design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program is supporting the research of Professor Annaliese K. Franz of the
Department of Chemistry at University of California, Davis. Professor Franz's
research efforts revolve around the development of new silicon-based chiral
materials and catalysts. Such chemistry will contribute to environmentally
benign methods for chemical synthesis by developing metal-free catalysts that
miniÂ¬mize the use of reagents and organic solvents, increase efficiency, and
approach 100% selectivity. Successful development of new catalysts will have an
impact on the synthesis of chiral organic molecules in the pharmaceutical and
agricultural industries. The proposed research program also integrates research
training with science communication training and outreach to improve
communication with the media, policymakers and the public that will increase
awareness of how research is performed, ensure sound public policy, and inspire
future scientists.