* 0847652
* CAREER:  Broadband Microwave and THz Investigations of Correlated Electron and Nanostructure Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Norman Armitage, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 02/28/2014
* USD 525,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

The response of condensed matter to electromagnetic radiation is a fundamental
probe of its electronic structure. Correlated systems and their nanostructures
like quantum magnets, high-Tc superconductors, 2D electron gasses, graphene and
others exhibit a multitude of novel properties as a result of strong electron-
electron interactions, reduced dimensionality, and interfacial effects.
Unfortunately, many of their natural time scales lie in the GHz and THz region
of the electromagnetic spectrum that has been difficult to access in a broadband
manner. The upper part of this range has even become known as the `Terahertz
Gap', which is a range of frequencies (roughly 0.05 to 10 THz) and energy scales
above what is easily accessible with radio-frequency and microwave electronics,
but below that accessible easily with conventional optics. Recently, however,
there have been a series of dramatic breakthroughs in broadband microwave GHz
range and time-domain THz spectroscopy that allow measurements which were simply
not possible previously. This proposal for research at The Johns Hopkins
University is aimed at the exploitation of these recent dramatic advances in GHz
and THz range spectroscopic techniques for the investigation of exotic
electronic states of matter at low temperatures. The systems to be investigated
include novel dielectrics, electronic glasses, nanostructures such as
interfacial metal heterostructures and graphene, and materials in proximity to
quantum (T=0) phase transitions. These systems are of central importance for
intellectual issues at the forefront of condensed matter physics and their
exploration in the GHz and THz spectral range offers great scientific
opportunity. The proposed work is of particular educational value to students
owing to the material science and low frequency electrodynamics techniques that
will be employed and which are finding broad application in research and private
industry. In this regards, specific teaching laboratories will be developed.
Public outreach activities in the form of the Johns Hopkins Physics Fair will
also be realized.

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: It is hardly an exaggeration that most of what we know
about physical systems comes from their response to perturbations at their
characteristic frequencies. For instance, the fundamental tone of a plucked
violin string depends on the length of the string, the tension in it, and its
thickness. This is true from the acoustics of a violin to the energies of atoms.
Unfortunately the natural frequency scales of many solid materials fall in a
range which has been prohibitively difficult to access technically until
recently. This project takes advantage of recent dramatic technical advances in
THz and microwave spectroscopy to characterize the natural frequency scales of
solids. Material systems like superconductors, which can conduct electricity
without resistance and various magnetic states will be studied. The
investigations performed herein will give absolutely essential information to
develop new materials with important technological implications. These
technological developments are coupled to a broad initiative in education and
outreach. The proposed work is of particular educational value to students owing
to the material science and low frequency electrodynamics techniques that will
be employed and which are finding broad application in research and private
industry. Specific teaching laboratories will be developed. Public outreach
activities in the form of the Johns Hopkins Physics Fair will also be realized.

