* 0847978
* New Facilities for Housing and Curation of Seed Bank of Rare and Endangered Plants of the Northeastern United States
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* William Brumback, Native Plant Trust, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2011
* USD 50,197.00

A National Science Foundation grant has been awarded to New England Wild Flower
Society, the nation's oldest plant conservation organization, to improve its
Seed Bank of rare and endangered plants of the Northeastern US. The Seed Bank is
a critical conservation resource that has been used to replace lost and
declining populations of federally endangered and regionally rare plant species.
The collection of live seeds will be moved to a newly built LEED-certified
facility and the Seed Bank's infrastructure upgraded to meet current curatorial
standards. This includes improved processing, storage, and testing equipment
that will permit the collection to grow beyond its current capacity, and to
better serve the plant conservation community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seed banks
for wild plant species are a last line of defense against extinction or
extirpation due to climate and land-use changes. Because seeds of many plants
may be kept viable indefinitely under optimum conditions, at low cost, and
retrieved for propagation and reintroduction on demand, seed banks are among the
most effective and economical conservation tools. New England Wild Flower
Society's Seed Bank of rare and endangered plants of the Northeastern US,
established in 1980, has been operative in restoring populations of federally
endangered species. The proposed upgrades and expansion will enhance applied
conservation efforts and promote research on rare plants.&lt;br/&gt;