* 0847905
* Renovation of the Ichthyology Collection and Associated Facilities at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Tracey Sutton, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 09/30/2013
* USD 311,993.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through its 56-year history, the
Ichthyology Collection (at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS) has
grown from an un-cataloged teaching collection to become one of the largest
repositories for freshwater, Chesapeake Bay, coastal, and deep-sea fishes in
Virginia (http://web.vims.edu/ich_coll.html?svr=www). Co-PIs Hilton and Sutton
have outlined a series of renovations aimed at safeguarding the specimens
contained in the collection and making them more accessible to the scientific
community. The planned physical renovations of collection space, including
construction of a mezzanine and upgrading collections-related equipment, will
improve the efficiency of the collection and will permit significant expansion
space for the collections. Upgrading to a digital x-ray system will increase the
availability of specimens to colleagues throughout the world. The development of
a frozen tissue facility will ensure the long-term viability of the growing VIMS
tissue collection. These renovations will increase the use of the collection by
VIMS researchers, outside researchers, and in public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an institution, VIMS has a unique three-
partite mission, which includes research, education, and advisory service, and
the Ichthyology Collection is an integral part of this mission, serving a broad
community of basic and applied research scientists and fisheries managers. With
funds from this proposal, Hilton and Sutton will train a graduate student in
collections management, and will oversee other students and public volunteers
working in the collection. Over 600 members of the public visit the VIMS
Ichthyology Collection each year, and Hilton and Sutton have outlined plans for
the renovation of the popular VIMS coelacanth display, which will include make
it more accessible and attractive. As part of this display, the VIMS Ichthyology
Collection generally will also be highlighted in order to introduce visitors to
the important role that natural history collections and specimen-based research
play in the mission of institutions such as VIMS.&lt;br/&gt;