* 0847693
* CAREER: Understanding Nanoscale Deformation by Characterizing the Mechanical Behavior of Nanoporous Noble Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2014
* Thomas Balk, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 11/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL: Nanoporous metals with nanoscale ligaments offer a unique opportunity
to explore the deformation behavior of highly confined metallic volumes and
understand the mechanisms that govern mechanical behavior at the nm length
scale. A persistent problem exists in studies of nanocrystalline metals, thin
films and nanostructured materials: what role do dislocations and other defects
play in nanoscale deformation? It is understood that constraints on dislocation
nucleation and motion arise as the available deformation volume decreases, but
it is unclear whether dislocations are able to mediate plasticity in metal
volumes that are several to tens of nm in size. Even if dislocations are
involved in the deformation process, their behavior is likely to be heavily
influenced by the presence of free surfaces and interfaces. Additional
mechanisms such as diffusion may also occur. In order to correctly interpret and
model the deformation behavior of nanocrystalline metals, we must understand the
actual mechanisms that dominate deformation. The objectives of this CAREER
research plan are to: (1) investigate nanoscale deformation behavior in
nanoporous gold, palladium and iridium, using in situ transmission electron
microscopy; (2) systematically study the mechanical properties of thin film and
bulk nanoporous noble metals, and determine the appropriate scaling laws that
describe these properties; (3) evaluate the damping behavior of nanoporous
metals, which are expected to exhibit significantly higher damping and
anelasticity versus dense or Ã¬m-scale porous metals. The intellectual merit of
this project lies in its aim to uncover the fundamental mechanisms governing the
mechanical behavior of nanoporous structures. The results from this project,
which will focus on face-centered cubic noble metals, should be applicable to
other nanoporous metals and relevant to the study of nanoscale materials
subjected to deformation. NON-TECHNICAL: This study has a strong fundamental
scientific basis, but will also benefit the application of nanoporous metals by
enabling improvements in their mechanical stability. Additionally, by attaining
a better understanding of the mechanical behavior of nanoporous structures,
fellow scientists will be able to predict and tailor properties for a given
application. The broader impact of this research will enhance the undergraduate
education experience for materials engineers at the University of Kentucky, by
providing them with a unique opportunity to study abroad and perform research in
a world-leading materials laboratory in Germany. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be directly involved in this research. The engineering student
exchange program between Kentucky and Karlsruhe is a continuing focus of the PI,
who will recruit UK undergraduate students to work with graduate students and
with visiting German students in his laboratory. This experience will provide UK
undergraduates with international exposure and help them learn how to live and
work in a global society. The results of this project will be presented at
conferences and disseminated in the scientific literature, with joint authorship
by each team of student researchers.