* 0847547
* The Complexity of Noise: A Philosophical Outlook on Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Amit Hagar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2010
* USD 143,990.00

This project on quantum computation is supported by NSF's Science, Technology,
and Society program. It is also fund by the joint initiative with Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate: Research at the Interface of the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences and Society. In quantum computation, algorithms exist that
can solve problems more efficiently than any known classical algorithms. While
the laws of quantum mechanics are error-free, computers (physical objects that
are subject to the laws of physics) are subject to imprecision that can cause a
mismatch between what they are supposed to do and what they actually do. The
elimination of such errors has become a predominant goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
worldwide quest for the realization of a large scale computationally superior
quantum computer that is fault-tolerant is currently taking place. Optimists
suppose that under a certain threshold of errors, an arbitrary long fault-
tolerant quantum computation can be achieved with only moderate overhead in
computational cost. Pessimists object that there are fundamental (as opposed to
merely technological) reasons why large scale quantum computers will never be
computationally superior to classical ones no matter what innovations are
introduced. Since a complete characterization of actual errors is itself an
intractable task, arguments for and against the feasibility of such machines
invite philosophical scrutiny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to gain
further insights for the debate by reformulating the problem within statistical
mechanics. The reformulation is suggested by many similarities that exist
between the foundations of statistical mechanics (particularly the debate on the
origins of thermodynamic irreversibility) and the foundations of quantum
mechanics (and the analogous debate on its universal applicability). On this
view, rather than an active attempt to shield the quantum computer from external
noise, fault-tolerant quantum computing should be portrayed as a passive attempt
to prepare computationally superior quantum states that are noise-resilient.
Skepticism about the feasibility of a large scale computationally superior
quantum computer could then be vindicated by demonstrating how to connect the
putative scarcity of such computational superior noise-resilient states with the
computational cost involved in locating them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
pedagogical component of this project aims to expose humanities students to the
exciting transition in the meaning of notions such as "computation" and
"complexity," which have left their cradle, mathematical logic, and have
migrated into physics with the advancement of technology. The goal of this
component is achieved by devising a new upper-level undergraduate course in the
humanities and a corresponding compendium (that will be placed online) in which
the historical and the philosophical foundations of this transition are
discussed.