* 0847030
* CAREER: Multi-functional Materials for Electrochemical Energy Conversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Vijay Ramani, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 419,500.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to study the process driven evolution of microstructure and properties in
mixed-conducting multi-functional materials for electrochemical energy
conversion applications. The project is divided into three tasks. In task one,
the effect of sequential introduction of proton conductivity, electron
conductivity, and electrocatalytic activity onto a silica substrate on resultant
microstructure and properties will be studied. In task two, the influence of
potential cycling and exposure to strong oxidizing and reducing conditions on
microstructure and properties will be examined through accelerated tests
designed in close collaboration with industry. The final task will involve in-
situ investigation of kinetic and transport properties in fuel cell electrodes
prepared using optimized multi-functional materials. Material microstructure
will be characterized by XRD, TEM, FTIR and nitrogen physisorption. Kinetic and
transport properties will be measured using conductivity and diffusion cells,
while electrochemical properties will be estimated using voltammetry and
polarization experiments.

This research will enhance our understanding of processing-microstructure-
property relationships in porous, multi-functional materials and facilitate
transformative changes in fuel cell electrocatalyst/electrode composition and
microstructure, leading to lower support corrosion, higher catalyst utilization,
improved kinetic and transport properties, and lower cost. The insights gained
during this study will establish a pathway for future research on the
manufacture of high performance multi-functional materials for electrolyzers,
unitized regenerative fuel cells, electrochemical hydrogen pumps, and
intermediate temperature ceramic fuel cells. The education and outreach
activities planned in this CAREER project will enhance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching and learning through course and
nationwide workshop offerings. Participation and training of underrepresented
groups will be facilitated by actively involving inner-city school students in
research and outreach activities. Finally, significant societal benefits through
the training of the next generation of scientists and engineers in relevant
alternate energy technologies are anticipated.