* 0847853
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Crafting Life: A Sensory Ethnography of Constructive Biologies
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Stefan Helmreich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,929.00

This dissertation research, supported by the Science, Technology & Society
Program and the Biology directorate at NSF under the Biology & Society
initiative, coordinates three case studies to examine how a growing number of
people utilize biological practice. The cases examine sensory engagements with
biological materials in particular, to critically intervene into articulations
of knowledge and power governing contemporary experimental biosciences. At the
disciplinary margins of what properly counts as "biology," synthetic biologists,
molecular gastronomists, and women crocheting coral reefs are all deploying
diverse craft practices, here termed "constructive biologies," as tactics with
which to critique the economy and governance of the biosciences. Synthetic
biologists aim to fabricate standardized biological systems from scratch, and to
make freely available the parts from which these organisms are synthesized to
both bioengineers and non-professionals alike. So too, molecular gastronomy is
engaged in the standardization of biological substance, but as a means of taking
the traditionally artisanal practice of cooking and transforming it into a
scientific endeavor. Hyperbolic crochet undertakes "an experiment in practical
evolution" in the crocheted coral reef, which thousands of women create to draw
attention to the effects of climate change on coral reefs. By juxtaposing these
three field sites, this project aims to understand how disparate sensibilities
become built into fabrications, and to explore whether such practices represent
larger changes afoot in the biosciences. Weaving together the warp of synthetic
biology, molecular gastronomy, and hyperbolic crochet with the weft of three
topics fundamental to science studies: 1) scientific attribution, credit, and
property, 2) tacit knowledge, and 3) standardization and artisanship, the
intellectual contribution of this project will be demonstration of how craft
goes beyond service to other forms of biological knowledge toward mediating an
embodied, sensory appreciation of living systems. This claim will be advanced by
ethnographic research examining constructive biologies that are refiguring
living substance, and thus remaking the definition of "life itself."