* 0847077
* CAREER: Parsimonious Modeling via Matrix Minimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Maryam Fazel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 406,000.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In many engineering applications,
notions of complexity, order or dimension of a model can be expressed by the
rank of a matrix, while prior information and model accuracy often correspond to
convex constraints on this matrix. Parsimonious Modeling involves the
computational problem of minimizing matrix rank subject to convex constraints.
Examples include problems in system identification, model reduction, and
Euclidean embedding, arising in control, signal processing, and machine
learning. The rank minimization problem is known to be computationally
intractable in general. The work is inspired by the recently developed framework
of compressed sensing for sparse signals. A preliminary work by the PI and her
collaborators, points to a rich generalization of this theory from sparse
vectors to low-rank matrices, showing that some classes of this hard problem can
be solved efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds on
advances in compressed sensing and its underlying math, as well as convex
optimization. The program has three thrusts: (1) theoretical characterization of
classes of rank minimization problems that can be solved efficiently, (2)
development of efficient semidefinite programming algorithms for this problem,
(3) a focus on applications of rank minimization (e.g., in system
identification). This program combines practical impact with conceptual depth,
unifying existing notions of parsimony (such as vector sparsity and matrix rank)
as well as the computational methods to address
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
will leverage extensive collaborations between pure mathematicians and
engineers, and should motivate research in mathematics in areas not
traditionally considered ?applied". Results and computational tools developed
can be used by researchers in various application fields. Research from this
project will be integrated with the PI's past work into a new project-driven
graduate course at UW. Students at all levels will be engaged. A workshop and a
mathematical problem solving competition is planned as part of UW's BRIDGE
program for incoming women and minority freshman.&lt;br/&gt;