* 0847375
* CAREER: Switched-angle Spinning NMR for Investigation of Membrane Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Rachel Martin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2015
* USD 635,000.00

In this award, Dr. Martin from the University of California at Irvine, will
develop a new switched-angle NMR probe and methodology for studying the
structure of membrane proteins in their native environment. The PI picked
matrilysin as the initial target membrane protein, which cleaves other proteins
from the cell surface. The educational plan comprises several components,
including efforts in establishing awareness of global issues for international
students, and outreach to high school students in grades 9-12 in the framework
of UCI's SPIRIT program. The goals are to increase interest in science by
hosting students in Dr. Martin's lab, and have them actively engage in
experimental work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane proteins are substances that
adhere to the outside of a cell. They have many different functions such as
transport of chemicals into and out of the cell or in helping the cell
communicate with other systems in the body. Due to their multi-functionality,
these proteins are involved in many diseases. Matrilysin, for example, the
protein to be studied by Dr. Martin at University of California, Irvine,
exacerbates cancer by cleaving proteins from the tumor cell surface, thus
preventing the immune system to recognize these cells as cancerous. In order to
understand the function of membrane proteins and find cures for diseases, the
structure of the protein in its native environment, that is, attached to a cell
surface, must be known. Dr. Martin will develop sophisticated experimental tools
that will help in elucidating such structures. Dr. Martin's work comprises
elements of chemistry, biology, and physics. She plans to engage students from
the high school to the postdoctoral level in her work, and train them in
thinking and problem solving across disciplinary boundaries. Dr. Martin is
committed to training a diverse and international workforce in issues ranging
from scientific literacy to science policy through participation in existing
programs at UC Irvine.