* 0847849
* On Evaluative Readiness for Goal Pursuit: Testing Theoretical and Practical Questions of Breadth, Mechanism, and Causal Impact on Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Melissa Ferguson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 03/31/2012
* USD 75,000.00

One of the oldest mysteries of human behavior concerns when and why people are
able to stick successfully to their most important goals. For example, what
distinguishes the person who is able to give up smoking, or refrain from
overeating, or stay in school from someone is unable to do so? This research
project, which includes 3 experiments, focuses specifically on the role of non-
conscious mental processes in successful self-control behavior. The first
experiment examines when a goal (e.g., staying healthy and thin) might increase
people's negative evaluations of activities or behaviors that would compromise
the goal (e.g., fatty and unhealthy foods). The second experiment focuses on how
a goal leads to such changes in people's evaluations of stimuli that might
influence the pursuit of the goal. The third experiment examines whether it is
possible to experimentally alter people's non-conscious mental processes in
order to improve their ability to stick to the goals they identify as most
important to them. A fundamental strength of this proposal is that it examines
the role of non-conscious mental processes in successful self-control. By
addressing key questions about how and when goals change people's evaluations of
the stimuli around them, this work has the potential to significantly transform
the field's understanding of effective self-control. In addition, findings from
this research are likely to inform the development of new interventions and
therapies for improving people's self-control.