* 0847222
* CAREER: Oxidative Cross-Coupling--An Efficient and Green Method for Synthesizing Biaryls
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Brenton DeBoef, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2015
* USD 550,000.00

This project will develop new oxidative cross coupling reactions for the
synthesis of biaryl molecules and will test a mechanistic hypothesis for this
novel process. The primary goal of the work is the development of a model that
explains the observed phenomena and can be used to predict the ideal reaction
conditions for a given aryl substrate. Systematic competition and kinetic
studies will be used to probe the reaction mechanism, and the information
gleaned from these experiments will be used to develop new oxidative coupling
reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Brenton DeBoef of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Rhode Island. Professor DeBoef's
research efforts are focused on the invention of new chemical reactions that
cleave strong carbon-hydrogen bonds and form new carbon-carbon bonds in a single
step. These new processes may streamline the synthesis of high-value molecules
such as drugs, herbicides, and dyes for organic light emitting diodes.
Additionally these novel reactions have less environmental impact than many of
the existing technologies. Dr. DeBoef is also developing new research-oriented
curricula involving multi-step chemical synthesis and green chemistry.
Undergraduate and graduate students are being trained for careers as synthetic
chemists in the global marketplace, and will benefit from the International
Chemistry Program that Dr. DeBoef is developing at the University of Rhode
Island.