* 0847356
* CAREER: Understanding the Influence of Fast Molecular Motions on Charge Mobilities
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2014
* Aaron Massari, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2014
* USD 676,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Professor Aaron Massari of the
University of Minnesota will employ two-dimensional infrared vibrational echo
spectroscopy (2D-IR VES) to understand how the molecular motions within
conducting polymers influence the mobilities of electrical charges. This
research project will utilize polymer samples incorporated into electrode
arrays, which will allow for the in-situ study of molecular motions and charge
mobilities in polymer structures in the presence of an external electric field.
These studies will provide molecule design and polymer processing information
that will be immediately relevant to future photovoltaic or molecular electronic
technologies that are based on organic molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will help to advance not only the aforementioned technologies,
but our understanding of structure-function relationships in electronic
materials in general. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in the
project will receive training in a highly multidisciplinary environment which
includes not only laser optics and fundamental molecular spectroscopy, but
materials science, electrochemistry, and theory. Prof. Massari will work with
on-going programs at the University of Minnesota such as the Multicultural
Summer Research Opportunities Program (MSROP) and the Lando Fellowship Program
to recruit undergraduate students from area community colleges to participate in
chemical research.