* 0847987
* EAR-PF: Critical Zone Controls on Hydrology and the Fate of Nitrogen in Montane Forests of the Colorado Front Range, U.S.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Eve-Lyn Hinckley, Hinckley                Eve-Lyn        S
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2011
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Eve-Lyn S. Hinckley is awarded an
NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop an integrated program of
research and education at the University of Colorado, Boulder. This project
addresses the major gaps in the process-level understanding of the interactions
between hydrology and nitrogen biogeochemistry. Through directed field efforts,
these interactions will be studied at the Boulder Creek Critical Zone
Observatory (BcCZO), in Boulder, CO. Three sub-catchments in the BcCZO represent
a range of developmental states - from recently glaciated bedrock to deep soil
profiles - and ecological zones - from montane to alpine - leading to variation
in hydrologic response, nutrient status, and vegetation communities. This two-
part study will focus on the two montane sub-catchments to: (1) Investigate how
flow paths vary along a hillslope and affect the fate and transport of N species
within a sub-catchment; and (2) Evaluate how differences in critical zone
development between two sub-catchments affect hydrologic-biogeochemical
coupling. To address these unknowns, dual isotopic tracers (15N and deuterium)
will be applied during winter snowfall and simulated summer storms to track the
fates and transformations of nitrogen in soil, water, and microbial pools under
these different hydrologic conditions. This knowledge is relevant for
understanding soil and water quality, nutrient supply to vegetation, and mineral
weathering - the basic processes of functioning ecosystems that support life. In
conjunction with the research activities, a series of lectures will be developed
for a graduate-level course on Critical Zone Science to be taught at the
University of Colorado, Boulder. In addition, this information will be distilled
into talks and activities appropriate for elementary-aged children that
participate in the K-12 Science Discovery Program run by the University.