* 0847696
* CAREER: Survival of the Privileged: Exploring the conditions that allow supermassive black holes and minority physicists to thrive
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kelly Holley-Bockelmann, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,075,873.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kelly Holley-Bockelmann
(Vanderbilt University) will execute an integrated research plan to address
several problems that are at the forefront of supermassive black hole research:
1. How supermassive black holes merge, 2. How supermassive black hole growth is
influenced by the galaxy environment, and 3. How gravitational wave recoil
impacts supermassive black hole growth. Models are needed to understand how this
effects black hole growth from the earliest stages in low mass galaxies and how
this changes the demographics of supermassive black holes. This work leverages
existing Vanderbilt resources, including a 1400-node supercomputer center, and
combines high-performance computing, and extensive data mining to test and
develop a comprehensive theory for the evolution of supermassive black
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, Dr. Holley-Bockelmann will execute a
comprehensive plan that will address the underrepresentation of women and
minorities in astrophysics. The plan includes: 1) increased access to
computational resources, tools, and training; 2) a formal network of peer-to-
peer mentoring; 3) research experiences that are individually tailored to the
student and integrate with the research goals listed above; 4) enhanced training
for minority high school teachers; and 5) increased science learning
opportunities for minority high school students. These goals will be
accomplished though a partnership with Fisk University, a Historically Black
University, located just 1.5 miles from Vanderbilt. Dr. Holley-Bockelmann will
teach a computational "boot camp" course on the Fisk campus to entering graduate
students. Dr, Holley-Bockelmann will also directly coordinate a program to use
rocketry as a means to train Fisk students pursuing high school teacher
certification. The modules developed by the students will be field-tested in
local high schools, and the data on the efficacy of this program will constitute
a thesis in Astronomy Education, by a Fisk or Vanderbilt student.