* 0847324
* CAREER: Collective transport near quantum critical points in superconducting nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Sambandamurthy Ganapathy, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 525,000.00

Technical Abstract: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This Faculty Early Career Award
funds a proposal that seeks to make significant impact on our current
understanding of the physics of quantum phase transitions (QPT) in
superconducting nanostructures. Nanometer scale indium oxide devices with
precisely engineered structural and transport characteristics will be utilized
to probe the subtle interplay between disorder and interaction across the
superconductor-insulator QPT. These experiments will provide explicit
information about the microscopic conduction mechanisms when the transition is
tuned via disorder, density or magnetic field in one and two-dimensional
devices. The results will improve our current understanding of the phase
coherence and emergence of novel collective phases near quantum critical points.
Research is closely integrated with the education component of the proposal: an
undergraduate laboratory experiment to explore quantum nature of electrons will
be developed and hands-on research opportunities will be provided to a broader
group including high school science teachers in the Buffalo region. The
education plan also seeks to improve the learning experience of students in
undergraduate introductory physics courses through a variety of modern teaching
methods.

Non-technical Abstract: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The goal of this Faculty Early
Career Award is to effectively combine experimental research to explore quantum
phases near critical points in superconducting nanostructures with education and
outreach programs to train a new generation of undergraduate and graduate
students and high school teachers. The research proposal will seek an
unprecedented control in engineering the microstructure and property of the
material used (indium oxide) and the transport measurements in nanodevices
proposed herein are expected to transform our current understanding of quantum
phases in one and two-dimensional systems. The integrated educational aspects
will involve several projects closely related to the research activities in the
PI?s group. A new undergraduate laboratory experiment for learning the basic
concept of quantum nature of electrons will be developed with the help of
undergraduate students at the university or K-12 physics teachers in the Buffalo
region. Modern teaching methods will be implemented in introductory physics
courses for non-majors, thereby improving the learning experience and scientific
awareness among a wider student body. The results of the research and
educational activities will be disseminated to the general public through
participation in local art festivals and New York State?s STEP program.