* 0847838
* Contributions of mobile source emissions to watershed N budgets along an urban to rural gradient
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Neil Bettez, Bettez                  Neil           D
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2011
* USD 160,000.00

Excess nitrogen (N) is a serious water-quality problem in most of the estuaries
in the US, especially those downstream of developed coastal basins. While the
major sources of this N, atmospheric deposition, wastewater, fertilizer, and
other agricultural sources are well known, their relative importance as N
sources to particular estuaries is not. One trouble is that the deposition
monitoring network used by most researchers in the US was designed to avoid
influences from nearby sources such as suburban/urban areas. This is significant
because a major source of emissions especially in urban areas are mobile sources
such as motor vehicles and construction equipment and a portion of their
emissions are deposited nearby. This work will allow more accurate estimates of
nitrogen fluxes from urban catchments by including deposition from mobile source
emissions. As part of this research, N budgets will be constructed for sub-
watersheds along a land-use gradient from the urban core to the rural/suburban
fringe of Baltimore that take into account the contribution of mobile sources to
atmospheric N inputs. As part of this research, students will be involved in
collecting samples from collectors placed throughout the study area at schools
associated with the Baltimore Ecosystem Study Schoolyard LTER.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this study will have implications for the
management of coastal systems' especially those near major metropolitan areas.
This proposal is an important first step in quantifying the contribution of a
significant and previously overlooked source of N to our coastal systems.
Because of this gap in our understanding it is difficult to design an integrated
plan to manage N inputs to estuaries. This is the first project to consider
mobile source deposition in watershed N budgets and to relate these estimates to
the two methods widely used by researchers and managers to estimate deposition
(NADP/CASTNet) and emissions (EPA's National Mobile Inventory Model).