* 0847752
* SGER: Wireless EEG Brain Interface for Extended Interactive Learning
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Gert Cauwenberghs, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2010
* USD 200,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0847752&lt;br/&gt;PI- Gert
Cauwenberghs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory
research project aims to observe and augment the learning experiences of
children through non-intrusive acquisition, on-line analysis and interpretation
of their brain dynamics. Current systems for recording high-resolution
encephalogram (EEG) dynamical brain activity are not suitable for this purpose
because they distract the children and constrain their mobility by excessive
wiring between electrodes and computer. Existing methods are also not useful
because of unreliable contact between electrodes and scalp during body motion.
This two-year project specifically entails the design and implementation of a
low-weight wearable, wireless EEG recording system with 128 embedded non-contact
electrodes. This will include supporting software for real-time analysis and
display of brain dynamics on a host computer. The research will give rise to new
methods for non-intrusive acquisition and on-line interpretation of brain
dynamics, and open up new research directions not possible using existing
methods. The project supports inter-disciplinary graduate research combining
biophysics of EEG, engineering of non-contact and wireless sensors, independent
component analysis, cognitive neuroscience, and the temporal dynamics of
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of this research will contribute to the
broader understanding of brain function at a level combining cognitive
neuroscience and social dynamics. A diverse and interdisciplinary body of
students at the NSF Temporal Dynamics of Learning Center (TDLC) and the
Institute of Neural Computation at UCSD will take part in applying the
instrumentation to learning research in the biological, cognitive and social
sciences. The wireless EEG infra-structure also significantly enhances the
mobility of EEG recording in existing motion-capture facilities at TDLC,
allowing the study of learning in dynamic environments with freely interacting
subjects. The project will further benefit from outreach channels supported by
the TDLC, including the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Hughes Scholar
Program (HSP), and the Preuss High School at UCSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;