* 0847198
* STTR Phase II:  New Process for High Strength/Weight Net-Shape Auto and Aero components from Mg Sheet
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Jack Huang, Thixomat,Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,029,733.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR ) Phase II project aims to scale-
up and commercialize a low cost and simple process to produce high
strength/density Magnesium (Mg) alloy sheet; using Thixomolding Thermomechanical
Processing (TTMP). TTMP avoids the decades-long barriers of twinning and shear
band deformation that limits the formability of commercial coarse-grained Mg
alloys, rather, in TTMP fine isotropic grains are molded in the first
Thixomolding step and then these are thermomechanically processed to impose
continuous dynamic recrystalization to finer grains of 0.8 to 2 microns. In this
fine grained mode of processing, twinning and shear banding are minimized while
slip and grain boundary sliding are promoted. The common intermetallic phases of
Mg alloys are also refined to nanometer size so that they can serve as
dispersion hardeners. The end result of the refined microstructures is an
increase of both strength and ductility. The mechanism may apply also to
Titanium (Ti) and Beryllium (Be) alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impacts of this project are fuel and
pollution&lt;br/&gt;savings in automobiles and trucks; fuel and payload benefits
in aerospace; energy savings in batteries and fuel cells; and medical benefits
in bio-replaceable body implants. Commercially, this project will result in a
new U.S. business in manufacture of superior low cost Mg sheet.