* 0847801
* CAREER: Cold Atom Mixtures of Fermions and Bosons on a Lattice
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Shan-Wen Tsai, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award is funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Physics Division.
It supports theoretical and computational research and education on quantum-many
body systems with a focus on ultracold atom systems with connections to
materials, particularly strongly correlated materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the experimental manipulation of cold atoms on
optical lattices and control of interactions, models that have been studied in
Condensed Matter Physics for their relevance to various complex materials may be
engineered and tested. New quantum many-body states that have not been or cannot
be realized in solid state systems have been obtained, and others are yet to be
explored. The PI will investigate correlation effects in fermion-fermion and
fermion-boson mixtures of cold atoms in optical lattices, and cold atoms in
self-assembled lattices of dipolar molecules. Cooperative phenomena arising from
interactions, dimensionality, and lattice geometry lead to rich phase diagrams
for these quantum many-body systems. In this landscape of possible microscopic
parameters that can be tuned, it is important to have systematic studies from
which key physical principles governing quantum many-body systems can be
obtained. This will have impact on our understanding of complex materials, and
on our ability to design and engineer new quantum states of matter. This
proposal also investigates non-equilibrium correlated quantum many body systems,
such as sudden switching of interaction terms in the Hamiltonian. The current
cold atom technology makes it feasible to create many-body Hamiltonians in which
the parameters are time-dependent. A combination of analytical and computational
methods will be employed to study the phase diagram of these complex systems,
and a significant portion of this project involves development of new tools for
the study of dynamics away from equilibrium, and for study in the strong
coupling regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project
focuses on the needs of the school districts surrounding the Inland Empire in
Southern California, which has a high proportion of Hispanic, African American,
and other underrepresented groups in its population. It utilizes resources
provided by the University of California, Riverside and will be done in
partnership with the university?s Academy of Learning through Partnerships for
Higher Achievement Center. There is a need to improve science education at all
K-12 levels, particularly in the field of physics. The PI will establish a
bridge between UCR physics students and schools in the community, enriching the
education of K-12 students and teachers, and providing an important professional
development opportunity for University of California, Riverside students to
improve their teaching, communication, and presentation skills. Broader impacts
of this project also include training of graduate and undergraduate students in
research, curriculum development, and retention of women graduate students. The
intriguing physics of the ultracold and its inherently quantum nature engages
the interest of scientists, students at all levels, and the general public
alike. This award supports the development of an advanced undergraduate physics
course on the physics of cold atoms, a Freshman Discovery Seminar Course on
Bose-Einstein condensates and optical lattices, and a seminar presentation for
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award is funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Physics
Division. It supports theoretical and computational research and education to
advance the theory of systems composed of many interacting particles. The theory
has direct application to cold gases of atoms trapped in laser light to form
regular crystalline arrays of atoms and to materials that contain electrons that
interact strongly with each other. The research includes developing a
potentially powerful but risky theoretical technique that may illuminate the
enigmatic behavior of materials like high temperature superconductors which
display superconductivity, a quantum mechanical state of matter that exhibits no
resistance to the flow of electricity, at the highest temperatures of all known
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystals composed of cold atoms trapped in
light offer a particularly promising experimental proving ground for theories of
many interacting particles because interactions between atoms can be controlled
in the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this
project focuses on the needs of the school districts surrounding the Inland
Empire in Southern California, which has a high proportion of Hispanic, African
American, and other underrepresented groups in its population. It utilizes
resources provided by the University of California, Riverside and will be done
in partnership with the university?s Academy of Learning through Partnerships
for Higher Achievement Center. There is a need to improve science education at
all K-12 levels, particularly in the field of physics. The PI will establish a
bridge between UCR physics students and schools in the community, enriching the
education of K-12 students and teachers, and providing an important professional
development opportunity for University of California, Riverside students to
improve their teaching, communication, and presentation skills. Broader impacts
of this project also include training of graduate and undergraduate students in
research, curriculum development, and retention of women graduate students. The
intriguing physics of the ultracold and its inherently quantum nature engages
the interest of scientists, students at all levels, and the general public
alike. This award supports a Freshman Discovery Seminary and advanced
undergraduate physics course as well as public outreach efforts that aim to
convey the wonders of interacting systems cold atoms and their intriguing
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;