* 0847319
* CAREER:  Electron Injection in Nanostructured Materials:  New Paradigm of Transparent Conducting Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jung-Kun Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This CAREER project includes integrated
research and education activities. The research explores novel nanocomposite
materials that allow independent control of the carrier concentration and
mobility of transparent conducting oxides for potential electro-optical
applications. This will be accomplished through the self-assembly of high
carrier concentration metallic nanoparticles in high mobility transparent
conducting oxide materials. The project examines how microstructure and
morphology of embedded nanoparticles influence the electrical and optical
properties of such systems and determines the fundamental mechanisms responsible
for the improved conductivity. The goals of the research activities are: i)
Establishment of fundamental correlations between basic physics of nanocomposite
based transparent conducting oxides and experimental observations of improved
electrical conductivity and transparency; ii) Development of a basic
understanding of the electron delocalization of metal nanoparticles embedded in
a transparent conducting oxide matrix with different electronic and optical
properties; and iii) Elucidation of the influence of solid-ion interactions on
the nucleation, growth, and subsequent crystallization of nanoparticles embedded
transparent conducting oxide films.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project
addresses basic electronic/photonic materials research issues in a topical area
of materials science with high technological relevance. Improvements in
transparent conducting oxide conductivity have the potential to increase the
energy conversion efficiencies of solar cells as well as increase the speed and
energy efficiency of optoelectronic devices. The educational component of this
CAREER award is expected to enhance the infrastructure of the renewable energy
research at the University of Pittsburgh. The PI plans to develop a new course,
Energy Applications of Nanostructured Materials, focusing on the correlation
between solar energy and nanomaterials. This course is expected to be integrated
with a new Nanotechnology Certificate at the University of Pittsburgh, which
should make the Materials Science and Engineering program at the University more
visible in nanoscience and sustainability educations. In addition, the results
obtained through research activities will be utilized to develop a prototype
solar cell for outreach to high school students with an emphasis on under-
represented groups.