* 0847563
* CAREER: Compact Objects in the Era of Celestial Cinematography
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 07/31/2014
* USD 479,766.00

As a class, compact objects consist of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black
holes. As the endpoint states of normal stellar evolution, they represent
fundamental constituents of the physical Universe. The most telling observations
of compact objects come from dense stellar systems, where stars are crowded
close enough to each other to undergo frequent interactions. This interplay
between compact objects and other stars yields observations which when compared
to simulations provides firm conclusions about the properties of these extreme
forms of matter. Under this award, Dr. Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz (University of
California - Santa Cruz, UCSC) will build complete models for a wide variety of
stellar encounters. Only through full-scale simulations will come the ability to
critically test our understanding of the physics of stellar encounters and their
aftermath, with a direct comparison with observations. A comprehensive model
database of transient events will be developed and disseminated to the
astronomical community. This aspect of the work is particularly important as
astronomy moves toward an era of celestial cinematography where the entire
accessible sky is imaged to unprecedented depth, with near-real-time detection
and classification of variable sources. The prediction and, hence, understanding
of the observable characteristics of stellar encounters is one of the main goals
of this modeling program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part of this project, Dr.
Ramirez-Ruiz will join forces with the faculty, and staff at Hartnell Community
College to effectively identify potential transfer students who are promising
researchers at the beginning of their careers and also members of groups who are
traditionally underrepresented in the University of California. Key components
of the program include intensive research instruction through summer
internships, academic counseling and mentoring, and workshops that integrate
family members. The selected summer interns will work closely with Dr. Ramirez-
Ruiz on a research project and also be integrated into one of the many existing
student support programs at UCSC, such as the California Alliance for Minority
Participation program. This will provide the interns with a student community as
well as the opportunity to develop additional skills to advance their education
and career. Family involvement in the program is considered essential. For this
reason, as part of the public outreach effort, Dr. Ramirez-Ruiz will develop a
Family Astronomy Night lecture series. The value of the lecture series will be
twofold. First, it will communicate aspects of the proposed research and the
thrill of discovery to a diverse group of community college students and their
parents. Second, it will help ensure that parents have the information needed to
support their child's academic success.