* 0847350
* CAREER: Testing a Memory-Systems Model of the Expression and Reduction of Racial Prejudice: A Plan for Research and Training in Social Cognitive Neuroscience
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* David Amodio, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 06/30/2015
* USD 833,965.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-50.

Racial discrimination continues to be a national concern in America, despite
significant cultural and legislative shifts toward a more egalitarian society.
Although overt expressions of bigotry are now relatively infrequent, much
psychological research finds that racial biases often lurk in the unconscious
mind, from where they may influence behavior in subtle ways without one's
intent. As such, a major goal of contemporary prejudice research is to
understand how implicit racial biases affect behavior and, importantly, how such
biases may be reduced. Dr. David Amodio's research sheds new light on these
questions by examining the neurocognitive mechanisms that underlie the
activation and expression of different forms of implicit racial bias. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Amodio is conducting research
that links emotional and conceptual (i.e., stereotyping) forms of implicit bias
to different systems of learning and memory in the brain. By linking implicit
bias to neural processes, he can apply knowledge from the broader neuroscience
literature on how these systems learn and unlearn, and how they interact with
mechanisms for cognition, emotion, and behavior, to obtain a novel perspective
on the dynamics of racial prejudice. By taking an integrative social cognitive
neuroscience approach, Dr. Amodio's research promises to advance our basic
understanding of how neural mechanisms of learning and memory function in social
behavior while also informing the pressing issue of racial discrimination in
American society.

In conjunction with his research goals, Dr. Amodio will develop a new program
for education and research in social cognitive neuroscience at New York
University. The unique training curriculum incorporates theoretical and
methodological approaches from neuroscience, social psychology, and cognitive
psychology, directed toward the understanding of social processes and their
neural underpinnings. The funding from NSF will support graduate student
research and infrastructure for training in neuroimaging. An additional
component of this program is the promotion of psychological and neural science
in the community. Toward this end, Dr. Amodio's program provides opportunities
for high school students and community members to learn more about science
through his public presentations and student visits to his laboratory.

