* 0847266
* CAREER: Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Nitrogen-Cycling Microbial Communities Across Physicochemical Gradients in the San Francisco Bay Estuary
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Christopher Francis, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2015
* USD 522,691.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although nitrogen (N) acts as a
limiting nutrient in many marine ecosystems, from estuaries to the open ocean, N
in excess can be extremely detrimental. Eutrophication is of particular concern
in estuaries, with over half of the estuaries in the United States experiencing
its effects. Harmful levels of N in estuaries can be diminished through tightly
coupled processes in the microbial nitrogen cycle, including nitrification
(chemoautotrophic oxidation of ammonia to nitrite and nitrate) and
denitrification (the dissimilatory reduction of nitrate to N2 gas). In fact,
coupled nitrification-denitrification can remove up to 50% of external dissolved
inorganic nitrogen inputs to estuaries, thereby reducing the risk of
eutrophication. Despite the biogeochemical importance of both nitrification and
denitrification in estuarine systems, surprisingly little is known regarding the
underlying microbial communities responsible for these processes, or how they
are influenced by key physical/chemical factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will work in San Francisco Bay - the largest estuary on the west
coast of the United States - using molecular, biogeochemical and cultivation
approaches to explore how the distribution, diversity, abundance, and activities
of key N-cycling communities are influenced by environmental gradients over
temporal and spatial scales. Denitrifying communities will be studied using
functional genes (nirK and nirS) encoding the key denitrification enzyme nitrite
reductase, while genes encoding ammonia monooxygenase subunit A (amoA) will be
used to study both ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and the recently-discovered
ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA)- members of one of the most ubiquitous and
abundant prokaryotic groups on the planet, the mesophilic Crenarchaeota.
Analyzing sediments from sites spanning a range of physical and chemical
conditions in the Bay, seasonally over the course of several years, will
represent an unprecedented opportunity to examine spatial, physical/chemical,
and temporal effects on both denitrifier and ammonia-oxidizer communities in
this large, urban estuary. Concurrently, an intensive cultivation effort will
also be undertaken, in order to compile a novel culture collection of estuarine
denitrifiers and ammonia-oxidizers, for which virtually nothing is currently
known. Taken together, these complimentary approaches will help reveal how
complex physical/chemical gradients influence the diversity and functioning of
key estuarine N-cycling communities over time and
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include obtaining a critical
understanding of how underlying N-cycling microbial communities are influenced
by complex and fluctuating environmental gradients over time and space in the
San Francisco Bay estuary which should translate to insights into the ecology
and regulation of these biogeochemically-important processes in all estuarine
systems. In addition, results of the research will be communicated and
investigated through several key educational and outreach activities: (1) a
sophomore-level course to be developed and taught focused on San Francisco Bay
as a model system for understanding the biogeochemical and societal importance
of large estuaries; (2) Bay Area high school biology teachers will be targeted
for a 4-week intensive microbiology summer course; (3) development of a
'microbial community' module to the REAL (Redwood Environmental Academy of
Learning) Program, focused on the hands-on ecological teaching of 'continuation'
students at nearby Redwood High School; and (4) mentoring and training of
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, who will be directly involved
in the research project over the next 5 years.