* 0847160
* SGER:  Quantification of Uncertainty in Argo Observation of Ocean Response to Hurricanes
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2011
* Young-Oh Kwon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2011
* USD 90,192.00

The objective of this project is to assess quantitatively the capability and
limitations of the Argo float array for the investigation of basin-to-global
scale upper ocean response to hurricanes based on the comparison between the
Argo observation and numerical model results. The Argo array measures subsurface
temperature and salinity profiles before and after storms, and so provides a
unique dataset to study the impact of the storms in a basin-to-global scale and
for the subsurface as well as the sea surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To properly
understand the basin-to-global scale impact of tropical storms, a sustained
global observational network with a resolution sufficient to observe the impact
of tropical storms is needed for surface as well as the subsurface ocean. On the
other hand, our understanding on the upper ocean response to the storms has
progressed mostly based on the studies focused on individual
storms.&lt;br/&gt;Successful use of the global observational network of Argo
array in conjunction with satellite observations would allow the investigators
to extrapolate our understanding to basin-to-global scale
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;However, despite the unique opportunity provided by the
near-global and subsurface coverage of the Argo array, the uncontrolled sampling
in space with a relatively sparse 10 day interval produces substantial
uncertainty primarily due to the inability to filter out near-inertial pumping
and random&lt;br/&gt;position uncertainties with respect to the storm and the
background flow. Therefore, a method to quantify uncertainty in the Argo
sampling of ocean response to the hurricane is needed as a prerequisite to
address&lt;br/&gt;the scientific questions using the dataset.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main strategy is to use a realistic numerical ocean
simulation under a given initial background condition and hurricane forcing to
perform an observation sampling experiment. During the experiments, virtual
floats will be deployed in the model to mimic Argo floats in the real ocean. The
data sampled by virtual float profiles will be used to estimate the uncertainty
against the simulated full response. The 3-dimensional Price-Weller-Pinkel model
will be used to perform observation sampling
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Assessing
uncertainty of the uncontrolled Argo observation in a statistically robust
fashion with respect to the response to hurricane is unprecedented (as far as we
are aware of). The proposed activity will not only advance the community's
capability to apply statistical methods to scattered observations, but also
enable it to use the Argo observations to address the fundamental scientific
questions associated with the basin-scale ocean response to the hurricane, such
as what is the contribution of tropical storms to the vertical mixing and the
meridional transport of heat in the upper ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed work will provide the broader oceanography and
atmospheric science community with a statistically robust tool to use the Argo
observations to study the upper ocean response to an extreme event such as the
hurricane and associated air-sea interaction, an application of Argo array that
is well beyond its original vision. Argo has been a long-term international
community effort that benefited many areas from the large-scale oceanography to
the interannual-to-decadal predictability efforts. Broadening&lt;br/&gt;the use
of Argo array will be very desirable and beneficial to justify the extension and
expansion of this community asset. The project will also contirubte to the
careeer development of two promising new NSF investigators.