* 0847782
* CAREER: Electrically- and Optically-Controlled Self-Assembly in Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Ivan Smalyukh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 12/31/2013
* USD 620,000.00

Proposal 0847782, CAREER: Electrically- &amp; optically-controlled self-assembly
in liquid crystals &lt;br/&gt;Ivan I. Smalyukh, Asst. Professor of Physics,
Univ. of Colorado at Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The PI will conduct interdisciplinary research at the
interfaces of liquid crystal (LC) physics, nanoscience, and photonics, focusing
on fundamental and applied aspects of self-assembly in LC composite materials.
He seeks to identify the organizing principles behind self-organization of nano-
and micro-sized particles dispersed in LC mesophases ranging from the classical
thermotropic nematic to the novel phases composed of bent-core molecules, and to
those formed by DNA and live bacteria. PI will establish how director structures
around nano- and micro-sized particles immersed in LCs depend on particle?s
shape, size, surface treatment, type of the LC mesophase, and applied external
fields. He will use topological defects, nano-scale periodic defect arrays in LC
blue phases, and strongly-distorted director structures for spatial patterning
of particles. LC?s sensitivity to external fields, surface treatment,
temperature, and light will enable unprecedented degrees of control over formed
self-assembled structures of molecules and inclusions of various shapes and
chemical composition. In order to engage this class of problems, the PI will
utilize fluorescence-detectable nano- and micro-sized particles ranging from
nanocrystals to live bacteria, so that their spatial localization and alignment
in the LC samples can be revealed using fluorescence confocal imaging. To get
insights into the physics phenomena behind the self-assembly, optical imaging
and laser manipulation will be combined synergistically with freeze fracture
transmission electron microscopy and synchrotron x-ray micro-beam diffraction,
so that the hierarchical self-assembly structures from nanometer to tens of
microns length scales can be known. The fundamental phenomena will be examined
in the broader contexts ranging from development of self-assembly-based tunable
optical metamaterials to understanding bacteria-extracellular matrix
interactions in biofilms. This work will advance knowledge of self-assembly in
complex fluids and will impinge on fields as diverse as nano-scale interactions
and ensuing collective behavior, novel display technologies, efficient
conversion of solar energy to electricity using inexpensive organic solar cells,
metamaterial fabrication, and bacterial biofilms. PI is will integrate the
proposed research projects into a broad range of education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;PI is
researching organizing principles of nanoparticle and molecular self-assembly
into precisely controlled structures in liquid crystals. Fundamental
understanding of this ?smart? assembly will shed light on biological
organization at the cellular and molecular levels and will enable development of
new electrically- and optically-controlled materials with unique properties
needed for wide-angle beam steering, efficient conversion of solar energy into
electricity, and for practical devices of importance to society, such as
flexible displays and data storage devices. PI will integrate this research into
educational and outreach programs, including ?Light, Color, &amp; Matter? Wizard
Shows in elementary and secondary schools, Science Tours for high school
students, advising student chapters of professional societies, providing
research experiences for students and faculty from minority-serving institutions
and helping them to define their educational and research goals, teaching
?Liquid Crystals: From Fundamentals to Applications? conference short courses
for liquid crystal industry, participating in the SPIE visiting lecturer program
by giving public lectures worldwide, and organizing international conferences
and inter-continental advanced materials and photonics (I-CAMP) summer schools.
Lectures of the I-CAMP summer schools will be webcast in real time and then
transformed into web-based video archives and interactive tutorials. Moreover,
these summer schools will be integrated with outreach forums and career
development programs for students and postdoctoral fellows and will attract
underrepresented minority participants. &lt;br/&gt;