* 0847681
* CAREER: Spin Fluctuation in Itinerant Electron Magnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Emilia Morosan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). At the forefront of
condensed matter physics, the design and development of new materials has been
the root of many fundamental discoveries. The ability to predict and synthesize
targeted compounds represents one of the main challenges of our understanding of
the relations between the chemistry, crystal structure and physical properties
in complex solids. This NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
supports experimental investigations and education in condensed matter physics,
with focus on itinerant electron magnets. The main goals of this project are (i)
the design and synthesis of novel itinerant magnetic systems and (ii) the study
how itinerant magnetism is affected by spin fluctuations: Are spin fluctuations
responsible for non-Fermi liquid behavior in these systems? What are the
mechanisms responsible for quantum critical behavior in itinerant electron
systems? How do these spin fluctuations break the degeneracy of competing
instabilities like magnetism and superconductivity? By tuning the magnetic phase
transitions to a quantum critical point (QCP) by composition, pressure or
magnetic field, the newly discovered itinerant magnetic systems will be used to
answer each of these fundamental questions. Undergraduate and graduate students
involved in the project will be trained in crystal growth and characterization,
valuable tools for materials driven condensed matter research. The PI will
incorporate her research expertise into a new graduate-level course focused on
modern problems in magnetism and magnetic materials. The PI's laboratory
resources will be used to illustrate some aspects of this course. In addition,
high school teachers will be involved in summer research in the PI's laboratory,
an experience that, in turn, can have a great impact on a large number of
students and guide them towards future careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). At the forefront of condensed
matter physics, the design and development of new materials has been the root of
many fundamental discoveries. This NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
award supports experimental investigations and education in condensed matter
physics, with focus on novel magnetic states of matter. The main goals of this
project are (i) the design and synthesis of novel exotic magnetic systems and
(ii) the study of their physical properties. Although magnetism has been studied
since antiquity, many fundamental questions remain unanswered about
unconventional magnetic compounds. In particular it is of great interest to
understand what happens as the temperature is lowered close to absolute zero, or
towards quantum phase transitions (QPT). These are fundamentally different than
the more familiar phase transitions, for example liquid-to-solid as water
freezes. In the case of quantum phase transitions, quantum and not thermal
fluctuations are now at play. It is crucial to understand such transitions and
the role of quantum fluctuations, since unconventional superconductivity and
other exotic phases are believed to emerge from QPT. Undergraduate and graduate
students involved in the project will be trained in crystal growth and
characterization, valuable tools for materials driven condensed matter research.
The PI will incorporate her research expertise into a new graduate-level course
focused on modern problems in magnetism and magnetic materials. The PI's
laboratory resources will be used to illustrate some aspects of this course. In
addition, high school teachers will be involved in summer research in the PI's
laboratory, an experience that, in turn, can have a great impact on a large
number of students and guide them towards future careers in science.