* 0847016
* CAREER: Towards Rational Design of "Smart" Surfaces from Two-Component Polymer Brushes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Qiang Wang, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2014
* USD 403,626.00

0847016 Wang

A nanotechnology-related project is supported to understand and predict the
response of two-component polymer brushes, particularly the polyelectrolyte (PE)
brushes, to various external stimuli (solvent selectivity, solution pH, ionic
strength, and applied electric field) and the influence on such response by
various design factors (chain architecture, polymer/block lengths and charges,
grafting densities, and incompatibility between the two components). The
seemingly simple two-component brushes (including both binary homopolymer
brushes and block copolymer brushes) can exhibit a rich variety of interesting
and novel behavior through self-assembly of the two components, and have diverse
applications in many fields as smart surfaces. The design of these responsive
brushes for practical applications such as chemical gates, sensors,
biomaterials, and drug delivery, however, requires detailed understanding of the
physics of their stimuli-response and knowledge of how various design parameters
affect their stimuli-response, which are currently rather limited. Coarse-
grained models describing the generic features of two-component brushes will be
used, and two judiciously designed and complementary methods, 3D parallel self-
consistent field (SCF) calculations and novel fast off-lattice Monte Carlo
(FOMC) simulations, will be employed. The computational results will be
validated by experiments through collaborations to ensure that they capture the
physics of stimuli-response of two-component brushes and can provide essential
guidance to experimental design of such smart surfaces.

Intellectual Merit: The overall goal of the PI's research is to understand and
predict the behavior of inhomogeneous systems of polymers at surfaces and
interfaces using advanced theories and simulation techniques. The project will
greatly advance current understanding and predictive capability on the stimuli-
response of two-component polymer brushes and enable knowledge-based rational
design of such smart surfaces best suited for targeted applications, while
avoiding both labor and time intensive trial and error experiments. The
fundamental knowledge discovered in this work can also be transferred to other
inhomogeneous polymeric systems. For example, understanding the effects of
correlations and fluctuations revealed in PE brushes here is of fundamental
importance in polymer science, and is the prerequisite for developing more
accurate theories for PE systems. Finally, the computational tools developed in
this project could be readily extended to a wide variety of inhomogeneous
polymeric systems that have great potential applications in nanotechnology. In
particular, applying FOMC simulations in the study of soft materials is
potentially transformative and may revolutionize the computational study of
these systems.

Broader Impacts: The project will advance current understanding and predictive
capability on the stimuli response of two-component polymer nano-scale brushes
and enable knowledge based rational design of such smart surfaces best suited
for targeted applications (e.g., bio-medical devices), while avoiding both labor
and time intensive trial and error experiments. The proposed interdisciplinary
work well integrates research activities into the teaching of science and
engineering, not only for graduate and undergraduate students, but also for high
school students and science teachers, as well as the general public. Some of the
computational results will be transformed into movies and made available to the
general public. These movies will show the concept, switching mechanisms and
stimuli-response of the smart surfaces, with specific examples chosen from the
broad applications of smart surfaces to demonstrate the potential applications
of the research and anticipated societal benefits. Through the movie making
process, the students can much better relate their theoretical and computational
research to reality. The simulation movies will be provided to the teachers, who
can then play in their classrooms. Given the wide applications of smart surfaces
in many fields, this will introduce to high school students through direct
visualization the broad scope of Chemical and Biological Engineering profession
and the societal benefits that the proposed research has, and stimulate the
interest and passion of a large number of high school students on scientific and
engineering research. Examples from the proposed work will also be incorporated
into a new graduate level course, Advanced Computational Methods for Materials,
being developed by the PI, which greatly promotes the application of various
computational tools in nanoscience and nanotechnology. This proposal is also
synergistic with Colorado aggressive efforts to lead in nanotechnology research
and development and formation of the Colorado Nanotechnology Initiative
integrated with higher education in Colorado.