* 0847719
* CAREER: Transport of Ions and Electrons in Solar Energetic Particle Events -- Towards an Integrated Space Weather Model
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2015
* Gang Li, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2015
* USD 535,691.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Principal
Investigator (PI) will perform a systematic study of electron and ion transport
in solar energetic particle (SEP) events and create a training program for space
physicists. The PI will develop an enhanced Monte Carlo approach to follow the
propagation of energetic particles by tracing single particle trajectories;
examine how the radial dependence of solar wind magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
turbulence can affect energetic particle transport; explore various dynamic
approximations of solar wind MHD turbulence beyond static quasi-linear theory;
and investigate the effects of flux tubes in the solar wind on the transport of
energetic particles. This project will include the design and development of a
new space physics course to be taught by the PI, improving the space physics
curriculum in the Physics Department at the University of Alabama at Huntsville
(UAH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's science investigation will lead to a well
documented model which will provide a realistic numerical tool to the community
for studying particle transport in SEP events. This model will be useful for
operational space weather forecasting, since SEP events are a serious space
weather hazard. Studying the transport of SEPs and their interaction with
interplanetary plasma in the heliosphere will directly contribute to increased
understanding of energetic particle transport in the cosmos. The project's
education and training component will directly support two graduate students and
several undergraduate students. In addition to curriculum development at UAH,
the PI will organize a biannual workshop on recent progress in space weather
studies to complement the annual SHINE (Solar, Heliospheric, and INterplanetary
Environment) meeting. The PI will provide financial support to interested
graduate students throughout the country who apply to attend his
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;