* 0847175
* CAREER:  Governing Collaborative Science: Cyberinfrastructure, Scale, and Governance in the Networked Ecological Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Thomas Finholt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 462,249.00

This CAREER award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 (Public Law 111-5). Investments in advanced computational infrastructure
("cyberinfrastructure" (CI)) represent a large and growing percentage of the
U.S. science budget. Underwriting such investments are a number of broadly
transformational claims: that new computational resources and paradigms will
enable new modes of data-driven discovery and innovation; that new capacities
for data storage and exchange will render scientific stocks of knowledge more
durable, open and accessible; that CI will extend and improve science teaching
and training at all educational levels; that CI will lead to new and efficient
modes of distributed collaborative working in the sciences, notably in the form
of novel "virtual organizations"; and that CI will improve the efficacy and
openness of the science-society interface, better connecting researchers to
citizens and public decision-makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such changes map and
contribute to an ongoing transition from postwar "big science" towards
"networked science" in which sociotechnical issues of scale, integration, and
governance are central -- and routinely underappreciated by the computational
backers and builders of the present cyberinfrastructure movement. This NSF
CAREER award explores the dynamics and tensions of governance within two leading
examples of highly distributed networked science: the long-standing Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) Network, oriented to producing locally grounded,
multi-decadal, and cross-disciplinary ecological research; and the emerging
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), presently under construction
with the ambitious goal of practicing interoperable, computationally-intensive,
and continental-scale ecology. Drawing on theoretical traditions within and
beyond science and technology studies (STS) and a novel combination of multi-
scale ethnographic, historical, and network-analytic methods, this project
promises important and practically beneficial advances in STS thinking around
networked collaboration and computational change in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project deepens and
extends long-standing STS concerns with: a) the integration of scientific
knowledge and resources across multiple sites of practice; b) the formal and
informal governance of scientific work, both "internal" (within and across
specific worksites and "external" (vis-à-vis funders, decision-makers, and
variously configured publics); and c) shifts in the practice of science
associated with the introduction of new computational and organizational forms.
It produces new and significant findings around the nature of scientific
collaboration, and provides fuller understanding of the interplay between
information infrastructures and the dynamics and tensions surrounding the
practice and governance of science. Finally, the project leads to new
methodological combinations -- in particular an integrated suite of comparative
ethnographic, historical, and network-analytic methods -- suggesting new
strategies for applying STS investigations to phenomena and scales beyond the
field's canonical case study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This study
leads to both design- and policy-level prescriptions, and so contribute directly
to NSF and other science funder efforts to develop more effective, dynamic, and
responsive cyberinfrastructure for the sciences, both within and beyond the
ecological sciences. In its attention to the external governing of networked
science (including issues of network participation and exclusion), the project
contributes to NSF goals of broadened and more equitable public participation in
science. The project's extensive educational and outreach components --
including cross-disciplinary primary, undergraduate, and graduate training
components; public lectures and science café; and multi-part public radio series
-- extends the project's impact to a wider educational and public audience,
including members of groups traditionally underrepresented within the sciences.