* 0847530
* CAREER: Development of acid-cleavable linkers for drug delivery
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jerry Yang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2013
* USD 540,412.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professor Jerry Yang at the University of California San Diego whose
research will evaluate and optimize the hydrolytic properties of a new class of
cid-cleavable linkers that can be used for the controlled release of
therapeutics from drug delivery systems (DDSs). These pH-sensitive linkers are
designed to exploit the lower pH of the endosomes or lysosomes to trigger the
release of therapeutic agents from suitable delivery vessels upon
internalization in cells. The specific aims of this research are: 1) to
synthesize and to evaluate the pH-dependent hydrolytic properties of several
derivatives of N-ethoxybenzylimidazoles (NEBIs) that can be used to conjugate
therapeutics to drug delivery vessels, 2) to construct model drug delivery
systems comprising cancer cell-targeting antibodies carrying cancer therapeutics
via the proposed pH-sensitive NEBI linkers, 3) to evaluate the specificity,
uptake, and intracellular localization of the proposed drug delivery systems in
cultured cells, and 4) to evaluate the utility of the proposed NEBI linkers for
the selective delivery of anticancer agents to human breast cancer cells. The
outcome of this research will be the development of a general strategy to
covalently attach therapeutics to drug delivery systems for improved efficacy of
drugs for a broad range of diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research are enhanced by the versatility, tunability, and predictability of
this linker system. This, combined with its accessibility in practical scales,
provides an ideal platform for creating a general method to covalently attach an
array of drugs to a range of drug-delivery systems for effective treatment of
disease. The educational activities described in this proposal will also have a
broad impact in the training of the next generation of interdisciplinary
scientists. The application of fundamental chemical concepts to important
biomedical problems is a common theme that is reinforced by Professor Yang both
in the classroom and in research. By including students from diverse scientific
backgrounds and levels of education (i.e., from the high school to the
postdoctoral levels), students are forced to think of problems from many
different angles, and in as simple terms as possible, so that they can
effectively communicate and develop innovative solutions across multiple
disciplines.