* 0847406
* CAREER: Behavioral Mechanism Design
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Paul Healy, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 514,970.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The field of economics known as mechanism design considers how to design
incentive schemes that reach desired outcomes. It has many applications and it
represents one of the most important developments in economic theory over the
past 30 years; indeed, this theory resulted in a recent Nobel Prize. At the same
time, recent research in behavioral economics and decision science has
strengthened our understanding of how people actually behave in strategic
settings. This CAREER project focuses on discovering superior mechanisms based
on this new behavioral knowledge.

The research plan includes both laboratory experiments and theoretical work to
discover general behavioral principles, identify better mechanisms for specific
areas of application such as auctions and carbon-trading systems, and to provide
insight into the design of optimal mechanisms for a wide range of general
applications.

The PI is creating a new summer workshop for high school students from a wide
range of socioeconomic backgrounds. These students participate in hands-on
research workshops using economics experiments. Members of under-represented
groups are particularly targeted by this program, which creates interest in
pursuing a career in social science. The PI will also design and teach a new
undergraduate course in behavioral economics of mechanism design. The class will
include a ?capstone? component where students design and carry out their own
experiment. Finally, he will restructure an existing doctoral course and start a
reading group in behavioral mechanism design for graduate students and faculty
in Economics and related disciplines, including decision science.

The research funded by this award provides further societal benefit because it
will be used to develop the next generation of incentive mechanisms.