* 0847133
* CAREER:  Geographies of Sovereignty: Global Migration, Legality, and the Island Index
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Alison Mountz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2014
* USD 428,471.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much research on migration examines
conditions in countries of origin, immigrant experiences in 'host' societies, or
both. In contrast, there has been little consideration of zones of transit and
transition between country of origin and final destination, that is, the remote
sites migrants travel through on their journeys to new locations. This project
will examine these journeys between states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Alison
Mountz in the Department of Geography at Syracuse University is undertaking this
study, which will enhance knowledge on this neglected issue by investigating
islands as particular sites where struggles over migration, asylum, and
sovereignty transpire and where federal mandates of national security and
refugee protection intersect. An emerging body of literature suggests that
smuggling industries exploit economically impoverished migrants and asylum-
seekers in places of ambiguous jurisdiction. States also operate in remote
locales to manage undocumented migration through border enforcement and
detention. The research asks why particular islands become sites of migration
management, how migrants arrive on islands, and what legal issues ensue.
Qualitative and quantitative methods will be used to collect data on American,
Australian, and European islands that are sites of migration entry and
processing. The project aims to analyze island geographies and demographics and
to develop a Global Classroom based on these data. The resulting database will
be used to map offshore enforcement practices and to produce an island index
that aims to rank islands' propensity as sites of migration entry, processing,
and struggle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research findings will advance knowledge on
global migration in order to contribute to contemporary debates about
immigration, border enforcement, and asylum policies. The project will offer new
ways of understanding what happens to international migrants on their journeys
between states, including the role of interception at sea, detention on islands,
and human rights issues that emerge along the way. Graduate students will work
with the Principal Investigator to conduct comparative research in six field
sites in five countries. The research will contribute to innovative curricular
design in the fields of political geography and migration studies, including a
Global Classroom where students in South Africa, England, and the United States
will work via videoconference to map global migrations alongside peers located
across borders.