* 0847340
* CAREER: Scalable Moving-Domain QM/MM Methods for the Computation of Protein Electrostatics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Jose Gascon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER project supported by
the Theoretical &amp; Computational Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Jose Gascon of the University of Connecticut will carry out research to develop
accurate classical/quantum (QM/MM) computational methodologies for the
simulation of large biological molecules. In particular, Gascon will efficiently
compute electrostatic potentials in large biomolecules and combine this with
QM/MM hybrid methods. Polarization effects will be included in modeling the
electrostatic potential, and the large system under study will be partitioned
into smaller components, resulting in faster calculations. The educational plan
focuses on educating middle school teachers in computational chemistry methods
as well as on the SECRET program, which exposes high-school students to
computational chemistry in a "real-world" research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides creating new methodologies, the
proposed research will help advance the fundamental understanding of large
biomolecular systems and develop computational tools for computer-aided design
of new compounds. This work can likely have considerable impact not only on the
computational chemistry community but also on fields from quantitative
biochemistry to rational drug design. The educational component should help
increase chemical literacy early in a student's education and draw more women
and minorities into technical careers. &lt;br/&gt;