* 0847047
* Fundamental Predictions of Tryptophan Emission Spectra in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Patrik Callis, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 314,601.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of fluorescence methods to
study cellular biology at the molecular level of detail has become a rapidly
growing billion dollar industry. Most of these methods depend upon changes in
the intensity and/or wavelength of light emitted from a probe molecule when a
protein or nucleic acid undergoes a functional process. The PI is performing
hybrid quantum mechanical-classical mechanical computations and analysis that
lead to a detailed fundamental understanding of the largely unknown underlying
molecular physics that cause these changes. Specific focus will be on
understanding ultrafast fluorescence intensity decay and wavelength shift
experiments on proteins, the spectacular fluctuation of quenching rates seen in
single-molecule fluorescence of proteins, and the underlying mechanisms of
quenching variation used to monitor protein folding. These are areas of cutting
edge experimental work, and the PI works closely with experimental groups to
ensure that the computations are relevant and to help with interpreting the
experiments. This project builds on previous years of support, which led to
unprecedented progress in understanding tryptophan fluorescence wavelength and
intensity variability in proteins using electrostatics. The PI's newly acquired
ability to realistically evaluate electron transfer coupling elements during
dynamics simulations led unexpectedly to an understanding of why wavelength and
quenching are often strongly coupled and correlated. The project is now
immediately in a position to make insightful contributions to the contested
notion that time resolved wavelength shifts speak solely to solvation dynamics,
rather than a mixture of solvation dynamics and long term heterogeneity in
protein conformation. In summary, a major goal is to quantitatively predict
fluorescence quenching and wavelength shift rates for these systems without
empirical parameters, including computing relative fluorescence quenching by
tryptophan and tyrosine of flavins, chlorophyll, and fluorescent dyes attached
to proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's work has shown the importance of the
enormous local electric field strength and direction in determining fluorescence
behavior in proteins. Continued effort in these areas is encouraged by the
emerging view that the catalytic power of enzymes is largely due to a
specifically oriented, preorganized electrostatic environment, whose energy may
come from reduction in folding energy. A constant theme from the PI's group has
been that an ordered electrostatic environment coupled with large fluctuations
is precisely what determines whether fluorescence will be strong or weak, and
whether its average wavelength will be short or long. This meshes perfectly with
the exciting recent observation by Marcus and others that the temporal behavior
of fluctuations in electrostatic field is in common with that of other
properties of proteins over the time scale of biological importance.
Additionally, electron transfer-based fluorescence quenching is considered an
obscure subject within the biological community and in need of a rational means
for prediction and understanding. The microscopic details of how electron
transfer takes place in proteins and other materials are still an area of active
debate. There is a high probability that the methods developed by this research
will aid in the design of special purpose fluorescent dyes by predicting the
extent of quenching by specific quenchers. More broadly, electron transfer in
proteins is enormously important to life, given its central role in
photosynthesis, oxidative phosphorylation, and cell redox level. It is equally
important in the devices that serve most of society. The PI's teaching interests
have led to an integrated grasp of quantum mechanics, kinetics, and
thermodynamics, all of which play crucial roles in electron transfer processes.
He has established a graduate course in the physical chemistry of electron
transfer and works with undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
associates in his laboratory; he has productively mentored graduate students in
the laboratories of his collaborators.