* 0847687
* Metal ion partitioning via the Yellow Stripe-Like (YSL) family of transporters
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Elsbeth Walker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 06/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is an enhanced
understanding of the mechanisms by which plants acquire and then maintain the
correct levels of iron and other metal nutrients. Currently, little is known
about molecules involved in the movement of metals on a large scale, for
example, from roots to leaves, or from leaves and roots into seeds. Knowledge of
the mechanisms involved in plant iron movement is lacking, presenting a major
obstacle to devising approaches for biofortification of staple foods.
Biofortification refers to the modification of crops to accumulate additional
iron in edible parts; it is widely regarded as a sustainable means of improving
the iron nutrition of the 2-3 billion people worldwide whose inadequate diet
causes iron deficiency anemia. Improving our understanding of plant iron
homeostatic mechanisms is also critical if we wish to improve growth of crops in
marginal soils, where iron deficiency frequently limits crop growth. The
investigators' work on the Yellow Stripe-Like (YSL) family of proteins is
focused on these large scale, whole plant processes: YSL transporters are
required for normal movement of iron, zinc, and copper in both vegetative and
reproductive tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By analyzing mutant plants that lack
one or more YSL genes, the investigators will elucidate the key YSL genes that
mediate large scale movements of metals in plants. By analyzing global gene
expression in mutant plants, the investigators will identify novel genes and
gene networks that are involved in plant Fe homeostasis. The investigators will
also develop more reliable and straightforward assays that characterize the
transport activities of the YSL transporters. This project will provide numerous
(at least 60 over the three year duration of the project) meaningful
opportunities for undergraduate participation in this research program, and in
addition, will educate and train a PhD student and two postdoctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;