* 0847339
* The Basic and Advanced Science and Technology Academies of Research (B A STAR) Project
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Derrick Booth, Los Rios Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Ning Fang
* 09/30/2009
* USD 420,244.00

The California Alliance of MESA Directors (CAMD) composed of thirty-four
community colleges is seeking new ways to increase the number of under-
represented and disadvantaged students obtaining technical degrees. The MESA
model specifically targets these students through outreach and access to the
program and its components reaching to approximately 3,500 students per year.
Our focus is to build and expand on MESA's existing service infrastructure by
establishing the Basic and Advanced Science and Technology Academies of Research
(B A STAR) project. We believe that the BA STAR has the potential to directly
and indirectly increase the number of students obtaining technical degrees by
providing students the opportunity to develop technical, teamwork and leadership
abilities. The BA STAR Program consists of four major
components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Leadership Development Conference (Year
1)&lt;br/&gt;(2) Basic Science and Technology Academy of Research (Year
1)&lt;br/&gt;(3) Training and Employment as Academic Workshop Leaders (Year
2)&lt;br/&gt;(4) Advanced Science and Technology Academy of Research (Year
2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the first year students participate in a
Leadership Development Conference (LDC). A cohort of these students is then
invited to participate in the Basic Science and Technology Academy of Research
(B STAR) following the LDC. The B STAR focuses on providing a core understanding
of physics principles as well as developing technical computer skills. During
Year Two of the program, the cohort is employed as facilitators for Academic
Excellence Workshops (AEW) during the academic year. An AEW is a small community
of students working collaboratively to master technical course material with the
facilitator's guidance. During the summer of Year Two, the same cohort
participates in one of five Advanced Science and Technology Academies of
Research (A STAR). Each A STAR is research and project oriented, relating to the
participant's academic major with the guidance of a faculty or industry mentor.
The BA STAR project collects appropriate data for both formative and summative
evaluation. The project also tracks and evaluates student participants to verify
increased persistence, completion and/or transfer or job placement. Information
regarding this project is included in MESA recruitment strategies and materials.
Moreover, we intend to disseminate the project's results across the nation via
peer-reviewed published articles, presented at relevant conferences, and posted
on the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;