* 0847926
* CCI Phase I: Center for Molecular Interfacing
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Hector Abruna, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,519,821.00

The Center for Molecular Interfacing (CMI) will enable the integration of well-
controlled molecular constituents within macroscopic systems by using graphene
sheets and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to achieve molecularly well-defined,
reproducible and robust connections. This interdisciplinary and inter-
institutional team of researchers will (1) study electrical and opto-electronic
properties of graphene-molecule-graphene and CNT-molecule-CNT devices with
mechanical adjustability, electrolytic gating, and optical access; (2) use AFM
and STM to characterize the molecule-graphene interface; and (3) use advanced
laser microscopy to identify and excite individual electrically-contacted
molecules. This work will be enabled by the development of novel experimental
platforms and techniques, synthesis of molecular architectures of deliberate
design and function, and the development of a theoretical framework. Fundamental
chemical processes such as self-exchange rates in redox reactions, the distance
dependence of electron transfer, and photoinduced electron transfer can all be
studied by precisely modulating the spacing in graphene-molecule-graphene
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will provide the knowledge base
to enable revolutionary advances in technologies such as energy conversion and
storage, sensing, information technologies, and catalysis. The proposed work
combines chemistry and&lt;br/&gt;physics at the cutting edge of science and
technology and provides students with collaborative interdisciplinary research
training. Particular emphasis will be placed in the recruitment and retention of
women and underrepresented minorities at all educational levels. Young children
in Puerto Rico will participate in a novel bilingual outreach program "Molecules
meet Macro" in partnership with the Casa Pueblo Cooperative in Adjuntas, Puerto
Rico. Center researchers will also participate in local news features,
demonstrations and exhibits at a local science museum, and other public outreach
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI)
Program supports research centers that can address major, long-term fundamental
chemical research challenges that have a high probability of both producing
transformative research and leading to innovation. These Centers will attract
broad scientific and public interest.