* 0847641
* CAREER: Development of Complex Polysaccharide Nanostructures via Electrostatic Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Matthew Kipper, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2014
* USD 413,801.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847641 PI: Kipper, Matthew ORG: Colorado
State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Development of complex polysaccharide
nanostructures via electrostatic self-assembly &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Polysaccharides provide
structural and mechanical properties for tissues and organs, and they have
binding domains for proteins such as enzymes, cytokines, growth factors, and
other extracellular matrix components. They are therefore excellent candidate
materials for introducing both biomechanical and biochemical functionality into
materials for applications such as tissue engineering. Their chemical and
physical properties are affected by their polyelectrolyte nature which arises
from pendent carboxylic acid, amine, and sulfate moieties. These electrostatic
interactions dominate such phenomena as self-assembly, protein binding, and
interactions at surfaces and interfaces, and can be used to tune the
nanostructure and surface properties of polysaccharide-based materials. The
overall goal of this work is to develop techniques to tailor the assembly of
complex polysaccharide nanostructures. To accomplish this goal, three research
objectives will be achieved: (1) Construct a series of synthetic analogs of a
biologically derived polysaccharide nanostructure, aggrecan, with tunable
architecture, so that the effects of its nanostructure on solution structure and
dynamics can be discerned. (2) Tune the nanoscale structure and composition of
polysaccharide-based nanoparticles and surface coatings. (3) Develop complex
assemblies of polysaccharide nanostructures, and use them to engineer mimics of
biological nanostructures based on polysaccharides, such as the aggrecan
aggregate. Polyelectrolyte multilayers, polyelectrolyte complex nanoparticles,
and electrospun nanofibers will be employed to control the composition and
organization of materials in rectangular, spherical, and cylindrical
coordinates, respectively. In the third objective, we will develop techniques to
combine these three types of nanostructures into more complex
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The success of this research
program will provide a new understanding of the physical chemistry and nanoscale
organization of an important class of biological materials. This will enable the
engineering design of materials that mimic the structure and organization of
tissues. The technology developed here will be incorporated into a new course at
Colorado State University on the physical chemistry of biomacromolecules, for
students in the new interdisciplinary School of Biomedical Engineering at
Colorado State University. Participating graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained to work at the interface of engineering and biology by applying
their engineering expertise to problems in biology and medicine. The PI has
established collaborations with researchers in the Colleges of Veterinary
Medicine and Agriculture that will give students opportunities to interact with
researchers from a variety of disciplines. The PI will develop and deliver a two
week summer short course for high school students on polymers that will include
daily morning lecture and afternoon laboratory components. The underlying theme
for the short course will be that the properties and performance of polymers
that they can witness over many length scales and time scales are ultimately
related to the molecular architecture. The course will introduce students to
polymers beginning with everyday examples and then discuss some of the
interesting properties and familiar applications of polymers through topics they
can relate to. Polymer production will be introduced through products they are
familiar with such as kitchen wrap and disposable plastic kitchenware, polymer
solubility will be introduced through discussions of recycling, and polymer
solutions and viscoelasticity will be discussed through ?polymers in the
kitchen.? Laboratory experiments will be designed that are low-cost and can be
easily reproduced in a typical high school classroom. The course will be offered
to twelve high school students and one to three high school science teachers at
local (Fort Collins) public high schools and the Denver School of Science and
Technology (DSST). DSST is a public charter school with a population of 28%
Hispanic and 29% African American students. At DSST 40% of the students come
from low-income families. Including students and teachers from DSST is a
deliberate strategy to help improve the enrollment of underrepresented
minorities in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;