* 0847368
* CAREER: An ecohydrological framework for understanding land degradation in dryland ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Kelly Caylor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,543,738.00

This proposal will provide a novel perspective regarding how factors that impact
dryland vegetation structure govern spatial and temporal patterns of plant water
use and water use ef&amp;#64257;ciency from individual to landscape scales. To
accomplish this goal, an ecohydrological observatory will be created at the
Princeton-affiliated Mpala Research Centre &amp; Conservancy (MRCC), located in
the Laikipia District of central Kenya. The observatory will be capable of
resolving landscape-scale evaporation and transpiration separately using an
integrated off-axis cavity spectrometer (ICOS) to measure the isotopic
composition of water vapor fluxes between the land surface and the atmosphere.
Prior calibration and validation activities have demonstrated the utility of
this sensor for E/T partitioning, and the possibility of direct flux
characterization using ICOS laser absorption methods at sampling frequencies of
0.5 Hz.&lt;br/&gt;Three specific hypotheses form the heart of the research and
educational plans: (1) The structural/functional organization of water-limited
vegetation may be described according to a constrained optimization that seeks
to both maximize water use (maintain high transpiration) and also minimize water
stress (prevent low water use efficiency) across a range of scales and settings;
(2) Ecosystem-scale functional diversity in plant water use and water use
efficiency (e.g. differing tree/grass water use in time and space) are critical
to the maintenance of ecological and hydrological function in dryland
ecosystems; and (3) Shifts in the relative magnitude of various water balance
components (e.g. transpiration/ evaporation) may be used as diagnostic
signatures of land degradation in dryland ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;To address
these hypotheses, the proposed research program will combine continuous
ecohydrological measurements at a core site with simultaneous intensive shorter-
term observations in both managed and experimentally manipulated plots. The
combination of continuous data as well as targeted measurements will allow for
direct tests of ecosystem response to water availability in landscapes
differentially impacted by herbivory and land use intensity. The results of this
research provide a unique quantitative framework for the development of land use
strategies that seek to prevent land degradation and sustain pastoralist
societies that depend on dryland ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;