* 0847786
* CAREER: III-nitrides Nanowire Superlattice for Nanoscale Laser Diodes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Yat Li, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The primary objectives of this CAREER project are to understand the interplay of
nanostructure design and material properties, and use a combined experimental
and modeling approach to define fundamental issues of semiconductor nanowire
optical structures with the goal of demonstrating free-standing nanowire
injection lasers. The project is comprised of the following interrelated
subprograms: 1) Synthesis and modeling of nanowire laser structures. III-
nitrides axial modulated nanowire structures, with multiple-quantum-dots (MQDs)
as active medium and distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) as an optical feedback
configuration, will be synthesized. Three-dimensional modeling will be performed
to predict the properties of nanowire gain medium and optical cavity as a
function of wire size, morphology, DBR and MQWs design. 2) Development of an
optimized nanowire laser structure via systematic optical characterization and
modeling, and experimental demonstration of an optically pumped nanowire laser.
Lasing threshold and its dependence on nanowire structure will be studied. 3)
Investigation of nanowire electronic properties and development new scheme for
carrier injection. 4) Development of a free-standing injection nanowire laser.
The modulation of lasing threshold and emission wavelength will be studied.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The project is transformative research that addresses fundamental research
issues in electronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance.
The project is expected to advance the understanding of the interplay between
nanostructure design and fundamental properties, and opens up substantial
opportunities in optoelectronic devices, which could impact extensively the
technology of electronics, photonics and energy conversion. The project is
multidisciplinary, which not only provides comprehensive research training for
students, but also promotes strong cross-department/institution and
international collaboration. The project also enhances the integration of
research and educational activities. The PI plans to develop new lectures,
seminar and laboratory courses by incorporating nanoscience research. Outreach
visits to industrial materials research labs and organizing public and industry
participation in the education program is an important part of the planned
activities. In addition, the PI plans to promote independent undergraduate
research in UCSC to recruit and train future young scientists, in particular
underrepresented students and students from non-Ph.D. granting institution and
community college.