* 0847570
* CAREER: Manifestations of the Proximity Effect and Related Phenomena in Hybrid Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Julia Meyer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,773.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education
to discover and explore novel phenomena involving the proximity effect and
related materials in high-correlated systems. Because of recent improvements in
controlling systems properties at the nanoscale, a wide variety of novel
phenomena associated with the confined geometry and the close contact of
different materials have become accessible. For example, a superconductor in
close contact with some other material can impart some of its properties onto
that material due to the diffusion of Cooper pairs across the interface. Because
of their incompatible spin properties, this proximity effect between a singlet
superconductor and a ferromagnet leads to a variety of unusual phenomena. The
research supported under this CAREER award focuses on superconductor-ferromagnet
hybrid systems. Questions addressed include: (i) screening properties of
superconductor-ferromagnet multilayers, (ii) mesoscopic effects in restricted
geometries, (iii) investigating the properties of systems with a dynamic
magnetization, and (iv) exploring the possibility of cooling spins in
superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor junctions.

Related effects in cold atomic gases will also be studied. Fascinating in its
own right, the relatively new field of cold atomic gases helps to shed light on
some of the most interesting open questions in traditional solid state physics.
Interactions can be tuned using magnetic fields. The research supported in this
award will address the physics of cold two-component fermion gases with
spatially varying interactions and resulting proximity-effect physics. The
coupling between BCS, unitary, and BEC regimes promises novel phenomena beyond
what is seen in solid state systems.

The fascinating developments in physics and the fascination it has to working
scientists is frequently not communicated to students because of the tenuous
connection of most undergraduate physics courses to modern research. Using
nanoscience as an example, the education component of this CAREER award will
concentrate on incorporating topics of current interest into the introductory
physics courses at Ohio State and on involving undergraduate students in
outreach through COSI (Center for Science and Industry) in Columbus.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER proposal supports theoretical research and education involving novel
phenomena associated with the close contact of superconductors and other
materials. Below a certain temperature which is generally different for
different materials, some materials can exhibit superconductivity a quantum
mechanical state of matter in which the resistance to the flow of electrons
vanishes. An intriguing property of superconductivity is that it is in a sense
contagious and can appear across interfaces with other materials that are not
superconducting. The PI will study this phenomenon in various hybrid materials,
including some with magnetic layers. Progress in nanofabrication technology has
opened the door to a wide variety of novel phenomena as the sample dimensions
become of the order of the relevant microscopic length scales. The research
supported under this award focuses on uncovering and understanding these novel
phenomena involving superconductor-ferromagnetic material interfaces, as well as
analogous effects in very cold gases of atoms that exhibit analogous phenomena.

The study of materials and phenomena confined to length scales of 1/100,000 of
the diameter of the human hair, the nanoscale, has given rise to nanoscience and
nanotechnology. The PI aims to convey this fascinating frontier of the tiny to
undergraduate students and the public through developing curricula of
introductory physics courses at OSU that will include recent developments in
physics. With the help of interested undergraduate students, the PI will use
opportunities offered by the Center for Science and Industry Columbus to present
the relevance and implications of nanoscience and nanotechnology to the general
public. Furthermore, results of the proposed research will be widely
disseminated through seminars and conferences as well as through publications.
Engaging students in the research serves the goal of training them in a field
that is highly relevant, both scientifically and technologically.