* 0847392
* CAREER:  Empirical Analysis of the Causes and Consequences of Financial Distress
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Efraim Benmelech, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,825.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a long-term
research and teaching agenda related to the economics of financial distress and
bankruptcy. For the past several years the PI has been interested in
understanding the various factors that shape financial contracts, financial
contract renegotiation, and bankruptcy. Empirical analysis of the causes and
consequences of financial distress is difficult since bankruptcy and financial
distress are potentially correlated with general economic downturns. This career
development plan outlines three research projects that identify causal effects
of financial distress and bankruptcy in under explored areas of corporate
finance.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In the first project the PI develops an
empirical methodology to evaluate the causal effect of short-term debt on
financial distress and financial crises. While short-term debt has often been
blamed for causing financial distress and precipitating financial crises, a
reverse causality explanation suggests that accumulation of short term debt may
be efficient when firms experience deterioration in the quality of their assets,
and is therefore a symptom of the crisis rather than a cause. The evidence in
this project cast light on an important question in corporate finance and
international economics. Yet, in addition to identifying whether short-term debt
had a causal effect in precipitating the East-Asian crisis, the empirical
methodology that the PI develops in this project can be used to address other
questions in corporate finance. In particular, where empirical
identification&lt;br/&gt;of the effect of short-term debt is plagued with
endogeneity. The PI will use this methodology to estimate the causal effect of
short-term debt on a battery of outcome variables such as investment, likelihood
of default, and bankruptcy filing. The second project identifies channels
through which bankrupt firms impose externalities on their non-bankrupt
competitors, creating industry contagion and spillovers. While theory suggests
that contagion may exist, empirical evidence is sparse. The approach here
enables the PI to identify a novel "collateral channel" through which bankrupt
airlines impose externalities on prices of used capital in the industry, and
hence lead to higher cost of capital to their competitors. The goal of the third
project is to understand how financial distress and bankruptcy lead to
extraction of concessions from employees in renegotiation, and to estimate the
magnitude of these concessions. The PI will analyze the credibility of the
threat of financially distressed firms to terminate their underfunded defined
benefits pension plans. This project will also sheds more light on pension
dumping and the consequences to retirees with defined benefits pension
plans.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: All of the three projects are of immense
importance to policy makers. Since the outbreak of the East Asian crisis in
1997, the IMF and the World Bank are analyzing the role of short-term debt in
increasing the vulnerability to financial crises. Policymakers argue that
emerging market countries should pay attention to debt management and discourage
a large buildup of shortterm debt. The evidence and the empirical methodology of
the first project might be proven useful in analyzing these issues. The second
and the third projects are important for the design of optimal bankruptcy
procedures. Results of the third project would also be relevant for regulators
such as the Department of Labor and PBGC in understanding how retirees? rights
are affected by strategic bankruptcy filings by firms.&lt;br/&gt;Educational
component of the project: The proposal includes a significant educational
component. The PI will develop and redesign two courses (undergraduate and
graduate) in corporate finance. The project will involve a significant
participation of graduate and undergraduate students. The PI will also organize
a conference on bankruptcy and financial distress.