* 0847385
* CAREER: Photoemission Spectroscopy of Thin Films : A New Laboratory for  Studying Quantum Many-Body Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kyle Shen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 530,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT :

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research funded by this CAREER award will probe exotic
states of matter in artificially engineered materials. In particular, this
project will investigate the quantum interactions and mechanisms which give rise
to the unique properties of these materials, which include superconductivity,
magnetoresistance, and phase changes. These properties have enormous utility in
energy delivery and electronic applications, although this potential remains
largely untapped. This is due to the current lack of understanding of the
microscopic mechanisms governing these properties, something that this CAREER
project will directly address. Recognizing the importance of these materials in
energy-related applications, the educational component of this CAREER award will
emphasize the importance of materials physics in energy storage, conversion, and
transport. Education and research will be tightly integrated at the
undergraduate level through research projects through the REU program as well as
by Cornell undergraduates. In addition, a freshman-level module emphasizing the
physics of power generation and conversion will be developed. This award will
also support an outreach program centered on developing an exhibit on energy and
materials for the public at the Ithaca Sciencenter. This award is supported by
the Division of Materials Research and the Division of Physics.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT :

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research funded by this CAREER award will probe exotic
states of matter in artificially engineered materials. In particular, this
project will utilize angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) to study
quantum many-body interactions in epitaxial thin films of correlated quantum
materials grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). These systems include the novel
two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) formed in oxide heterostructures (SrTiO3 /
LaAlO3), superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance in the manganites
(La2MnO4), and metal-insulator transitions (EuO, V2O3). Utilizing MBE-
synthesized materials will allow for the unique studies of heterostructures,
nanostructures, and materials under the influence of epitaxial strain. The
educational component of this CAREER award will emphasize the importance of such
materials in energy storage, conversion, and transport applications. Education
and research will be tightly integrated at the undergraduate level through
research projects through the REU program as well as by Cornell undergraduates.
In addition, a freshman-level module emphasizing the physics of power generation
and conversion will be developed. This award will also support an outreach
program centered on developing an exhibit on energy and materials for the public
at the Ithaca Sciencenter. This award is supported by the Division of Materials
Research and the Division of Physics.