* 0847231
* Curation of Fluid Preserved Vertebrates and Invertebrates - A Collaborative Proposal from the Museum of Wildlife and Fish Biology and the Bohart Museum of Entomology.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Lynn Kimsey, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 495,535.00

The Museum of Wildlife and Fish Biology and Bohart Museum of Entomology, (both
of the University of California, Davis) have been awarded $495,535 from the NSF
Biological Research Collections Grant Program. This grant will fund curation
needs for the alcohol preserved specimens in their holdings ? nearly 35,000
vertebrates and 200,000 insects. It will assist them by improving specimen
preservation, storage, inventory (with new bar-coding system), and databasing.
The two museums will work collaboratively in order to reduce duplicative efforts
and improve efficiency. Objectives are to improve curation standards, safety,
and accessibility to specimens.

Due to their innovative programs, these museums have become valued resources in
California (and nationally) and collection use and services have correspondingly
advanced. In addition to more traditional uses of museum specimens, they provide
broader services including: providing species identification workshops for
agency and private biologists; educating students at UC Davis (they support 34
courses on campus reaching over 1,900 students annually); and supporting tours
of K-12 students and teachers groups. Combined, their collections are visited by
over 10,000 persons each year of which 89% are members of the general public. As
a result of broader use, the specimens require a high level of curation and
maintenance. Requests for access by researchers remains steady, with an average
of 10 publications annually produced using their holdings.