* 0847088
* CAREER: Area-and-Power-Minimized Many-Channel Neural-Spike DSP
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Dejan Markovic, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 03/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems University of California-Los Angeles
Dejan Markovic CAREER: Area-and-Power-Minimized Many-Channel Neural-Spike DSP

The objective of this research is to revolutionize the digital-signal-processing
(DSP) technology used for many-channel electrophysiological recording systems
used in both clinical and neuroscientific applications. The approach is to
provide tight interaction between algorithms and the underlying technology to
optimize the DSP architecture. The goal is to demonstrate improvements of
several orders of magnitude in the increased number of channels and decreased
hardware cost.

With respect to intellectual merit, this project intends to demonstrate a real-
time implantable DSP chip scalable up to 2,000 neural channels. Existing designs
provide partial DSP functionality for only up to 30 channels. The chip will be
able to isolate activity from individual neurons and reduce the data rate below
800 kbps while maintaining a power density less than 0.8 milliwatts per square
millimeter, as needed for safety. The project will also provide a DSP
architecture for hardware emulation to demonstrate over a 10,000 times speed-up
in data processing compared to state-of-the-art computers.

With respect to broader impact, a successful integration of neural-data
processing will significantly advance many applications such as visual,
auditory, motor, and cognitive prosthetics. Methods for achieving faster
analysis of electrophysiological data will provide neuroscientists quicker
access to important research data and improve the overall quality of living. The
program intends to train a diverse population of students for careers in
industry and academia through relevant and practical design projects, and
promote a wider public access to the latest research and educational tools. The
far-reaching social and economic impact will be to help sustain the spread and
evolution of information technology to new biological and medical applications.