* 0847964
* Student Travel Support for the 2008 North American Power Symposium, held at Calgary, Canada, September 28-30, 2008
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Siddharth Suryanarayanan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 02/28/2009
* USD 10,000.00

Student Travel Support for the 2008 North American Power Symposium, held at
Calgary, Canada, September 28, 2008 ? September 30, 2008.

This proposal requests funding to subsidize the travel expenses incurred by
students attending the 40th Annual North American Power Symposium to be held at
Calgary, Canada from September 28 to September 30, 2008. It is anticipated that
this subsidy will positively impact the extent of student participation at the
conference. The North American Power Symposium (NAPS) is a non-profit event that
is aimed primarily at student participation. Traditionally, the overwhelming
majority of the papers are presented by students. At the 2008 NAPS, the
organizers are taking several other steps to foster and encourage student
participation. This includes arrangement for free accommodation of registered
students. Additional measures are being taken to encourage women and minorities
to participate.

Intellectual Merit: NAPS is unique in its focus on students preparing and
presenting technical papers. This conference provides a unique opportunity for
NSF to interact with and promote interaction among students, academia and power
industry to promote and discuss NSF?s vision of technical challenges in power
and energy, and complex systems, sensing, communication and control as well as
its economic, educational and sociological impact. NAPS is also venue to an
exciting student paper competition for identifying and fostering high quality
research performed by students.

Broader Impact: NAPS conferences have a history of giving students their first
opportunity at research presentations. Further, NAPS encourages discussion of
systematic integration of research and teaching. Based on recent history of NAPS
conferences the student program has been able to attract 20% minorities and
women.