* 0847611
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Eduction Proposal in Gravitational Wave Astronomy and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 03/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

This CAREER award supports the work of the PI and his students within the
Syracuse University Gravitational Wave Group to detect gravitational waves with
the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO). The research
will target gravitational waves emitted by colliding black holes and neutron
stars in the Enhanced LIGO detectors. This project will also use information
from computer modeling of sources of gravitational waves to improve searches and
maximize the astrophysical information that can be extracted from detections.
The outreach component of this award will bring the excitement of the NSF's
cutting edge research to the middle-school
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational waves and black holes are among
the most dramatic predictions of Einstein's theory of general relativity. LIGO
is an ambitious NSF-funded project to detect these waves and use them to explore
the Universe. Detecting these waves will open a new window on the Universe and
will allow us to study one of the fundamental forces of nature. This award
supports effort to build bridges between gravitational-wave astronomers, source
modelers, and optical astronomers. These synergies will be essential to the
success of LIGO and the field of gravitational-wave astronomy. The projects will
also provide training for graduate and undergraduate student and drive
development of the national cyberinfrastructure.