* 0847616
* EAR-PF: Quantifying the Geochemical-Microbial Connection Using Thermodynamics and Environmental Data
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Jeffrey Dick, Dick                    Jeffrey        M
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 01/31/2011
* USD 160,000.00

Dr. Jeffrey Dick is awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at Arizona State University. The
investigation will explore, using a thermodynamic framework, the physical-
chemical factors that support communities of microbes in a hot spring at
Yellowstone National Park. Environmental genomics data will be coupled with
geochemical measurements including temperature, oxidation-reduction potential
and elemental concentrations to predict for the first time the relative
abundances of proteins as well as the diversity of the microbial populations in
this system. Placing the environmental genomic and geochemical data into the
same thermodynamically derived frame of reference is crucial to a rigorous
theoretical analysis of the geobiological system responses to environmental
gradients. It can also aid in the growing challenge of interpreting large
amounts of environmental data and in deducing possible geochemical imprints on
the genomic relationships. The approach will bring together insights from
biogeochemistry and environmental genomics to identify the amino acid
compositions of enzymes that are involved in the cycles of carbon, nitrogen and
other elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An expected outcome of this project is the
development of a software implementation of the computational models that can
then be modified to investigate the geochemical limits of different metabolic
pathways in other extreme environments. The fellow will engage in outreach and
educational activities by developing an interactive presentation for the annual
Earth and Space Science Day at Arizona State University and by assisting faculty
and undergraduate students in a senior group project to conceive and carry out a
mission of geobiological exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;