* 0847790
* CAREER: Correlation of coupled electronic and nuclear motions in biological photoreceptors using femtosecond multidimensional spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Munira Khalil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2014
* USD 658,460.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This CAREER award, funded by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, supports an experimental research
program by Professor Khalil of University of Washington to develop new
spectroscopic techniques to measure coupled electronic and nuclear motions in
chemical and biological systems. Multidimensional spectroscopies utilizing
optical and infrared femtosecond fields will directly probe couplings between
electronic and vibrational motions. This effort will include synthesizing new
pulse sequences, interpreting and displaying the 3-D data set in an intuitive
manner, and developing a theoretical framework for relating spectroscopic
observables to physically relevant molecular parameters. The end goal of this
project will be to use these novel spectroscopies to learn how the absorption of
a photon translates into biological function in photoreceptor
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the experimental program
described above will broadly impact the fields of ultrafast multidimensional
spectroscopy and ultrafast photobiology. A detailed understanding of the
photobiology photoreceptor proteins has implications for designing de novo
photo-signaling proteins and bio-mimetic light-switching
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal lies at the interface of optical,
chemical and biological sciences, which provides a rich training ground for
graduate and undergraduate students. In partnership with Seattle MESA
(Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement) chapter, underrepresented minority
students from Seattle high schools will spend a summer in the PI's laboratory
performing experiments. Efforts in undergraduate curriculum development in
physical chemistry will include developing a series of problems using examples
from current biophysical literature and making them available to the wider
scientific community via the internet.