* 0847891
* Improvements to the Botanical and Entomological Collections at the Towson University Biodiversity Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* John LaPolla, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 273,214.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two largest and oldest natural
history collections at Towson University (TU) are the botanical and
entomological collections. These collections are unique as they represent an
extensive compilation of specimens from the mid-Atlantic region beginning as
early as 1864. These collections are important as they are used in assessing
both the present and historical ranges of species, especially in light of
urbanization and global climate change. They are widely used by both
undergraduate and graduate students. Preservation of the collections will allow
TU to distinguish itself as a place where students can still receive training
that grounds them in a solid understanding of organismal
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this project will allow for better
space utilization and the purchase of new cabinets for specimen preservation.
Imaging and data basing will also increase the accessibility of the collections
to a broader range of users through a designated website. Students at TU will be
trained in specimen preservation, database management and the interpretation of
natural history data. In addition, large numbers of K-12 students in Maryland
and, more specifically, the Baltimore metropolitan area, will be impacted
through the various outreach programs undertaken with the Hackerman Academy and
the Cherry Hill Project&lt;br/&gt;