* 0847351
* CAREER:  Understanding Responses to Inequitable Outcomes in Non-Human Primates
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Sarah Brosnan, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 06/30/2014
* USD 677,462.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of research in economics and
social psychology shows that people respond negatively to receiving worse
outcomes as compared to other individuals. These reactions impact many decisions
in people's daily lives and sometimes lead them to make decisions to their
detriment. More recent research indicates that other species exhibit a similar
reaction to inequality, often refusing rewards that are inferior to those
received by their peers. However, thus far the evolutionary mechanism(s) for and
function(s) of this response remain unknown, as does the reason for the
significant variation seen in how the response manifests. &lt;br/&gt; The
proposed research examines the factors surrounding negative reactions to
inequity across non-human primate species to determine 1) the mechanism(s)
causing this behavioral reaction, 2) the social and/or environmental factors
affecting the reaction and 3) the evolutionary history of this reaction. Seven
species of primates will be asked to make decisions about whether or not to
accept rewards in a series of studies in which their outcomes vary relative to
their social partners. The influence of social factors like group membership and
individual factors like personality will also be investigated. &lt;br/&gt; The
results of this research will clarify how decision-making is affected by unequal
outcomes. As a CAREER project, this work offers undergraduate and graduate
students multiple opportunities to become involved with interdisciplinary
research, as well as providing for the development of course materials designed
to enhance undergraduate education, which will be freely distributed to the
community.