* 0847481
* CAREER: Metallic nitride fullerenes: synthesis, characterization, and applications of their polymer nanocomposites
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2015
* J. Paige Buchanan, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 520,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 0847481 Date:
December 25, 2008&lt;br/&gt;PI: Phillips Institution: University of Southern
Mississippi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic
Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Paige Phillips of the
Chemistry Department at the University of Southern Mississippi will work with a
new class of "super molecules" - metallic nitride fullerenes - that are now
available in gram quantities for transformative lab-scale research programs. The
PI has participated in the development of MNF materials since their discovery in
1999, which has afforded her a unique expertise with regard to understanding
their physical and chemical behavior. The proposed work represents a seminal
effort to systematically characterize the fundamental photochemistry of MNF
nanomaterials, their derivatives, thin-films, and polymer nanocomposites. This
work is also expected to contribute significantly to the volume of knowledge
concerning functionalization chemistries available for MNF adduct formation.
Being able to predictably alter the physical and chemical properties of the MNF
through surface modification is essential to realizing the potential of these
materials in any commercial application. The PI plans to use an iterative
approach between molecular modeling and experimentation, using empirical
calculations to guide experimental design and choice of reagents. The rationale
for the reactions chosen include the likelihood of high yields and multiple
additions, enabling secondary functional group attachments, and the presence of
supporting preliminary data. During this work, the PI will develop methodologies
to incorporate MNFs into polymer matrices, generating exciting nanocomposite
materials, and characterize their subsequent film properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Phillips will pursue a project that is expected
to produce a significant number of publications, presentations, and patents
while offering underrepresented groups a unique and diverse educational
experience. With the largest African American percentage in the United States,
Mississippi has a high population of minorities from which to draw participants
for the PI's recruiting and inclusion plans. The PI's teaching and research plan
fosters discovery, opportunity, inspired teaching, and enthusiastic learning
through integration of research and education. The PI promotes the inclusion of
high school and lower-level undergraduate students, women, and minorities at
early, impressionable academic ages, in part by routinely hiring students for
summer undergraduate research positions in her labs. As the only female
Chemistry professor in the department, the PI has the opportunity to mentor
students who desire a female advisor. The PI has been the Graduate Recruiting
Coordinator for the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and in this
capacity has developed strong professional ties to the larger Mississippi area
scientific community. As a recent transplant from industry, the PI also
maintains a large number of contacts in industry for internships and co-ops for
excellent students. This CAREER program has a comprehensive research and
educational integration plan, which will address all major aspects of the
student's educational experience.