* 0847457
* CAREER: Exploring Models of Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Xi Yin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
proposal is to understand the limits and predictive power of string theory by:
(1) investigating fundamental questions such as: Are there consistent models of
quantum gravity that are not described by string theories? And if so, what
constraints does string theory put on quantum theories of gravity in general?;
and (2) applying the ideas and methods of string theory to other fields of
physics and mathematics. The first part of the research project will be carried
out by studying low dimensional models of quantum gravity, using the insight of
the holographic duality between gravity and gauge theories (AdS/CFT
correspondence) as well as effective field theories. Corners of the landscape of
four-dimensional string vacua will be explored using recently discovered dual
three dimensional gauge theories. The dynamics of branes at strong coupling and
string theory in spacetimes with large curvature will be investigated using
integrable structures in large N gauge theories and in string sigma models. The
second part of the project is concerned with applying AdS/CFT and brane
constructions in string theory to understand phenomena in QCD, such as
confinement, chiral symmetry breaking, quark-gluon plasma, and to understand
strongly coupled 2+1 dimensional systems in condensed matter physics.
Connections between the physics of black holes and the mathematics of
enumerative geometry and modular forms will be further explored. &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed projects broader impact is through the PIs curriculum development and
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students at Harvard, and through the
integration of the PIs research and teaching into the outreach program
TheoryNet. The PI's education plan includes developing new courses at Harvard
University on important subjects in theoretical physics advanced in the past
forty years. Group meetings with graduate and undergraduate students will be
established. The PI's research and teaching in these areas will be integrated
into the outreach program TheoryNet, with the goal of exposing K-12 students and
teachers in the greater Boston area, as well as neighboring northeastern states,
to advances in theoretical physics. The PI will visit high school classes, give
presentations on research topics, answer questions from the students, share
experiences with high school teachers and together develop a learning community.