* 0847607
* Collaborative Research: Multisensory Influences On Touch Perception--fMRI, MEG, and TMS Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Tony Ro, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2011
* USD 229,893.00

In our everyday lives, we are frequently confronted with information from
multiple sensory modalities. Recently, there has been increasing interest in the
circumstances under which stimuli presented in one sensory modality influence
sensations in a different modality. For instance, the sound of a mosquito
buzzing seemingly enhances sensitivity to touch (tactile stimulation) on our
skin; seeing an insect crawling on someone else's arm seems to affect our own
tactile perception. Despite several recent studies examining the influence of
audition and vision on touch, the brain mechanisms responsible for these
interactions are poorly understood. An NSF-funded collaborative effort of Tony
Ro (Rice University) and Michael Beauchamp (University of Texas Health Science
Center, Houston) will use a combination of converging methods to examine tactile
processing in isolation and the influence of vision and audition on touch in the
human brain. Psychophysical studies will be conducted to determine the optimal
stimulus parameters that demonstrate an influence of vision and audition on
tactile perception. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS), and magnetoencephalography (MEG) will be used to
localize the brain regions involved with integrating multisensory information.
While most of these experiments will be conducted using normal controls, an
additional series of experiments will be conducted in a unique patient who
acquired auditory-tactile synesthesia following a stroke. Tactile sensitivity on
the patient's left hand and arm was impaired, but he now feels tactile
sensations in that area in response to sounds. Psychophysical and imaging
experiment will be completed on this patient to determine the neural mechanisms
responsible for the synesthesia, especially whether plastic neural changes have
reconstituted the patient's somatosensory cortex so that it is now responds to
sounds.

These studies will not only better our understanding of multisensory
integration, but will provide a deeper appreciation of general information
processing mechanisms of the human brain. Such knowledge will contribute towards
the development of better rehabilitative tools for patients with congenital or
acquired sensory deficits to one or more of the sensory systems. Additionally,
this research will provide a better understanding of the mechanisms of natural
and brain-damaged induced changes that take place in the adult human brain. The
funding will be used to support research training opportunities for
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral trainees in cognitive neuroscience
and brain imaging in the Houston area. In addition to training the next
generation of brain scientists, the findings of this research will be
disseminated through scientific and lay publications, as well as other media
outlets, allowing for a deeper understanding and appreciation of the human brain
in society.