* 0847181
* Collaborative Research - NSF Workshop Series: Interdisciplinary Design as an Instructional Discipline
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Samuel Hunter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 08/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

This grant provides funding to conduct a series of workshops on
Interdisciplinary Design as an Instructional Discipline to be held over a 12
month period. Workshops will be held at the University of Michigan, Northwestern
University, and in conjunction with the 2009 NSF CMII Grantees Conference and
the 2009 ASME International Design Engineering Technical Conferences. These
workshops will address issues related to supporting the emerging discipline of
design through graduate education and interdisciplinary design research.
Participants from a broad range of disciplines, including engineering,
architecture, industrial design, visual arts, psychology, and business, among
others, will be invited to attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design is an integrative
activity that spans many disciplines; however, our educational system often
struggles to provide interdisciplinary design experiences for our undergraduate
and graduate students and to recognize the significance of design research.
Recently, new and innovative interdisciplinary graduate programs in design have
arisen with strong ties to engineering yet structured to fully embrace and
complement research from other disciplines. These graduate programs have the
potential to influence the development of a new discipline of design that
includes both education and research. Interdisciplinary education is a central
factor in expanding and sustaining an American competitive advantage in today's
global economy. Developing design as a broadly recognized and practiced
instructional discipline is essential for maintaining leadership in the
innovation of new products and systems. This series of workshops will bring
together experts in the field of engineering design research and education and
the larger design community to explore the challenges, successes, practices and
future directions of interdisciplinary design graduate programs to gain insight
into how to construct, grow, and sustain programs that prepare students for
successful design innovation. If successful, this series of workshops will form
the basis of new approaches to design education and research that fully embraces
interdisciplinary collaborations within the current structure of academia.