* 0847273
* CAREER: Chemical Methods for Organic Synthesis Using Nucleophilic Allyl- and Alkylmetal Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Elizabeth Jarvo, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2014
* USD 582,650.00

Proposal Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
development of catalyst-controlled asymmetric allylation and alkylation
reactions. While many methods for enantioselective allylation and alkylation
reactions exist, new methods are required for efficient and practical reactions
of complex synthetic intermediates. A central hypothesis is that nucleophilic
allylmetal and alkylmetal complexes will be formed in situ by transmetallation
mechanisms and these species will undergo ligand-controlled reactions with
electrophiles. Preliminary studies have uncovered a new class of nucleophilic
allylpalladium complexes with bidentate neutral N-heterocyclic carbene ligands,
which have been used to develop catalytic allylation reactions of N-acylpyrroles
and alkylidene malononitriles. The development of stereoselective conjugate
allylation reactions of broad scope with mild reaction conditions is planned. In
addition, new mechanisms for alkylation reactions of electrophiles by generating
alkylmetal complexes from boronic acids with first row transition metals will be
proposed. Studies to elucidate the mechanisms of the transformation will also be
performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Elizabeth Jarvo of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Irvine. Professor
Jarvo's research efforts revolve around the development of selective methods for
the formation of C-C bonds. Such chemistry will contribute to environmentally
benign methods for chemical synthesis as the transformations will be practical
and efficient, which will minimize the environmental cost of the transformation.
Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on synthesis in
the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries.