* 0847405
* CAREER: Terahertz Spectroscopy of Molecular Solids: Experiment and Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Timothy Korter, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 12/31/2013
* USD 640,147.00

In this award, Dr. Timothy Korter from Syracuse University, together with his
graduate students, will employ time-domain terahertz (THz) vibrational
spectroscopy to probe interactions between molecules in the solid state. The
vibrations are strongly influenced by the molecular environment which provides
information about the intermolecular potential energy surfaces which in turn are
related to macroscopic chemical properties such as phase transitions. Dr. Korter
plans to investigate two important classes of materials - crystalline
pharmaceuticals and solid-state energetic materials. Due to their complicated
structures influenced by hydrogen bonding, crystal packing and the presence of
enantiomers, the THz vibrational spectra are exceedingly complex, and
interpretation is only possible through integration of predictive methods.
Density functional theory and ab initio modeling combined with careful
experimentation will be instrumental in understanding the origins of the
spectral features observed. Structural analysis will be complemented through
techniques such as NMR spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and Raman spectroscopy.
Collaboration with Dr. Brown from UCSB will provide access to spectral features
below the resolution limit available in Dr. Korter's laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;The
educational plan consists of developing museum displays for the Milton J.
Rubenstein Museum of Science and Technology in Syracuse, NY. These displays are
aimed at achieving an understanding and appreciation of different time scales
ranging from seconds to femtoseconds, the timescale at which Dr. Korter performs
his experiments. The displays will be interactive and visually appealing to draw
the visitor to them, and then actively engage him or her. The PI plans to liaise
with specialists in the field to maximize their educational value.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz (THz) radiation can see through
clothing, plastic and paper which make scanners based on this technology good
candidates to detect concealed weapons in airport security. Unlike X-rays, THz
rays are very low in energy and can be applied without health risks. Their
ability to see through materials like plastics makes it possible to characterize
the content of a container without opening it. In this award, Dr. Korter from
Syracuse University will uncover the identifying features of explosives and
illicit drugs when subjected to THz radiation. Each individual material gives
rise to a very unique pattern when a plot is generated of how much of the THz
radiation is reflected or absorbed. These patterns are so complex that Dr.
Korter will also have to develop theoretical calculations to predict how a
material is expected to react to the radiation, and then compare these features
with the experimental patterns. Once these patterns are understood, they can be
used to identify illicit materials in routine screenings. &lt;br/&gt;When
subjecting the materials to THz radiation, Dr. Korter does not irradiate them
continuously but in very, very short pulses which allows him to extract
information on how the material is reacting to such a short perturbation. The
response is unique for each material. The pulses are on the order of femtosecond
duration, or the millionth fraction of a billionth of a second. This is almost
impossible for the human mind to grasp - therefore, Dr. Korter will develop
interactive displays for museums that help the visitor in developing a sense for
ultra-short time scales.