* 0847293
* SGER: Rethinking Drivers for IT: Lessons from a Newfoundland Fishing Village
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Phoebe Sengers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This project identifies implicit assumptions in contemporary IT design rooted in
industrialized consumer culture through an ethnographic investigation of the
arrival of broadband IT in Change Islands, Newfoundland, a remote, subsistence-
oriented, working-class community with close ties to the environment. This
exploratory work claims that the current drivers are inappropriately oriented
towards a non-sustainable future, and the fresh perspective that a group of
users whose particular needs and patterns of life are not well-known to IT
designers can identify a more sustainable future for IT design. This project
starts with the recognition that we must substantially rethink our relationship
to the environment. The project develops an understanding of the marginal ties
of this particular community to an industrialized consumer culture to highlight
the aspects of everyday IT design which are predicated on industrialized
orientations such as mass production and consumption of consumer goods and a
disconnect with the natural environment. In response to this understanding, a
design case book is developed to reflect a sustainable approach to human-
computer interaction (HCI). Design directions that arise from taking Change
Islanders? lifestyle and perspectives seriously contribute to the fundamental
rethinking of IT practice which will be an essential requirement of sustainable
HCI.