* 0847224
* CAREER: Fluctuation Phenomena Near Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Victor Galitski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports integrating fundamental theoretical condensed matter physics
research on quantum fluctuation phenomena and education activities on relating
theoretical results and ideas to experiment and communicating them to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;The research part of the proposal is devoted to the
theoretical studies of quantum fluctuation phenomena in a variety of electronic
systems. The main objective is to develop a quantitative microscopic theory of
certain quantum phase transitions and to connect it to the existing
phenomenological approaches:&lt;br/&gt;1. The PI will investigate the unusual
physics of quantum superconductor-to-insulator transition (SIT) in low-
dimensional systems and study the interplay between superconducting and phase
fluctuations in order to describe transport properties near the transition. The
primary goals of this project are to formulate a non-perturbative theory of the
SIT and connect the microscopic fermionic approach with the effective field
theory models, e.g., with the dual vortex theory. &lt;br/&gt;2. Motivated by
recent experiments, which unexpectedly observed a mysterious metallic state in
superconducting films, the PI will explore different theoretical scenarios for a
Bose metal phase in two dimensions. In addition, the PI will study mesoscopic
disorder fluctuations in order to develop a realistic theory of the non-linear
transport observed in the unusual metallic phase.&lt;br/&gt;3. The PI aims to
combine the strong-coupling model of superconductivity and the quantum
generalization of the celebrated Aslamazov-Larkin theory. The objective is to
construct a microscopic two-order-parameter theory, where both the pairing field
and the magnetic order parameter are dynamic variables. This research has the
aim of studying a variety of phenomena in superconductors, itinerant
ferromagnets, and heavy fermion materials.&lt;br/&gt;The educational/outreach
component is involves developing new courses and educational materials, which
will be done in close collaboration with the Maryland physics education group.
The PI has an established record of attracting underrepresented groups into
condensed matter physics and further such opportunities will be sought and
developed. The outreach component will include a series of public lectures and
demonstrations on the subject of superconductivity to middle- and high-school
students and participation in the Research Experience for Undergraduates
program. In addition, the PI will develop a professional dynamic web-resource to
disseminate the results of physics education and condensed matter research to
the interested investigators, physics teachers, and general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports fundamental theoretical condensed matter physics research and education
aiming to extend our understanding of superconductivity ? a state of matter
where electrons pair together and act in concert as reflected by an absence of
any loss to the flow of electric current. Particularly with the discovery of new
materials that exhibit superconductivity at ever higher temperatures,
superconductivity may enable efficient electric power transmission, electric
motors, and new electronic device technologies. This work contributes to the
intellectual foundations upon which such technological advances may be
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to develop a theory that will address
outstanding issues in our understanding of superconductivity. It will, in part,
build upon the standard theory of superconductivity that successfully describes
superconductivity that abruptly appears from an ordinary metallic state in
materials as the temperature is lowered through a material specific temperature
that is close to the absolute zero of temperature. It will include
experimentally accessible phenomena, for example in very thin superconducting
materials, that lie outside the standard description. The PI will develop a
theoretical framework that will enable the study of physical mechanisms that
were not envisioned in the standard theory and which lead to superconductivity
abruptly forming from a metallic state. This research may have impact on newly
discovered superconducting compounds where superconductivity occurs at much
higher temperatures than those for which the standard theory applies. The PI
will also study phase transformations that occur from the superconducting state
at the absolute zero of temperature and new states of matter that involve
superconductivity that may arise in thin films of superconducting material.
These are currently of fundamental scientific importance, but may also lead to
useful technologies in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational/outreach
component is involves developing new courses and educational materials, which
will be done in close collaboration with the Maryland physics education group.
The PI has an established record of attracting underrepresented groups into
condensed matter physics and further such opportunities will be sought and
developed. The outreach component will include a series of public lectures and
demonstrations on the subject of superconductivity to middle- and high-school
students and participation in the Research Experience for Undergraduates
program. In addition, the PI will develop a professional dynamic web-resource to
disseminate the results of physics education and condensed matter research to
the interested investigators, physics teachers, and general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;