* 0847433
* CAREER: Spin-Resolved Imaging of Correlated Electron Systems Including Cuprates and Pnictides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Jennifer Hoffman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 539,500.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award funds a project to
image electron spins in complex&lt;br/&gt;materials. Although electrons in
metals mind their own business, barely&lt;br/&gt;interacting with each other, in
so-called 'strongly correlated electron'&lt;br/&gt;materials the interactions of
electrons drive unique properties that are&lt;br/&gt;fascinating and often
useful. For example, so-called high-Tc&lt;br/&gt;superconductors carry
electricity without loss at economically feasible&lt;br/&gt;temperatures; multi-
ferroic materials allow electronic data storage using&lt;br/&gt;a magnetic field
and magnetic data storage using an electric field; heavy&lt;br/&gt;fermion
materials boast electrons behaving with thousands of times
their&lt;br/&gt;actual mass; simple sheets of carbon called graphene allow
electrons to&lt;br/&gt;zip along as if they had no mass at all. These materials
have in common&lt;br/&gt;that their electrons interact strongly, and that those
interactions are&lt;br/&gt;poorly understood. This project will employ a spin-
polarized scanning&lt;br/&gt;tunneling microscope to measure the energies and
locations of electron&lt;br/&gt;spins with atomic resolution, starting with
superconductors. The project&lt;br/&gt;will also use this technology to educate
three deserving groups: Harvard&lt;br/&gt;students will benefit from a new
undergraduate course on scanning&lt;br/&gt;tunneling microscopy; local
elementary school children will be invited to&lt;br/&gt;see a working science
lab viewing real electrons; interested citizens will&lt;br/&gt;be able to browse
a colorful website explaining the fascinating variety of&lt;br/&gt;materials
under investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award funds a project to image
electron spins in high-Tc&lt;br/&gt;superconductors, both cuprates and
pnictides. The common feature to these&lt;br/&gt;exotic materials is that their
electrons interact strongly, and there is&lt;br/&gt;no broadly successful
theoretical language to describe these so-called&lt;br/&gt;'correlated electron
materials'. Great strides have been made through&lt;br/&gt;various methods of
imaging the interactions of electron charges, but&lt;br/&gt;understanding has
been limited by the lack of effective tools to image the&lt;br/&gt;interactions
of electron spins. This project will employ a low&lt;br/&gt;temperature spin-
polarized scanning tunneling microscope to measure the&lt;br/&gt;spin-resolved
density of electronic states with atomic resolution. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, a
comparison will be made between spin interactions in&lt;br/&gt;cuprates and
pnictides, the only two known families of high-Tc&lt;br/&gt;superconductors,
discovered in 1986 and 2008. The project will also use&lt;br/&gt;this spin
imaging technology to educate three deserving groups: Harvard&lt;br/&gt;students
will benefit from a new undergraduate course on scanning&lt;br/&gt;tunneling
microscopy; local elementary school children will be invited to&lt;br/&gt;see a
working science lab imaging real electrons; interested citizens
will&lt;br/&gt;be able to browse a colorful website explaining the fascinating
variety of&lt;br/&gt;strongly correlated materials under
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;