* 0847667
* CAREER: Feedback Tomography
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Romeel Dave, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 07/31/2014
* USD 524,072.00

Dr. Romeel Dave' (University of Arizona) will carry out a theoretical study of
feedback tomography using state of the art hydrodynamic simulations that
dynamically incorporate outflows and sophisticated chemical evolution. Building
on highly successful models of cosmic-scale galactic outflows, this program will
focus on the environs of galaxies to better understand the complex interplay
between inflows, outflows, and ambient gas in and around galactic halos. A
primary goal will be to connect observable absorption-line tracers with physical
properties of the gas such as kinematics, density, temperature, and metallicity.
Through careful comparisons of models with available and forthcoming data, a
cosmologically framed scenario will be developed for how mass, metals, and
energy cycle in and out of galaxies. Implications will be investigated for how
such cycling jointly establishes key properties of the inter-galactic medium and
galaxies across cosmic time. Additionally, avenues will be explored for
improving and optimizing the modeling of outflows on large scales within current
codes, using carefully constrained test problems. Through this multi-faceted
effort, the understanding of galactic outflows and their impact on galaxy
properties will be greatly advanced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part of this
work Dr. Dave' will produce an educational movie on the principles of galaxy
formation, with a focus on how observations and simulations work together to
increase our understanding of galaxy formation. This pedagogical tool, which
will be designed to be used in classrooms or viewed as a stand-alone film, will
be used to help spur interest in the increasingly important subfield of
extragalactic astronomy, both among teachers and the general public. In
addition, Dr. Dave' will help develop and conduct an astronomy study abroad
program in Ghana for advanced undergraduates from the United States and Africa.
The program will teach basic concepts of extragalactic astronomy in the first
week, and then teach students to utilize online observational and simulation
databases to ask and answer questions about current problems in galaxy
formation.