* 0847417
* CAREER: Discrepancies in raft size between cellular and model membranes: Solid-state NMR measurements of protein effect on lipid raft size
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Megan Spence, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2014
* USD 650,000.00

In this CAREER award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Megan Spence proposes to study the role of
membrane proteins in modulating the size of lipid rafts in the cell membrane.
Lipid rafts are hypothesized to play an important role in the organization of
proteins in the membrane, actively orchestrating protein-protein interactions by
sequestering particular membrane proteins while shunning others. To measure the
size of the rafts, she will develop a diffusion-based technique combining solid-
state NMR spectroscopy with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), capable of
measuring rafts as small as 200 nm. The apparent diffusion of lipids in a raft
is constrained by the lipid raft boundaries, and the size of the rafts will be
measured by determining the maximum root-mean-square displacement of the lipids.
The proposed work will develop solid-state NMR spectroscopy as a biophysical
tool for the study of membrane rafts, and further our understanding of the role
of lipid rafts in modulating protein function and the role of proteins in
modulating lipid raft formation. Detailed information about lipid raft-protein
interactions will help medical researchers better understand raft-related
diseases like viral infection and prion diseases. &lt;br/&gt;Professor Spence
will develop a one-credit practical laboratory techniques class for second year
undergraduate students, focusing on laboratory culture, good notebook keeping,
and planning of experiments. To practice these skills, students will design
experiments to be carried out in an Earth's-field MRI. Early exposure to
research increases the retention of science majors, particularly those of
underrepresented populations, and this course poises sophomores for research
work in the following summer.