* 0847552
* CAREER: Morphology Control to Build 3D Magnetic Nanostructures and Tune Organic Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Thomas Gredig, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 02/29/2016
* USD 474,871.00

Technical: The scientific goal of this CAREER award is to advance the
fundamental understanding of organic semiconductors through four interrelated
materials science research tasks. The first task focuses on the role of the
growth process and grain size distribution, which play a crucial role for the
electronic and optical properties of organic materials. The morphology is
quantified using methodologies adapted from inorganic thin film studies. The
second task is based on a reduction in dimensionality through the fabrication of
organic superlattices (coherent multilayers), in which interface properties
dominate. Similar structures for metals resulted in the discovery of giant
magneto-resistance and the data storage revolution. The PI plans to combine
impedance spectroscopy and temperature-dependent measurements to gain insight
into the charge transport mechanism of organic superlattices. In collaboration
with chemists, the PI will engineer nano-building blocks with ferromagnetic
properties that can be tuned as needed. A concept of magnetically tailored one-
dimensional ferromagnetic chains is thereby introduced. The fourth task
addresses the issue of energy conversion efficiency in organic solar cells.
Recently, blends of n- and p-type semiconductors were discovered to
significantly increase the performance of organic photovoltaic cells. In a new
concept, the PI seeks to build nano-columns based on porous alumina templates
that are expected to boost the efficiency and grant additional structural
control and potential for optimized design.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance. Organic semiconductors are valuable for various
electronic and photonic applications and potentially large societal impacts. The
PI plans to establish a research and teaching laboratory at the California State
University, Long Beach, which serves the urban, ethnically and culturally
diverse student community. This CAREER award has multiple faceted education
impacts. The inclusion of organic semiconductors in the curriculum provides
unique and necessary training to students entering a rapidly expanding market
for organic semiconductors. Addition of demonstrations to the K-12 Science
Learning Center helps convey the relevance of nanotechnology and organic
semiconductors.