* 0847683
* CAREER: Climate Change Impacts on the Interrelationship between Iron Cycling and Organic Carbon: Environmental Biogeochemical Research and Education from Molecular to Field Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Thomas Borch, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2014
* USD 499,984.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Intensification of hydrologic regimes due to climate change
will have important impacts on biogeochemical processes and ecosystem services,
but quantifying these impacts experimentally remains a key challenge for earth
scientists. My research goal is to investigate the potential impacts of
increased precipitation on the interrelationship between biogeochemical cycling
of iron and organic matter. In pursuit of this goal, the objectives of this
CAREER proposal are to: 1) determine the impact of increasing water content on
the iron mineralogy and chemical structure of humic substances along subalpine
moisture gradients, 2) Elucidate the role of chemical structure and
concentration of humic substances on iron biomineralization along these moisture
gradients and in detailed laboratory studies, and 3) Reveal the influence of
aqueous geochemistry on the spatial distribution and macromolecular structure of
humic substances at the mineral?water interface. The research approach is
integrative and will investigate biogeochemical transformations of iron
minerals, humic substance structures, and iron organic matter interactions along
subalpine moisture gradients at the USDA FS Fraser Experimental Forest in
Colorado. In addition, well-characterized iron minerals will be inserted into
the soil at multiple depths along the moisture transects to provide more
information about the impact of moisture on iron biomineralization pathways
under natural conditions. Microbial iron reduction and the spatial distribution,
macromolecular structure and chemical composition of humic substances at the
iron-water interface will be studied for the first time at the nanometer-scale
by scanning transmission X-ray microscopy. My long-term educational goals are
to: 1) educate and train future scientists with a tool box of analytical and
problem solving skills to address the most complex challenges in environmental
biogeochemistry, and 2) to get more woman and minorities interested in the field
of Earth sciences. In pursuit of these goals, the objectives of this CAREER
proposal are to: 1) Integrate today's Environmental Biogeochemistry topics into
the environmental science curriculum in a real time format, and 2) Launch MEB
(Mentoring Environmental Biogeochemistry): an undergraduate research program
that brings together multi-disciplinary participants to increase diversity in
environmental science and enhance the pipeline for graduate studies. The
educational approach is to develop a set of new courses that integrate the need
for responsive environmental biogeochemistry topics in the environmental science
curriculum and that will be evaluated and assessed professionally. Inquiry-based
learning and peer-learning with a laboratory component will be especially
valuable for training of scientists in an interdisciplinary field. MEB
activities will also specifically address the need for representation of woman
and minorities by focusing on topics that have demonstrated to attract
underrepresented groups. Intellectual Merit: It is important that we know the
impact of climate change on biogeochemical cycling of iron because this could
have significant impact on the fate and transport of pollutants and organic
carbon. In fact, it was recently concluded that iron minerals are a major
control in long-term organic carbon sequestration in soils. This study
challenges that conclusion since a change in soil redox potential due to
flooding could potentially lead to a release of ?sequestered? carbon due to
reductive dissolution of iron. Broader Impacts: Improved education and training
of a diverse group of students, teachers, and researchers including
underrepresented in environmental biogeochemistry will help solve complex
environmental problems. Advancing the understanding of climate impacts on
biogeochemical cycling of iron benefits society by providing knowledge about
potential costly environmental problems that have not been considered up to now
and that could lead to increased pollution and further threaten the global water
and food supply. Dissemination of results will be conducted broadly at four main
levels: 1) Publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at national
and international conferences are obvious but important routes of dissemination.
The PI is a guest editor for an Environmental Science &amp; Technology focus
issue on Biogeochemical Redox Processes and their Impact on Contaminant
Dynamics. 2) Outreach to High School Teachers and Younger Students: The PI and
his students will participate in K12, Building Bridges, and ?High School Day
programs at CSU. 3) Workshops and International Outreach: The PI will organize
the next Telluride Science Research Center workshop on environmental
biogeochemistry and will conduct a workshop in Germany discussing synchrotron
radiation based tools in environmental biogeochemistry. 4) Cooperative Extension
and Community Outreach: Current research of the PI with the agricultural
experiment station has provided an ideal vehicle for dissemination of results to
the agricultural community. The PIs research will also be communicated to the
public via radio stations and news papers. The CSU School of Global
Environmental Sustainability will help meet the ambitious goals of this project.