* 0847991
* SGER:  Dynamic Partitioned Global Address Spaces for Future Large Scale Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Sudhakar Yalamanchili, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 02/28/2010
* USD 47,805.00

With the continued explosive growth in electronic information, both business
enterprises and high performance computing systems are being structured as large
ensembles of interconnected modular computing/storage modules or blades. These
systems form the next generation data centers and supercomputers and a major
impediment to their successful wide-spread deployment is the growing capital
cost as well as power and cooling costs. A dominant contributor to these costs
is the memory subsystem that can exceed the costs of the processing core and
consume as much as 25%-40% of the energy in high end configurations. Currently,
the architecture of data centers limits how physical memory in data centers can
be shared by different programs in the system. Consequently, systems must be
designed to accommodate the worst case peak memory demand and is therefore
unduly expensive both in terms of capital cost as well as power.

The proposed research explores a novel solution for the reduction of memory
system related costs by enabling memory to be shared across blades in a dynamic,
demand-driven, fashion. The key idea is the tight integration of memory
subsystem with the network subsystem. The result is a significant increase is
memory efficiency and an attendant drop in the total memory requirements of a
data center with little to no performance penalty. This approach is made
feasible by exploiting recent advances in chip integration where the memory
controllers and high performance communication interfaces are integrated on the
same die. Thus cost and power can be more effectively managed than previously
feasible by tracking actual memory demand rather than statically provisioning
for worst case memory demand.

To maintain its leadership in computing, U.S. industry requires both technical
advances such as those proposed here, new companies that leverage these
advances, and new employees with the skill sets needed for rapid technology and
product development. The proposed work offers suitable technical elements to
offer ways to engage students in Computer Science and Engineering topics, to
arrest the ongoing decline in the U.S. enrollment in CS and CmpE, to create new
employment opportunities and to leverage the creativity and entrepreneurial
nature of the U.S. student population. Existing relationships with technology
companies such as IBM, HP, and Intel through an existing NSF I/UCRCat Georgia
Tech will provide pathways to influence the system community.