* 0847960
* Development of a Multi-Herbarium Web-Accessible Database of the Vascular Plants from the Missouri Plateau, U.S.A.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Grace Kostel, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,844.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Black Hills State University has been awarded a grant by the National Science
Foundation to (1) verify identifications and develop a database of all vascular
plant specimens from the Missouri Plateau held by 14 herbaria in the region and
(2) provide web access to data for plants from the region. The study area
consists of approximately 1/12th of the land area of the continental United
States. The construction of the database will be done with the help of
undergraduate and graduate students in addition to professional botanists from
the cooperating institutions. The activity includes the compilation and
dissemination of information on one of the botanically least known areas of the
nation. The database will be accessible to the public at
http://herbarium.bhsu.edu.

Broader impacts of this activity will include a multitude of uses of the readily
available information in the database. The project will make knowledge of the
flora of the area more accessible to researchers throughout the world, regional
land managers, and the general public. Workshops for middle school and secondary
teachers as well as land managers will provide broader utilization of the
results and allow more informed management of public and private lands in the
region.