* 0847304
* CAREER: Ordered Materials in Curved Spaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Alberto Fernandez-Nieves, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Many natural and synthetic systems involve ordered
arrangements of units on two-dimensional surfaces. Examples include viral
protein capsids, fullerenes, membranes and colloidosomes, which are colloidal-
particle arrangements on the surface of a spherical drop. This Faculty Early
Career Award funds a project that will experimentally address the role played by
both the characteristics of the underlying surface, which dictates certain broad
features of the defect structure that can arise within the particular ordering,
and the minimization of energy, which in the end controls the detailed structure
of the ordered material. By developing new methodologies based on microfluidics
to generate spherical and non-spherical closed surfaces, this project will
address this interplay and unravel its consequences. Beside possible
applications in biological systems, controlling the resultant defect structure
can lead to functional particles, since the defects can be functionalized to
provide directional bonding capabilities; as a result, colloidal superatoms
might be designed with specific shapes and valency for use in building
supermolecules and novel bulk materials. A strong effort will be focused on
developing a substantial educational and outreach program synergistically with
the research component of the project. For this, a new course to present recent
fundamental advances in Soft Condensed Matter will be developed and offered to
undergraduate and graduate students at GaTech. In addition, by involving the
Fernbank Science Center in Atlanta, this project will enable the dissemination
of the geometrical and physical aspects involved through outreach activities
aimed at high school students and the general public; the experimental character
of the project and the visual appeal of the expected results will serve to
effectively communicate the otherwise abstract outcomes of the project.



****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Many natural and synthetic systems involve ordered
arrangements of units on two-dimensional spaces. Examples include viral protein
capsids, fullerenes, membranes and colloidosomes, which are colloidal-particle
arrangements on the surface of a spherical drop. This Faculty Early Career Award
funds a project that will experimentally address the role played by both the
topology of the underlying surface and its detailed curvature. Topology dictates
certain broad features of the topological-defect structure of the ground state,
but the curvature-driven energetics controls the detailed structure of the
ordered phase. By developing new methodologies based on microfluidic flows to
generate closed surfaces with zero and non-zero genus, this project will address
this interplay and unravel its consequences. Beside possible applications in
biological systems, the experimental control and tunability of the resultant
defect structure can lead to particles with a valency, since the defects can be
functionalized to create ligands with directional bonding capabilities; as a
result, mesoscale superatoms might be designed with specific shapes and valency
for use as building blocks of supermolecules and novel bulk materials. A strong
effort will be focused on developing a substantial educational and outreach
program synergistically with the research component of the project. For this, a
new course to present recent fundamental advances in Soft Condensed Matter will
be developed and offered to undergraduate and graduate students at GaTech. In
addition, by involving the Fernbank Science Center in Atlanta, this project will
enable the dissemination of the geometrical and physical concepts involved
through outreach activities aimed at high school students and the general
public; the experimental character of the project and the visual appeal of the
expected results will aid this goal.

