* 0847262
* CAREER: Developing microwave heating as a tool for synthetic and mechanistic chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Nicholas Leadbeater, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2015
* USD 575,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professor Nicholas E. Leadbeater at the University of Connecticut who
will examine microwave heating as a tool in synthetic organic chemistry to
exploit its advantages over conventional heating that includes shorter reaction
times, higher product yields, and enhanced selectivity. The first theme in the
proposal is the development of microwave heating in conjunction with in-situ
Raman spectroscopy as a tool for reaction monitoring, for mechanistic chemistry,
and for probing the fundamentals behind the rate accelerations seen in
microwave-promoted reactions. The second theme is synthetic chemistry driven,
focusing attention on performing microwave-promoted reactions under a reactive
gas atmosphere using the gas as a reagent, exploring the combination of
microwave heating and photochemistry in synthesis, and the use of microwave-
promoted reactions for the scale-up of reactions using supported catalysts.
Overall, the work proposed here will lead to a more thorough understanding of
the fundamental interaction of microwave energy with reaction mixtures; take
advantage of microwave irradiation in conjunction with Raman spectroscopy as a
tool for probing kinetics and developing new synthetic
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will have clear
implications for green chemistry since microwave heating offers a clean and
efficient alternative for providing heat to drive chemical reactions. The
educational aspects of this proposal are centered on the integration of new
topics and technology for including preparative chemistry into the undergraduate
curriculum, and an outreach program directed at high school students in high-
need educational districts in Connecticut. Specifically, microwave heating will
be used as an educational and enabling tool for the undergraduate organic
chemistry laboratory. A course will be developed to introduce students to new
technology and the concepts of clean chemistry as well as to use biofuels as
teaching tools in general chemistry. The outreach component of the proposal is
part of a larger project in collaboration with five other junior faculty members
in the Chemistry Department, with the objective of introducing students from
high-need school districts to new concepts they and to encourage them to
consider careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;