* 0847395
* CAREER:  Relationships in Finance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Lauren Cohen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 672,369.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Anyone
interested in studying price movements in any asset market needs first to
understand how information moves through agents in the market, and ultimately
into prices. A critically important, and yet understudied, mechanism for this
information transfer is through social and economic relationships amongst
individuals and organizations. In this research project, the PI plans to move
this relationship finance research agenda forward. By executing on the research
agenda, his end goal will be a more accurate description of how information
really does flow through agents in financial markets, a clearer explanation of
their resulting behaviors acting on this information, and so richer empirical
predictions and explanations for the asset price movements we see. The PI is in
a unique position to move forward on this agenda in the field as much of his
work up until this point has been on discovering and measuring real effects of
these relationships on behaviors and resultant price movements. One barrier to
doing research in this field is that collecting data on substantive
relationships can be time consuming and take a number of assistive RAs. Given
the resources of the CAREER grant and the PI's existing knowledge of data
sources, there should not be constraints on his ability to collect rich data on
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Along with the academic
research focused on relationships, the PI plans to create a new course at the
Harvard Business School called Relationship Finance. This course will stress the
importance of thinking through economic and social connections when attempting
to evaluate, and make inferences, on how financial market participants behave,
and the resulting impacts on prices. The course will contain a collection of new
case studies focused on this goal, with the hope that students' involvement and
experiences will help to spur future case research to support the course. In
terms of dissemination, the results of this agenda will be disseminated in a
number of ways. First, academically focused research will continue to be
produced and submitted to academic journals that help circulate the research. In
addition, by presenting at universities and seminars, the PI plans to not only
help spread key findings and ideas, but elicit valuable feedback from his
colleagues across the profession that will help strengthen the work. The PI
plans to also present to audiences of practitioners in financial markets to gain
their first-hand insight into how relationships affect their approach to the
markets they deal in. For the curricular research,the first-order impact will be
through the newly developed course. Second, Harvard Business School Publishing
(which publishes the case studies) has a very developed case services
department, selling over 6 million cases per year to outside schools and
organizations. So the PI believes that his course materials will be used and
affect not only those students that take his course at Harvard, but students in
other universities and organizations that use the cases to be developed for the
course. There are thus a number of ways that both the academic and curricular
piece of the Relationship Finance research agenda can have influence both in and
outside of the profession.