* 0847796
* CAREER: Electrons, Phonons, and Magnons in Nanostructures and Novel Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Barry Zink, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

NON TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Very small
physical systems, where one or more dimension is reduced below 100 nanometers,
often show dramatically different behavior than larger objects. Though research
into this nanoscale regime is very active and has already revealed new phenomena
and promising new technologies, much remains unexplored. The main research goal
of this Faculty Early Career Award is to use new and unique methods to explore
the thermal properties of nanoscaled systems and novel materials. These
properties provide valuable information on the electronic, vibrational and
magnetic excitations in a system, but are traditionally difficult to measure.
This project focuses on new micro- and nanomachined tools for these
measurements, and will allow an important view into the behavior of these small
systems that could impact areas from heat management in ever-shrinking computer
chips to the development of new information storage technologies. Integration of
education with this work is planned via three main tasks: continued use and new
development of interactive teaching techniques in both introductory and advanced
physics courses, hands-on education of students in the laboratory environment,
and outreach to local secondary educators by offering an intensive lab-based
summer short course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The main research goal of this Faculty Early Career
Award is to deepen our understanding of electronic, vibrational, and magnetic
excitations in small structures and novel materials by direct measurements of
the thermal properties of these systems. Continued advances in the patterning
and manipulation of matter at small length scales has lead to fundamental
studies that reveal that the electronic, vibrational, and magnetic excitations
in these tiny systems can behave much differently than in the bulk. Though the
exciting regime where one or more sample dimensions is reduced below $100$
nanometers is being very actively explored, measurements of thermal properties
of these tiny systems remain challenging. This award supports measurements of
thermal conductivity, thermopower, and specific heat of systems ranging from
nanowire arrays to bulk single crystals that allow novel systematic studies of
physics ranging from electron-phonon interactions in small structures, to
thermal transport via magnons in small spin systems, to the cross-over from
diffuse to ballistic phonon transport, to the magnetic interactions and magnetic
entropy in spin systems fabricated from nanomagnetic elements. Integration of
education with this work is planned via three main tasks: continued use and new
development of interactive teaching techniques in both introductory physics and
condensed matter physics courses, hands-on education of students in the
laboratory environment, and outreach to local secondary educators by offering an
intensive lab-based summer short course on condensed matter and nanoscale
physics.