* 0847287
* CAREER: Mesoscale Self-Assembly of Hydrophilic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Ali Khademhosseini, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847287 PI: Khademhosseini, Ali ORG: Brigham&amp;Womens
Hospital&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Mesoscale Self-assembly of
Hydrophilic Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The ability to generate
biocompatible materials with spatially organized chemical, biological and
mechanical properties is of benefit for a wide range of applications. A powerful
method for fabricating such materials is proposed through self-assembly of
prefabricated shape-controlled microgels. In this proposal, a scalable approach
to direct the mesoscale self-assembly of hydrophilic materials will be developed
by using thermodynamic principles of multiphase systems and microengineering
technologies. To achieve this goal, a two step bottom-up approach will be used
in which microgels are initially assembled and subsequently stabilized by a
crosslinking reaction. Surface tension forces at the water and oil interface
along with lock-and-key shaped microgels will be used to drive the self-assembly
process. In addition, approaches to generate hierarchical self-assembled
biomaterials will be developed by controlling aggregation parameters such as
agitation forces or geometry. Finally, the various parameters for the proposed
self-assembling processes will be optimized and the biological properties of
cell-laden hydrogels will be studied as a function of gel size, materials
properties and macroporosity. The assembly process is applicable to a wide range
of other hydrophilic materials and will address a fundamental problem in
materials science regarding the lack of processes to self-assemble mesoscale
materials. The proposed approach is scalable and can be used to make materials
with predetermined spatial organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:
The proposed research will have broader impacts at the level of local, national
and international education as well as public awareness about the interface of
biology and materials sciences. At the local level this proposal aims to provide
the students with expertise in learning about interdisciplinary science,
performing research and learning the scientific method. The PI supervises
undergraduate researchers at MIT through the UROP program (undergraduate
research opportunity program) and is an advisor to graduate students of the
Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology. The PI will work with
the UROP program on recruiting undergraduate students to work with the other
members of the team on the project. Furthermore, the PI will recruit students
from MIT?s MSRP research program, which every summer brings underrepresented
minorities and women to MIT from other universities for research. The PI will
also develop graduate courses and arrange field trips with local high schools in
educating students about biomaterials research. At the national level, the PI
will develop programs for educating the public and students at other
institutions about biomaterials. In addition, the PI will pursue international
educational efforts and develop materials that will be available to the public
and around the world through a number of web initiated efforts.&lt;br/&gt;