* 0847811
* CAREER:  Effects of particle size on physical and chemical properties of mine wastes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Christopher Kim, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2014
* USD 409,542.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mining and processing of metal-
bearing ores has left a legacy of contaminated mine wastes across the gold,
silver, and mercury deposits of the north-central Mojave Desert located in
southern California. In addition to the primary metals being mined at these
sites, a host of other minor and potentially toxic elements (e.g. As, Cr, Pb,
Sb) is naturally enriched in these ores and released during the mining process,
introducing significant fluxes of elements that pose threats to human health as
well as the local and regional environments surrounding the mines. Furthermore,
weathering and dispersal of mine wastes redistributes metals and can change
their chemical forms (e.g. through oxidation, dissolution, sorption, and
secondary mineralization), which may further alter their potential
toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few known studies have systematically addressed
the effects of particle size on the concentration, speciation (chemical makeup),
distribution, and reactivity of toxic metals in mine wastes, despite the fact
that size distribution is one of the governing variables controlling the
transport of such materials to surrounding regions. We hypothesize that the
bioaccessibility of toxic metals in mine waste materials is largely dependent on
particle size-dependent properties related to changes in concentration,
speciation and distribution as a function of particle size. We therefore propose
a systematic, integrated, multidisciplinary approach to determine the
relationships between particle size and the physical and chemical properties of
mine waste materials in order to better predict the distribution and
bioavailability of toxic metals in mining environments. This approach involves a
combination of field sampling, sample separation by particle size, chemical and
X-ray spectroscopic analysis of selected size fractions, and leach extraction
tests to assess the release of As and Hg in selected size fractions exposed to
water and simulated lung and gastric fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The proposed research will reveal previously uncharacterized yet
fundamental trends in elemental concentrations, speciation, correlations, and
bioaccessibility as a function of particle size ranging from &gt;2.783 mm down
to 0.056 &amp;#61549;m. Using both conventional analytical methods as well as
novel (micro)spectroscopic techniques to identify the behavior of toxic
metal(loid)s including As and Hg and their relative correlations with other
elements in different size fractions, new information will be generated
regarding associations of As and Hg compatible with their presence as primary
ore minerals, secondary minerals, sorbed phases, and/or mineral coatings. Since
speciation in particular is recognized as a critical component of assessing the
relative reactivity and potential toxicity of trace metals in contaminated
samples, identifying and quantifying the effects of particle size on speciation
and using them to better predict trace metal bioavailability in natural systems
represents a potentially transformative contribution to our understanding of the
environmental geochemistry of mine waste materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project involves a fully integrated plan of research and education
by generating opportunities for independent research and fieldwork to
undergraduate students, providing undergraduates with experience at national
synchrotron research facilities, and initiating collaborative partnerships
between Chapman University, a primarily undergraduate institution, governmental
agencies, and public school educators. High school science students from
traditionally underrepresented groups will be recruited for summer research
internships and exposed to the proposed research through poster presentations
and other outreach activities, while schoolteachers will be brought to Chapman
through a release program that provides them with the opportunity to learn about
and participate in novel scientific research. Results will be disseminated to
relevant stakeholders impacted by the mine sites and may also lead directly to
the development of remediation strategies in areas where heavy metal
contamination is cause for environmental concern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;