* 0847721
* CAREER: Petrogenetic Affinity of Miocene Granites to Test the Mid-crustal Channel Flow Model in the Himalaya
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2016
* Mary Leech, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2016
* USD 507,264.00

The main goal of the research project is to test the channel flow model that
predicts granite melts of Indian crust thrust beneath the Tibetan plateau are
gravitationally-driven south to the topographic erosional front of the Himalaya.
These granites are exposed in the Greater Himalaya Sequence in the topographic
front of the Himalaya, in granite gneiss domes in the Tethyan Himalaya Sequence
further north, and may be exposed along the Karakoram fault in the southern
Tibetan plateau. The channel flow model will be tested using a combination of
field observations, U-Pb and 40Ar/39Ar geochronology, and Nd and Pb isotope
geochemistry to determine the sources of these Miocene granites in the western
Himalaya (India) and the eastern Himalaya (southern Tibet). Results of this
research will support or argue against the channel flow model in the Himalaya;
identify the source of Miocene granites in the Karakoram, Himalaya, and southern
Tibet; establish the northern reach of underthrust Indian crust beneath the
Tibetan plateau; and may establish whether the Karakoram fault is a crustal-
scale structure as well as constrain the timing of slip on the fault. Geodynamic
models developed for the Himalaya are commonly exported to other collisional
orogens worldwide: most recently, the channel flow model has been applied to the
Appalachians, the Canadian Cordillera, and the Hellenides. The channel flow
model explicitly links climate-driven surface processes with deep crustal
processes in the context of topographic gradients set up by continental
collision and as a result has pushed geological research in new directions
connecting tectonic processes to regional and global climate change.

The education plan for this project creates a new course at San Francisco State
University, "Science Education Partners in Geosciences", that will partner
undergraduate and graduate students in Geosciences with grade 3 to 6 teachers to
co-develop and co-teach lessons in San Francisco Unified School District
classrooms. In California, an area of great earthquake hazard, and a state with
major land use and water resource challenges even prior to climate change, there
is a particular need for scientifically literate citizens. The only year in
which California science standards require Earth Science as the focus of K-12
science instruction is the 6th grade; Earth Science comprises approximately one-
third of required science instruction at the elementary level (through grade 5),
and an even smaller component in high school, making intervention at grades 3
through 6 the most promising opportunity to enhance K-12 earth science literacy
in California public schools. The most important broader impact of this
partnership program will be the creation of a cadre of graduates with experience
in classroom teaching and outreach, and a group of elementary school teachers
empowered to teach engaging earth science lessons.

This CAREER award is supported by Tectonics, Petrology and Geochemistry, and
Education and Human Resources programs in the Division of Earth Sciences.