* 0847083
* Collection Improvement:  Curating the plant specimens of Dr. Robert F. Thorne at Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden (RSA-POM)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Lucinda McDade, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2013
* USD 117,052.00

The herbarium at Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden is global in scope owing
notably to the career of Dr. Robert F. Thorne (b. 1920). Thorne is best known
for his classification system for flowering plants. Before modern phylogenetic
methods and DNA data, Thorne?s system presaged later phylogenetic results.
Thorne?s research was supported by extensive collecting (>65,000 numbers);
nearly 15,000 remain unaccessioned. These include specimens from areas and of
taxa that are poorly represented in U.S. herbaria. This is a two-year project to
process the Thorne backlog. Specimen data will be captured into the herbarium?s
database as part of label-making. Industry standards will be used to produce
herbarium specimens that will endure. All work will be by trained personnel
supervised by permanent staff who have years of experience. Accessioning these
specimens will document the collecting that informed Thorne?s ideas on plant
relationships. Herbarium specimens underpin knowledge of plant diversity on
Earth, images of specimens are used to illustrate publications, and specimens
provide material for DNA. At least two individuals will be trained in all
aspects of plant specimen processing. RSABG has an excellent record of
recruiting entry-level assistants and nurturing them into skilled members of the
staff. RSABG participates in regional programs for students from ethnic groups
that are underrepresented in science and news of opportunities on this project
will be disseminated through these.