* 0847753
* CAREER: 21 cm Cosmology Observations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Miguel Morales, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 07/31/2014
* USD 713,199.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr, Miguel Morales (University of
Washington) will work towards removing the astrophysical and instrumental
foregrounds from HI (neutral hydrogen) observations in order to enable an era of
21 cm cosmology. This would greatly enhance our understanding of the first
luminous objects in the universe, and could enable precision cosmography and
dark energy studies across cosmic time. During the epoch of reionization (EoR)
the cosmological signal is about five orders-of-magnitude fainter than the
astrophysical foregrounds. In principle the smooth spectral characteristics of
the major foregrounds provide a dimension along which these foregrounds may be
separated from the signal, but this separation is greatly complicated by
instrumental effects which can mask the distinction. Morales is leading the
international Murchison Widefield Array EoR foreground subtraction team, and is
laying a path for future HI dark energy measurements with the Arecibo Legacy
Fast Arecibo L-band Feed Array Survey, Square Kilometer Array Precursor Research
On Understanding Telescope Systematics project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 21 cm
cosmology research conducted under this award will help extract the EoR power
spectrum and will provide foreground subtracted image cubes to the scientific
community. These image cubes will be made available to the public in order to
enable a broad range of EoR science, including cross-correlation with galaxy
surveys, non-Gaussian signatures, James Webb Space Telescope target selection,
and imaging of quasar Stromgren spheres. In addition, Dr. Morales will implement
an undergraduate research program to help community college students transfer to
four-year research universities. Community college transfer students are
disproportionately women and under-represented minority students. By assisting
these students to successfully transfer to a research university, the program
could enhance the diversity and preparation of the student pipeline into
graduate school and industry.