* 0847436
* CAREER: Implementing a Stealth-to-Targeting Switch in Model Colloidal Carriers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Valeria Milam, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 09/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847436 PI: Milam, Valeria ORG: Georgia Tech

Title: CAREER: Implementing a Stealth-to-Targeting Switch in Model Colloidal
Carriers

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This proposal is concerned with implementing a dynamic
stealth-to-targeting switch in model colloidal carriers. Specific motivation for
this work lies in the therapeutic limitations of current drug delivery vehicles
possessing either stealth or targeting capabilities. By incorporating a dynamic
stealth-to-targeting switch, the proposed research has the potential to pave the
way for a new generation of drug carrier systems that fully realize their
therapeutic index through dramatic improvements in both circulation time and
desired targeting abilities for injured, malignant, or diseased tissue. To
implement a finely controlled transition between stealth and targeting states,
the proposed approach employs DNA as dynamic macromolecular linkers initially to
mask, and then to reveal targeting ligands on model colloidal carriers. The
central aim is to tailor the timing of DNA-mediated targeting events through
directed hybridization events of DNA strands immobilized on the carrier surface.
The challenge lies in controlling the stability and interactions of DNA in order
to tailor the kinetics and extent of carrier ?activation.? To address this
challenge, the proposed work will explore sequence characteristics, such as
affinity differences between various oligonucleotide strands, to induce
particular structural changes in the DNA strands and thereby modulate ligand
presentation in a model carrier system.

BROADER IMPACTS: The integrated education plan involves initiatives geared
towards both high school students and engineering college students. The
motivation for this plan lies in the need to (1) increase young students?
exposure and interest in engineering, particularly to materials science and
engineering (MSE) and (2) train engineering students to address the synergistic
roles of materials and biological systems in bio-related materials applications.
The first part of the educational plan involves developing and implementing a
Materials Science and Technology (MST) course in a local high school. The
objective of this laboratory-intensive course is to physically and
intellectually engage young students in reinforcing and applying fundamental
scientific and engineering principles using materials as a practical learning
tool. A series of experiments on various classes of materials, including
biomaterials, will be incorporated into the course topics. The target audiences
for this hands-on, minds-on educational approach are (a) underrepresented groups
in engineering for whom pre-university educational initiatives would help
attract them to pursue degrees and careers in engineering and (b) the at-risk
population of high school students who often possess the capability, but lack
the motivation to take upper level, college preparatory courses in science and
math. The teaching modules will be made freely available for public distribution
through the MSE website at GA Tech. The second part of the educational plan
involves developing MSE courses to address the structure and properties of both
the biological and materials systems at biological-material interfaces. The
objective is to extend a central paradigm in MSE ? structure-property
relationships ? to include biological systems, consistent with ongoing efforts
in our MSE program aimed at integrating biorelated topics in the curriculum.

