* 0847171
* Enhancement of the Natural History Collections at the University of North Carolina Wilmington
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wm David Webster, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 314,609.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will support improvements
in the infrastructure and accessibility of the extensive natural history
collections at the University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) in conjunction
with their movement into a newly renovated storage facility on campus. A new
computer program developed through NSF funding called Specify will be used to
create a computerized database of specimens and specimen images that will not
only assist in undergraduate and graduate teaching and research programs, but
will also provide broad online access to the collections to the greater
scientific community. This access will not only increase scientific awareness of
the UNCW collections, but online imagery will limit damage to specimens by
reducing the need for external loans, shipping, and handling. The management
plan will be structured in a way so that natural history collections of mammals,
birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and plants, totaling over 70,000 specimens,
will be transitioned to electronic format while serving as an applied learning
opportunity for undergraduate students. An Assistant Curator will be hired for
two years to help oversee this project with the faculty curators at UNCW and to
develop protocols for databasing and geo-referencing the collections now and in
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this proposal will
include benefits to the general public, K-12 education, and the scientific
community. Online access to the collections will provide public information on
the taxonomy, ecology, evolution, and conservation of plant and animal species
primarily associated with habitats in North Carolina and the Southeast. This
information is especially useful for the many endemic species associated with
Southeastern habitats that reside in the UNCW collections (plants and
vertebrates). This program will provide valuable information to K-12 teachers,
students and the broader community, allowing maximum public outreach and
development of natural history interests in the younger generation. The overall
goal is to increase classroom visitation and awareness of the rich natural
history in North Carolina. Faculty curators will visit at least three public
schools per year that are comprised primarily of under-represented groups to
present research and information on natural history in the Carolinas. An
interactive web site will also be developed for use by these and other
classrooms to help stimulate interest in the natural sciences. Moreover,
scientific experts at local, national, and global levels, as well as State and
Federal agencies, will have access to these collections resulting in enhanced
communications and collaborations with faculty curators. UNCW students also will
benefit, especially undergraduates, with courses directed towards applied
learning and taxonomic knowledge. Students will gain additional experience by
assisting with cataloguing and databasing the collections as part of this
program. Students successfully trained in this manner will be hired part-time to
continue assisting with the goals set forth in this proposal thereby gaining
additional applied learning experiences. Three Master's students will also be
included in this process during summer months. The entire project will impact at
least eight undergraduate and three graduate students per year, plus dozens to
hundreds of local school children, particularly in under-represented groups.