* 0847157
* CAREER: Supernova Cosmology and the Changing Sky
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Saurabh Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* joan wrobel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 643,342.00

Dr. Saurabh Jha (Rutgers University New Brunswick) will carry out a long-term
plan of integrated research and education to firm up the foundations of
supernova cosmology, put Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) to a new use as a tool to
study dark matter, and prepare the next generation of astronomers for new
research methods to study the changing sky. As the samples of supernovae
discovered by current and planned surveys grow, the precision of constraints on
dark energy parameters hits a floor of systematic uncertainty. Dr. Jha will
study the major limiting factors, with a goal of reducing current systematics by
(1) characterizing the supernova (SN) host-galaxy dust extinction, (2)
identifying more robust and precise subsamples of SNe Ia, and (3) constraining
SN Ia progenitors, explosion models, and luminosity evolution through the study
of peculiar objects. In addition, Dr. Jha will bring these cosmological tools to
bear on a new problem: studying the dark matter distribution in clusters of
galaxies using lensed SNe Ia whose absolute magnification can be measured in
current surveys and planned observations with Rutgers' share of the Southern
African Large Telescope. These projects will lay the groundwork for
comprehensive studies of supernovae and time-domain astrophysics in general with
the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope as the results from this program will
directly impact the design and execution of future supernova cosmology surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jha will also integrate this research into his and
Rutgers' educational mission, with a primary focus on upper-division classes for
science majors. Dr. Jha plans to bring peer-learning techniques to an unusually
large (50 students) third-year calculus-based introduction to astrophysics
class, introduce problems based on current research with real data into the
curriculum, and have students write archival research proposals on topics in
time-domain astrophysics. Dr. Jha will also recruit undergraduates for summer
research projects, with an emphasis on students from underrepresented groups who
may not otherwise consider career options in basic research.