* 0847150
* CAREER: Optimization of a large water Cherenkov detector for the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Christopher Walter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2015
* USD 562,095.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrinos may hold the imprint of
actions in the beginning of the universe that determined the properties of the
world today. Foremost among the questions it is hoped neutrinos may shed light
on is 'Why is today's universe dominated by matter'? Studying neutrino
oscillation with future powerful beams will allow testing the standard neutrino
model and the origin of neutrino mass. Studying proton decay can directly probe
energy scales at the Grand Unified Scale, and the observation of a galactic
supernova would supply a treasure trove of data which would test models in
particle, nuclear and astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund an
R&amp;D program to use data and Monte Carlo from the Super-Kamiokande detector
to optimize a 500-kiloton scale water Cherenkov (WC) detector sited at DUSEL for
long-baseline neutrino oscillation studies, along with searches for proton decay
and astrophysical neutrinos. By leveraging the knowledge the PI has gained in
the last decade of working with the world's only multi kiloton-scale WC
detector, he plans to optimize the design of a large future detector, maximizing
the mass and physics reach while minimizing the resources needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this project include involving
undergraduate students who will be trained on the cutting edge of techniques
used in large particle-astrophysics detectors. It is proposed to extend the
scope of the extremely successful physics REU program at the TUNL nuclear
laboratory on the Duke campus to also offer high energy physics projects to the
students who are attending the program.