* 0847108
* CAREER: Chiral Phosphoric Acid-Catalyzed Reaction Methodology and Synthetic Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jon Antilla, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 555,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop and understand organocatalyzed reaction
methodology that can lead to useful processes in organic synthesis. An effort to
exploit the utility of novel phosphoric acid-catalyzed asymmetric reactions will
be explored. In this end, synthetic routes based on this technology could allow
for the preparation of novel chiral heterocycles. This chemistry will also be
used as a 'chiral enabling technology,' translating the stereochemistry for
subsequent transformations. An effort will also be made to apply phosphoric
acid-catalyzed aza-Friedel-Crafts chemistry to the preparation of natural
products. Mechanistic studies will be used to explain the observed
enantioselectivity and to gain insight into the development of new reactions or
to improve existing methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Jon
C. Antilla of the Department of Chemistry at The University of South Florida.
Professor Antilla's research efforts center on the development of new
organocatalytic reaction methods and their application to synthesis. These
synthetic methods could be used to prepare basic chiral synthons for the
development of pharmaceuticals and for use in material science. Professor
Antilla will also pursue an educational initiative whereby under-privileged high
school students from local High Schools will attend a six-week long chemistry
laboratory enrichment course as part of the University of South Florida Upward
Bound program. The exposure of an interactive laboratory experience in the
chemical sciences should help in scientific literacy, college enrollment in the
sciences, and also to acclimate the students to a college environment.