* 0847049
* CAREER: Fundamental Understanding of Behaviors and Impacts of Cell Wall Lignin during Bioconversion of Lignocellulose to Fuel Ethanol
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Xuejun Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

0847049 Pan

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Intellectual Merit: Cellulose ethanol is the next generation
biofuel. However, the low efficiency of feedstock pretreatment and enzymatic
saccharification limits the commercial production of cellulose ethanol. Lignin,
which accounts for 15-30% of biomass and binds cellulose together to form a
recalcitrant matrix, is a key factor contributing to the low efficiency. The
goal of the proposed research is to understand the changes of lignin during the
bioconversion and the mechanisms of lignin-enzyme interactions. The structure of
lignins in both feedstocks and pretreated materials and the structural changes
of lignin during different pretreatments will be investigated. In addition,
lignin model compounds will be used to elucidate the mechanisms of lignin
reactions during the pretreatments and to determine the impacts of lignin on
enzymes during saccharification. The integrated education plan aims to train
more high-quality students for the emerging bioindustry. A new biorefining
course will be developed for both undergraduate and graduate students. To
attract and train students to the area of bioenergy, high school students and
undergraduate students will be supported to conduct summer projects. Graduate
students will be trained through an international collaboration with University
of British Columbia, Canada, which will expose the students to the frontier
research in this area. In addition, a bioenergy forum for students will be
created, which will provide students a platform to follow the cutting-edge
research and development in bioenergy; to meet experts from academia, government
and industry; and to create network for their future education and career.
Broader Impact: This integrated proposal has broad impacts on enhancing
scientific and technical understanding, on promoting teaching, training and
learning, and on society and industry. The outcomes of this research will
enhance the scientific and technical understanding of lignin and provide
guidelines to improve production efficiency of cellulose ethanol by optimizing
pretreatment and saccharification technologies and developing novel enzymes. In
addition, the fundamental understandings from the research will also benefit
paper industry and forest products industry. The integrated education plan will
involve students at different levels (K-12, undergraduate and graduate) in
research, teaching, learning and professional development. Furthermore, this
integrated project will enhance the collaboration in research and education
among universities, government and industry. For example, the University of
British Columbia, Canada, will be collaborating in the proposed research and
graduate student training. Lt. Governor of Wisconsin has pledged supports to the
proposed research and education plan. Lignol Innovation Inc and Novozymes are
interested in the proposed research and are willing to collaborate.