* 0847777
* CAREER: Taphonomy and Evolution of Theropod Dinosaur Reproduction
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2015
* David Varricchio, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2015
* USD 590,892.00

TAPHONOMY AND EVOLUTION OF THEROPOD DINOSAUR REPRODUCTION &lt;br/&gt;David J.
Varricchio &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Reproduction in living birds differs markedly
from that of other modern vertebrates in the rate of egg production, egg size
and shape, microscopic structure of the eggshell, nest form, method of
incubation, and the manner and prevalence of parental care. The disparity
between birds and other living vertebrates raises questions as to how and when
this unique reproductive style evolved. Did it originate before or after the
achievement of flight? Were the carnivorous theropod dinosaurs from which birds
evolved reproductively more similar to their dinosaur relatives or to modern
birds? How important were the reproductive and life history strategies of
Mesozoic dinosaurs to their success? The proposed research addresses these
questions by documenting the evolution of reproductive traits through the
Mesozoic from dinosaurs to birds. The investigation consists of four phases: 1)
study of modern bird and crocodile nesting localities for attributes that would
help interpret dinosaur sites, 2) investigation of Cretaceous theropod dinosaur
nesting sites, 3) construction of an evolutionary history of reproductive traits
based on field, laboratory, and museum study and 4) comparison of the life
history strategies among theropod dinosaurs, other dinosaurs, and living egg-
laying vertebrates. Strengths of this study include an interdisciplinary team
with expertise in taphonomy (the study of fossil preservation), eggshell
structure, and the nesting behavior of modern birds, as well as an unsurpassed
suite of modern and fossil samples. Modern nesting localities represent both
crocodilians and birds that exhibit a wide array of reproductive behaviors. The
Mesozoic dinosaur sample includes four egg types from the Cretaceous of Montana
and Idaho; these four egg types represent the only in place theropod dinosaur
eggs from North America. &lt;br/&gt; The study of modern nesting horizons
provides the framework for interpreting fossil nesting localities. Data
generated from the studies of modern crocodilians and birds will allow
recognition of patterns and processes affecting fossil preservation. The
combination of extensive fieldwork, laboratory analysis of eggs, and the
exceptional fossil sample will provide new insights on egg preservation and the
reproductive behavior of theropod dinosaurs. Identification of new egg
characters and resolution of controversial issues regarding theropod
reproductive behavior will strengthen our evolutionary understanding.
Documentation of the evolutionary history of reproduction in birds and their
theropod dinosaurs ancestors, will provide insight into the origination of
birds. Comparison of modern and extinct life history strategies among
crocodilians, dinosaurs, and birds will increase current understanding of
dinosaur ecology, test life history theory on a macroevolutionary scale, and
permit evaluation of factors potentially contributing to the overall success of
dinosaurs throughout the Mesozoic. Educational goals include incorporation of
research observation and interpretation into university courses and professional
development for rural Montana science teachers through workshops and fieldwork
participation. Additionally, the project will support research opportunities for
two masters and eight undergraduate students. Finally, Varricchio serves as host
committee chair for the 4th International Symposium on Dinosaur Eggs and Babies
to be held at Montana State University in the summer of 2009. This meeting
provides an excellent opportunity for dissemination of the research results,
while facilitating greater exchange of ideas between biologists and
paleontologists regarding the evolution of bird and dinosaur reproduction.