* 0847323
* CAREER: Dynamics of African Easterly Waves: Integrating Phenomenological Studies and Mathematical Instruction in Atmospheric Science
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Anantha Aiyyer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 556,607.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate
African easterly wave (AEW) origin and storm track dynamics using a wide range
of datasets including those from recent field campaigns and a hierarchy of
numerical simulations in order to improve the current paradigm for mathematical
instruction in the undergraduate atmospheric science
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science component of this project covers
two areas: AEW origin from non-modal and stochastic forcing of the African
easterly jet (AEJ) and AEW evolution within a streamwise varying waveguide.
Specifically, the investigator would (a) investigate key dynamic issues through
a systematic analysis of observations and numerical simulations using
stochastically forced models, (b) examine the evolution of AEWs in a streamwise
varying waveguide from the perspective of dispersing Rossby wave packets as well
as isolated nonlinear disturbances, and also investigate whether AEW history of
nonlinearity holds a predictive value for tropical cyclone (TC) genesis, and (c)
examine the post-TC genesis evolution of AEWs and investigate the range of
processes that occur during the TC-wave decoupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
education component of this project addresses a long-standing issue regarding
gaps in the mathematical preparation of atmospheric science students. It
envisions (a) improved guidance to students for optimizing their mathematical
instruction, (b) forging collaboration with mathematics faculty to provide
context-based instruction, and (c) synthesizing math and atmospheric concepts in
mathematical methods in an atmospheric science course.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project are educational and in improving our
understanding of AEW origin and evolution within a complex environment and thus
contributing to an enhanced understanding of TC genesis from AEWs and its
predictability.