* 0847725
* CAREER:  Tax Progressivity and American Political Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Monica Prasad, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 409,314.00

SES-0847725&lt;br/&gt;Monica Prasad&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United
States is the only advanced industrial country without publicly financed
national health care or compulsory national health insurance, it has a public
welfare state that is one of the smallest in the western world, and consequently
there is more poverty and economic vulnerability in the U.S. than in other
wealthy countries. But most people are surprised to learn that the U.S. also has
the most progressive tax system of the advanced industrial countries. In recent
years, scholars have questioned whether one explains the other: whether the
relatively more progressive tax system, established during the first half of the
twentieth century, constrained the development of the welfare state over the
second half of the century. The relationship between the progressivity of the
tax system and the extensiveness of the welfare state holds for other countries
as well. Recent scholarship is showing an inverse correlation between tax
progressivity and welfare effort across the advanced industrial world. But
scholars remain divided as to the meaning of this inverse correlation, and no
one has traced its history either in the U.S. or any other country. In this
project the PI will assess several hypotheses designed to explain this inverse
correlation between the progressivity of the tax system and the capacity of the
welfare state. The PI will complete a comparative historical analysis to trace
the roots of this paradox and to examine the role of taxation in the development
of the American economy. The education component includes working with a team of
graduate and undergraduate student research assistants and training a wider
group of fiscal sociology scholars. The latter will be accomplished through
workshops held over five years in conjunction with the Social Science History
Association annual conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will clarify aspects of American and
comparative political economy related to taxation, and will inform debate over
the feasibility and desirability of introducing a national-level consumption tax
in the U.S. The summer institutes will offer graduate students from other
universities training in fiscal sociology.&lt;br/&gt;