* 0847586
* CAREER: Multiple Dirichlet series and metaplectic groups
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Gautam Chinta, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew D. Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

In recent years there has been a flurry of activity in the field of Weyl group
multiple Dirichlet series. Surprising and unexpected connections between these
multiple Dirichlet series and several different fields of mathematics have
emerged. The PI has been at the forefront of the development of the general
theory and identification of these connections. He will pursue the further
developments which lead to new applications interrelating number theory,
automorphic forms, the representation theory of metaplectic groups and the
theory of affine and infinite root systems. These activities will serve to place
the relatively new field of Weyl group multiple Dirichlet series into a more
central position in modern mathematics. As such, the research projects Chinta
will undertake will interest specialists in many different fields. Particularly
striking among the new applications of multiple Dirichlet series are * A
metaplectic version of the Casselman-Shalika formula (in the absence of
multiplicity one) * A formula for orthogonal periods of Eisenstein series which
encodes deep and classical properties of classical forms, e.g. the simplest new
case discovered is equivalent to Gauss's three squares theorem * Connections
between characters sums over function fields and characters of affine root
systems

Integrated with the research activities of the proposer will be his continued
mentorship of undergraduate and high school students. City College of New York
is a recognized minority serving institution with a diverse undergraduate
student body consisting of Hispanic (37\%), Black (26\%), Asian (20\%) and White
(12\%) students. The proposer will introduce these students to research level
mathematics. In addition, the proposer has entered into a collaboration with the
Harlem Children's Society, in order to mentor high school students from
underrepresented communities. Situated in Harlem, City College is in a unique
position to serve its community by enabling area students to experience cutting
edge research in mathematics and the sciences. This CAREER grant will help
extend the scope of this partnership.