* 0847132
* CAREER: Organized Materials for Plastic Electronics - Divided Pi-Ways and Platinum Energy Canopies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Rhett Smith, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2014
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This CAREER award by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation supports Professor Rhett
C. Smith at Clemson University to develop and study two exciting new classes of
materials featuring remarkably well-defined and tunable molecular-level
organization of organic and hybrid organic/organometallic pi-systems. The
unique, shape-persistent scaffolds he will employ ensure specific alignment of
adjacent pi-systems. The mode of inter-pi-system interaction enforced will in
turn predispose each material to idealized performance in a given technological
application (i.e. some modes are ideal for photovoltaics, others for light
emitting devices). In addition to their great potential for highly coveted
technologies such as lightweight solar cells, thorough characterization of the
opto/electronic properties of these materials will reveal fundamental insights
into how molecular-level organization dictates performance and elucidate how
privileged material combinations act synergistically, thus forwarding rational
design strategies for next generation technologies. The molecular scaffolds that
are employed include novel oxacyclophane constructs and light-harvesting
phosphines used for organometallic polymers.

This work will also have a broader impact on science education through a variety
of synergistic activities. The overarching aim of these educational activities
is to increase awareness and participation in physical science. These efforts
involve a service learning program, outreach and the development of polymer
science courses guided by modern education theory and learning models. New
course materials include projects-based polymer laboratory modules designed to
mimic the graduate school research experience for undergraduates. Undergraduate
research mentoring is also a key component of the educational plan. This award
will support salary for undergraduates in the summer, and for their travel to
conferences, better preparing these young scientists for careers in research.