* 0847325
* CAREER:  Dynamic Control of Immediate Locomotor Compensations in the Leg
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Young-Hui Chang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2015
* USD 530,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The major objective of this 5-year CAREER Development project is to discover
unifying principles that guide locomotor compensation and integrate these
scientific principles into prosthetics and orthotics education. The research
goal is anchored by a central hypothesis that a common set of joint compensation
principles underlie whole leg function during locomotion even when faced with
different mechanical constraints. This project will be performed in the
Comparative Neuromechanics Laboratory at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Using a well-controlled experimental model of human locomotion the investigators
will place mechanical constraints on the locomotor task (e.g., limb movement
frequency, amplitude, foot placement precision) and on individual joints during
the task (e.g., torque loading, range of motion limitation, mechanical coupling
between joints). They will also test whether there is a hierarchical
organization to the control parameters of the leg during locomotion. This
research will be integrated into prosthetics and orthotics education in three
tiers: (1) development of a web-based teaching module, (2) curriculum
development in a unique entry-level Master of Science in prosthetics and
orthotics, and (3) a website to promote integration of basic research into
related programs.

Achieving these project goals will deliver broad impacts to science and science
education through better understanding of how nature exploits redundancy in
complex systems. The intellectual merit of this work will be to address basic
questions about the control and compensatory strategies of legged locomotion
that apply across constraint types and across organizational levels. The
compensation principles provide a theoretical framework for understanding how
normal, healthy human locomotion adapts to different terrains (e.g., asphalt,
grass), minor injuries (e.g., ankle sprain) and chronic pathologies (e.g., leg
amputation, stroke). Areas of science and engineering can then employ these
compensation principles to improve prosthetic and orthotic design, control of
biomimetic robots and gait rehabilitation methods. The broader impacts of acting
locally through a structured program of outreach and education development are
that it will effectively build a bridge for integrating basic science into the
first graduate program in prosthetics and orthotics, a historically applied and
clinically oriented field.