* 0847881
* Workshop on GeoSpatial and GeoTemporal Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Peggy Agouris, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,997.00

The Workshop on GeoSpatial and GeoTemporal Informatics (GSTI'08) focuses on geo-
spatial and geo-temporal informatics. The motivation for the organization of
this workshop comes from the substantial challenges posed to traditional
geoinformatics by the emergence of novel technological devices, artifacts and
methodologies, including (but not limited to) sensors and sensor deployment
techniques (e.g., geosensor networks, video cameras on-board unmanned aerial
vehicles, hand-held devices and more). These innovations represent the rapid
evolution of the traditional static and centralized geocomputational paradigm.
They are drastically changing the types of data that are collected, analyzed,
and disseminated, they are broadening the applications in which these datasets
are used, and they are also expanding the corresponding user community.

In order to address this evolution and its impact on the future of science and
engineering research and ultimately on the needs of society, the workshop will
bring together a number of leading researchers from the US and overseas. The
objective is to identify the emerging major challenges in geospatial and
geotemporal informatics, and to make relevant recommendations to the scientific
community, anticipating future needs and demands.

The research challenges addressed by GSTI'08 extend the frontiers of traditional
geospatial research, addressing computer science issues such as spatiotemporal
queries over diverse data feeds, mobile computing, location-based services,
streaming data integration and mining, automated updating of geospatial
databases, VR modeling, and computer vision.

The GSTI'08 Workshop is to be held in the Washington, DC metropolitan area in
the fall of 2008. The workshop is expected to have significant impact by
identifying research areas that need to be pursued in order to support and
respond to emerging and predicted societal needs. The workshop results,
including a report, will be widely disseminated via the Web site
(http://www.ggs.cos.gmu.edu/workshops/GSTI-08/) and other venues.