* 0847758
* CAREER: Genetically Modifiable Shape-Tunable Protein Nanotubes as Templates for Controlled Nano-Synthesis and Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Chuanbin Mao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847758 PI: Mao, Chuanbin ORG:
Oklahoma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Genetically Modifiable Shape-
Tunable Protein Nanotubes as Templates for Controlled Nano-Synthesis and
Assembly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Precise assembly of
nanocomponents and morphological control of nanoassemblies are still of great
challenge in nanotechnology. The objective of this proposal is to use a
filamentous bio-nanostructure, Salmonella typhimurium bacterial flagellar
filament (FF), as a platform to surface-display an ordered array of foreign
peptides for directing the synthesis and assembly of inorganic nanomaterials and
understanding protein-material interactions. FF is a self-assembling protein
nanotube (2 nm in inner diameter, ~15 nm in outer diameter) that can be purified
from bacterial cell surface. It is self-assembled (polymerized) from several
thousand copies of a single protein called flagellin (monomer). FFs from
Salmonella typhimurium bacteria used in this project are unique compared to
other biotemplates used earlier in nanotechnology for the following reasons: (1)
The surface chemistry is genetically modifiable. (2) Their shapes can be tuned
by simply changing solution conditions. (3) Their length can be controlled. (4)
They show lyotropic liquid crystalline (LC) self-assembly and their helical
forms can self-assemble into a novel LC structure called conical phase. The PI
will use Au nanoparticles (AuNPs) and nanorods (AuNRs) as model materials to
study the control of their 1D and 3D nano-assembly by individual and LC phase
FFs, respectively. He will also use silica as a model material to study the
polymorphism of FFs under materials synthesis condition and FF-templated
synthesis of inorganic nanomaterials and nanoholes. The project will show how
peptide display on FFs as well as polymorphism and LC self-assembly of
engineered FFs can direct the nano-synthesis/assembly with a precise control
over the spacing, organization and morphology of
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This project will be
integrated into the PI?s educational activities to: (1) develop an
interdisciplinary bionanotechnology (BNT) curriculum at the
undergraduate/graduate level, (2) train Ph.D. specialists and undergraduate
students with multidisciplinary skills in BNT, (3) equip community college (CC)
students with BNT knowledge &amp; skills by partnering with CCs, (4) develop a
Native American Nanotechnology Outreach (NANO) program by partnering with Native
American students, high school (HS) educators and Native American Research
Center for Health (NARCH) program in Oklahoma, (5) nurture ?Bio-Nano-Aware? HS
students and teachers through outreach to HSs, and (6) organize ?Speaking of
Nano? events and disseminate BNT research findings to Oklahoma statewide by
partnering with the Oklahoma Nanotechnology Initiative (ONI).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;