* 0847922
* SGER:  Blow-sampling:   A non-invasive method for assessing diet, reproductive status and genetics in cetaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 11/30/2010
* USD 89,924.00

Detailed knowledge concerning the diet, kinship, health, and hormonal status of
top marine predators is critical to understanding basic cetacean biology,
ecology, life history, and evolution, and can contribute substantially to
management and conservation efforts. However, such information is extremely
difficult to obtain without stressing, harming, and/or capturing animals. This
study develops a new, non-invasive method (blow-sampling) that involves
collecting fluid exhaled from the blowhole and will explore the full potential
of this biological sample. The individual life histories, reproduction,
behavior, genetics, and ecology of more than 1200 Indian Ocean bottlenose
dolphins in Shark Bay, Australia have been monitored since 1984. In addition,
five adults and their offspring visit a beach (Monkey Mia) daily to receive fish
from humans. Blow samples collected daily from these individuals will be used to
develop assays of reproductive states, relatedness and diets, which can then be
applied to evaluate these variables in the larger population. In a 2008 pilot
study 90 blow samples from provisioned and non-provisioned dolphins were
collected and mtDNA (maternally inherited) was extracted from their blow. These
samples will be used to identify reproductive state through hormones, diet
through fatty acids, health through disease presence, and kinship through mtDNA
and nuclear DNA, which can then be correlated with age, sex, behavior,
reproductive patterns and survival. This innovative and non-invasive project
will acquire much-needed data for improving dolphin welfare, and can potentially
set a new standard for biological sampling of cetaceans.