* 0847856
* CyberFlora Louisiana
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Steven Darwin, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2013
* USD 498,979.00

Through a National Science Foundation award, 1.1 million plant specimens in the
15 Louisiana herbaria will be imaged during a three-year project. Collection
information will be extracted from the labels with software tools to develop
electronic databases. The digitized images and data will be freely available
online through a central website called CyberFlora Louisiana. It will offer fast
data sorting and filtering, rapid delivery of zoomable images, mapping of
specimen locations, and checklists of plants for particular locations. The
website will be supplemented with digital images of plants, plant parts, and
identifying features for species found in Louisiana. Visual identification keys
will be developed that are easier to use than traditional ones with difficult
terminology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imaging, databasing, and geo-referencing all
the state?s collections would significantly increase the value and utilization
of these important resources, especially for local, state, and federal agencies
that need to consult the herbaria regularly. As one of the first statewide
projects in the nation, it will serve as a model for other state networks. An
online collection of plant information will increase appreciation of the
importance of Louisiana?s plants and their conservation. For schools, museums,
wildlife refuges, and parks, the availability of live plant images, keys, and
useful information will also stimulate more interest in plants. &lt;br/&gt;