* 0847169
* CAREER: Synthesis, Phase Transitions, and Device Integration of Nanoscale Vanadium Oxides: A Research and Education Program
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Sarbajit Banerjee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Vanadium
oxides have a rich and complex phase diagram originating from the facile
accessibility of different vanadium oxidation states and the various structural
distortions adopted to accommodate non-stoichiometry and point defects. The
proposed research project focuses on understanding the influence of finite size
on the properties of two intriguing vanadium oxides, VO2 and V2O5. Bulk VO2
shows a dramatic insulator?metal phase transition at ~67°C and represents a
textbook problem in solid-state chemistry and physics. The proposed work is
inspired by our preliminary results showing a strong size dependence of the
phase-transition temperature and hysteresis for VO2 nanostructures prepared by
hydrothermal methods. Chemical vapor deposition and hydrothermal approaches for
the fabrication of VO2 nanostructures with controlled shape, size, and growth
direction will be explored. A systematic investigation of the crystal growth
mechanism will be performed to obtain rational and predictive control over the
nanostructure dimensions. A combination of ensemble X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction measurements will be
used in conjunction with single-nanowire electrical transport and Raman
spectroscopy measurements to understand the influence of finite size on the
insulator?metal phase transition in these nanostructures. Another aspect of the
proposed CAREER proposal will involve the fabrication of V2O5 nanowires and
their dielectrophoretic integration within device structures. Simultaneous
electrical conductivity and Raman spectroscopy measurements of single nanowires
will be performed within device geometries to understand the influence of finite
size in modifying the electrical transport and surface conductance of these
nanowires in the presence of alcohol vapors. The synthesis and device
integration of anisotropic VO2 and V2O5 nanostructures will pave the way for
their implementation in optical switching devices, thermochromic coatings, Mott
field-effect transistors, alcohol sensors, and
waveguides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale materials often show properties that are
not exhibited by their bulk counterparts. The proposed research effort is
focused on understanding how such properties can be harnessed for practical
applications such as making faster electronic circuits for use in the next
generation of computers, ?smart? window materials that change color with
temperature, and accurate sensors for detecting low concentrations of vapors.
Vanadium dioxide, one of the materials that will be explored in this project, is
a transparent insulator at room temperature but upon heating to 67°C becomes an
excellent conductor that is almost completely opaque. The proposed research will
focus on shifting this transition closer to room temperature wherein this
dramatic effect can be used to construct ultrafast nanoelectronic circuits and
temperature-sensitive coatings. An integrated outreach and education program is
also proposed emphasizing teacher professional development, classroom
engagement, and curricular reform at the middle-school level at a local urban
high-needs school. These activities will serve to build sustained mentoring
relationships between faculty, graduate students, undergraduate students, and
middle-school teachers and students. This effort will seek to actively engage
Buffalo Public School middle-school students from economically disadvantaged
backgrounds in appreciating science and technology at a critical and formative
time period. The collaborative development of attractive curricular material and
challenging laboratory experiments along with sustained classroom visitation and
after-school science activities will form the cornerstone of this program. A
freshman seminar course will be developed to discuss the broader societal
implications of nanotechnology.