* 0847300
* CAREER: Oligocene planktonic foraminiferal Konservat-Lagerstaette: Implications for taxonomy, paleobiology, and tropical marine temperatures
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Bridget Wade, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2010
* USD 62,578.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Oligocene microfossil
Konservat-Lagerstätte: Implications for planktonic foraminiferal taxonomy,
paleobiology, and marine temperatures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridget
Wade&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M University
EAR-0847300&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Earth today has major
ice caps on Antarctica and Greenland, but this was not always the case. This
research focuses on climate change during a time period known as the Oligocene
(34 to 24 million years ago). This interval of time began with a big shift in
climate, when a large ice sheet developed on Antarctica. Once the Antarctic ice
cap was established, it waxed and waned many times between periods with
relatively little ice and periods with very expansive ice sheets. However, the
impact of these large variations in Antarctic ice volume upon tropical sea
surface temperatures and marine biota are largely unknown. Previous estimates of
Oligocene sea surface temperatures from microfossil geochemistry indicate
tropical and subtropical temperatures that were substantially lower than modern.
But there is a problem in previous studies: microfossil shell geochemistry can
be altered post deposition and bias temperature reconstructions. To address this
problem, PI will examine microfossils from sites with exceptional preservation
(Konservat-Lagerstätte). A detailed study of well preserved microfossils will
build an accurate picture of how the Oligocene climate changed and will lead to
a greater understanding of Oligocene climatic events and the impact on tropical
biota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated with a number of
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate activities that involve project-based
discovery learning. In partnership with the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program at
Texas A&amp;M, PI will expand a successful pilot program for minority high
school students, Summer pre-College Ocean Research Experience (SCORE), which
emphasizes integrated research experiences in ocean sciences. A permanent
exhibit on polar climates and the history of Antarctica will be designed and PI
will create 3D podcasts of microfossils "micropods" for incorporation into
teaching activities.