* 0847820
* University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology invertebrate fossils:  Databasing and web-accessibility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Fisher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 304,867.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this proposal is to
computerize taxonomic, geographic, and stratigraphic information for catalogued
invertebrate fossils at the University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology (UMMP-
IC). The UMMP-IC has long ranked among the most important collections in North
America (ranked 7th). The searchable database will be available online and
supplemented with digital images of specimens, allowing the scientific community
efficient access. The award adds to a recently completed move of collections to
new cabinets in a 5000 sq. ft extensively renovated, climate-controlled, secure
new facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in this venture will have a
transformative effect on UMMP-IC, returning it to the forefront of active
research in paleontology, releasing its enormous store of latent paleontological
data to an audience of taxonomists, systematists, paleoecologists and
paleobiologists. The online database
(http://www.paleontology.lsa.umich.edu/UMMP_IC/) will be available to the
general public, a growing fraction of who are interested in fossils, the history
of life and environment. Critically, the database will be eventually linked with
other collections in peer museums, facilitating the transition to online
multiple-collection searches. This project will enable the UMMP to strengthen
its prominent role in training students in paleontology and museum science by
incorporating significant levels of practical database and curatorial skill
development.