* 0847965
* The Beetles of the Pacific Northwest:   The Legacy of Melville Harrison Hatch
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Stevan Arnold, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2014
* USD 469,820.00

The goal of this project is to integrate a substantial collection of beetle
specimens into the holdings of the Oregon State Arthropod Collection (OSAC). The
project has three aims. (1) The physical integrity of the specimens will be
safeguarded by transferring them to new pest-proof cabinets. (2) The names used
to catalog the specimens will be updated so that they comply with the standard
naming system (taxonomy) used worldwide by other museums. (3) The accessibility
of the specimens to the public and researchers will be improved. Those
improvements will make the specimens more accessible onsite and via the
internet.

Beetles are sensitive indicators of environmental integrity and climate change.
Because of this bioindicator role, the OSAC collection of one million voucher
specimens is a unique resource for researchers that will be increasingly
important in the future. This collection is especially important because it
documents the geographic distribution of several thousand species over the last
90 years and so provides an invaluable benchmark for gauging the impact of
ongoing and future climate change. After the collection improvements are
implemented, the collection will be used by a variety of experts (e.g.,
ecologists, evolutionary biologists) and will be accessible online by the
general public.