* 0847707
* CAREER: Monitoring ultrafast excited-state selective dynamics, bond rupture, and rearrangement of small polyatomic molecules in solution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Alexander Tarnovsky, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2015
* USD 689,571.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Professor Alexander N. Tarnovsky of
Bowling Green State University will explore the photo-dissociation dynamics of
small polyatomic molecules in solution using ultrafast femtosecond laser pump-
probe spectroscopy and several other time-resolved techniques, including x-ray
and infrared absorption. The target systems include halogenated methane
molecules (CF2I2, CH2I2, and CH2BrI) in different organic solvents. Photoinduced
bond breaking and structural rearrangement will be monitored using various
probes that encompass a wide range of the electromagnetic spectrum (x-ray to
infrared) covering time domains from a single vibrational period to nanoseconds.
The properties of the surrounding liquid medium (polarity, polarizability, local
structure) are expected to have significant time-dependent influence on
dissociation and recombination processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
advancing our understanding of the photochemistry of halogenated hydrocarbons,
this research will also contribute to our general understanding of solvent
environmental effects on chemical reactions, and perhaps to our ability to
control chemical reaction pathways using ultrafast laser techniques. Professor
Tarnovsky?s research program will provide a rich research training experience
for both graduate and undergraduate students. Two high school science teachers
from local public schools will also take part in the research, and incorporate
some aspects of their work into their curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;