* 0847118
* Reorganization and computerization of the non-type systematic mollusk collection of the Paleontological Research Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Warren Allmon, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 497,100.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The collection of the Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) includes two to
three million specimens and is among the ten largest and most scientifically
important fossil collections in the United States. However, the backbone of the
collection, its non-type systematic mollusk collection (estimated at about 1.5
million specimens), is not yet fully at a minimally acceptable condition for a
resource of its importance and value. Between 25 and 30% of the systematic
mollusk holdings remain in unfavorable storage conditions that are potentially
hazardous for the specimens. This proposal seeks support for the reorganization,
curation, and beginning computerization of PRI's non-type systematic mollusk
collection, which will facilitate its long-term use by the scientific community.
Results will be made available on PRI's website at
www.pricollectionsdatabase.org. This reorganization is also highly likely to
have significant impact in the short term on a currently active research area in
paleontology and conservation paleobiology which applies geo-historical data to
present-day problems related to human-induced environmental change. PRI is a
national leader in Earth science educational programming, and specimens from the
mollusk collection will be used to inform and support various educational
outreach programs. In particular, the activity described in this proposal will
support the establishment of a teacher professional development program to
support secondary school science teachers in using hands-on, inquiry-based
teaching. The key concept will be that research collections are critical to
testing hypotheses about biological evolution and the history of Earth systems.