* 0847472
* CAREER: Assessing the Role of Land Surface Processes on the Climatic Changes in the Heavy Rain and Convection over the Indian Monsoon Region
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2018
* Dev Niyogi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Cai
* 01/31/2018
* USD 745,752.00

The study seeks to test the hypothesis that the land surface feedback is an
important modulator of the heavy rains and convection climatology over the
Indian monsoon region; and that the land use change has significantly
contributed to the changes in the heavy rainfall climatology over the Indian
monsoon region in recent decades.

The project will address the following outstanding questions: (i) What is the
impact of land surface processes on convection and heavy rainfall over the
Indian monsoon region? (ii) Is there a causal control of local land surface
feedback on the Indian monsoon heavy rainfall climatology?, and, What aspects of
this land use feedback can be detected from current observations, models, and
reanalysis products? These questions seek to investigate if the impact of land
surface processes can be statistically detected from multidecadal analysis and
observations; and what are the mechanisms by which land surface affects regional
convection and heavy rains over the Indian monsoon region.

Using multidecadal in situ and remote sensed observations, and results from land
data assimilation system and coupled land atmosphere models, this project will
yield an improved definition, attribution and prediction of the Indian Monsoon
rainfall changes. It will also improve the understanding of the mechanisms of
monsoonal convective processes and its predictability, including the impacts of
land use land cover change and land surface variability. This will enable
knowledge that is transformative to weather and climate models and helps develop
a more complete understanding of the climate change processes over the Indian
monsoon region.

As a broader impact, using the research findings, educational material will be
developed for general public, undergraduates, and advanced graduate students.
The research will directly contribute towards the training of graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers. Working with middle school teachers, project
findings will be used to develop middle school classroom monsoon activities.
These activities will be transformed to a media content website, as well as in
4H handbooks, state fair activities, and for visualization and student
activities digital libraries. Results of this work will be actively disseminated
through participation at professional annual meetings and conferences, and in
peer-reviewed journals, and popular media.

