* 0847332
* CAREER: Investigation and Parameterizion of Hurricane Boundary Layer Processesfor Improving Hurricane Forecast and Mitigation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Ping Zhu, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 09/30/2015
* USD 751,041.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

As the interface between the warm ocean (which is the primary energy source
driving tropical cyclones) and overlying atmosphere in which these storms
develop, the hurricane boundary layer (HBL) represents a pivotal conduit for
vertical transfer of energy in the form of heat, moisture and momentum embodied
by strong winds and underlying ocean currents. The lead investigator will
conduct multi-scale numerical modeling studies [including large-eddy simulations
using the Weather Research & Forecasting (WRF) model] and analyze special
observations to gain improved understanding of the HBL and optimize its
representation in weather forecast models. Particular attention will be directed
to methods for improved observation and prediction of damaging wind patterns
accompanying storm landfall. Specific objectives of this effort include: (1)
advancement of physically-based understanding of HBL processes including their
up-scale impact on tropical cyclone energetics and down-scale influences on
coastal damage patterns; (2) improved representation of "sub-scale" HBL
processes not routinely resolved by numerical simulations through derivation of
sophisticated parameterizations uniquely suited to strong hurricane wind
conditions; and (3) identification and development of novel approaches to map
and predict HBL wind patterns at the time of storm landfall to better support
efforts to mitigate coastal hurricane impacts. In conjunction with these
simulation-based methodologies, analysis of special observations from CBLAST
(the Coupled Boundary Layers Air-Sea Transfer field campaign) and enhanced
measurements from two portable coastal wind measurement towers will be
conducted. This integrated approach will allow improved understanding and
representation of features such as intensely-rotating mesovortices and
horizontal "roll" circulation structures embedded within broader cyclonic
airflows that influence the strength and duration of damaging surface wind
patterns beneath landfalling tropical storms.

The intellectual merit of this effort centers upon an improved physical and
dynamically-based understanding of atmospheric processes and air-sea
interactions influencing hurricane behavior, including mechanisms controlling
hurricane formation, intensification and dissipation. Broader impacts will be
derived through expansion of both undergraduate and graduate course offerings at
Florida International University (a minority-serving institution), outreach to
K-12 students through installation of meteorological instrumentation and follow-
on interactions at a nearby high school to enhance student awareness and
understanding of life-threatening tropical weather events, and ultimately
through improved hurricane forecasts and reduced loss of life and property
within populous coastal zones.