* 0847974
* Synergistic Computational and Experimental Magnetic Resonance Studies of Nanocrystalline Zeolites
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Sarah Larsen, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Sarah Larsen, together with her undergraduate
and graduate student researchers, will use magnetic resonance techniques
(nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)) to
elucidate the structure and properties of nanocrystalline zeolites.
Nanocrystalline zeolites (with crystal sizes of less than 50 nm) are versatile,
porous nanomaterials with potential applications in a broad range of areas
including catalysis, drug delivery, imaging, environmental protection, and
sensing. The characterization of the physical properties of nanocrystalline
zeolites on a fundamental level is critical to the realization of these
innovative applications. The distinct advantage of nanocrystalline zeolites over
conventional microcrystalline zeolites is the increased external surface area
that can be functionalized in order to tailor the surface chemistry. The
utilization of the external surface will lead to the development and application
of novel bifunctional, nanocrystalline zeolites. The experimental studies will
be enhanced by synergistic quantum chemical calculations of magnetic resonance
parameters, such as chemical shifts, quadrupole coupling constants, g-values and
hyperfine interactions. In these studies, three main issues related to
nanocrystalline zeolites will be addressed through the combination of magnetic
resonance techniques and modern computational methods including: 1) surface
structure, adsorption, and reactivity of nanocrystalline zeolites; 2) ion-
exchange and functionalization of nanocrystalline zeolites, and 3) development
of bifunctional nanocrystalline zeolites for applications in imaging and drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participation of a diverse group of students
is an integral part of the proposed research. These students are being trained
in an important, interdisciplinary research area at the interface of physical
chemistry, materials chemistry and nanoscience and nanotechnology. Professor
Larsen will continue her efforts to recruit a diverse group of students to her
research program. She will continue to successfully integrate research and
education particularly with respect to her interest in nanoscience and
nanotechnology. She is involved in a collaborative chemical education project
focused on developing laboratory experiments and outreach activities related to
nanoscience and nanotechnology for K-12 audiences. As part of this project, she
will extend these efforts to include outreach to the local high schools and
elementary schools through the preparation of outreach kits containing hands-on
activities with nanomaterials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;