* 0847490
* CAREER: Using Three-Dimensional Confocal Rheology to Measure Shear Induced Microstructural Deformations in Colloidal Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Daniel Blair, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 02/28/2015
* USD 525,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex fluids are fascinating
materials with unique properties that arise from familiar constituents. For
example, emulsions and foams such as salad dressing and seat cushions are
comprised of simple materials such as liquid and air, yet their material
properties remain topics of overwhelming interest. The goal of this Early
Faculty CAREER Award is to gain a broader understanding of the glass transition
by using emulsions -- a particularly interesting complex fluid. Emulsions are
collections of very small liquid droplets, dispersed within another fluid, that
closely mimic the behavior of atoms and molecules. However, due to their
relatively large size, direct and real-time measurements of their positions and
motions are obtainable in contrast to their atomic counterparts. The glass
transition describes a transition in liquids that leads to their solidification
when they are abruptly cooled. Rapid cooling forces the material to remain
disordered while somehow becoming a solid. Remarkably, when these fluid droplets
are tightly packed together, they undergo a transition where all of the droplets
jam up, resulting in a material that is structurally very similar to window
glass. By simultaneously deforming and imaging a glass comprised of emulsion
droplets information about the mechanical properties, including the force on
each droplet, can be directly measured. This information will provide key
insights into the origins of the glass transition and will aid in the
development of theoretical models that describe these complex materials. A major
educational component initiated by the PI is the development of the Mid Atlantic
Soft Matter Workshop (MASM). This workshop provides an ideal forum for
researchers within the region whose interests reside at the interface of
conventional disciplines. The workshop also naturally assists in the career
advancement of young scientists by acquainting them with the local academic and
industrial research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this Early Faculty CAREER Award is
focused on developing the unique ability to precisely control and determine the
mechanical properties within soft glassy solids at the bulk and microscopic
scales. A system of colloidal suspensions (emulsions) is utilized to create
materials that undergo kinetic arrest similar to the glass transition in a
variety of condensed materials. What makes the experimental program described in
this proposal unique is the development of methods to impose precise shear
stresses during direct high speed three dimensional imaging. This technology
will allow the system to be externally driven and measured (rheology) while
simultaneously measuring the dynamic and structural evolution of the material at
the microscale. To carry out this proposed research, two well established
techniques for quantifying soft materials are combined; confocal microscopy and
bulk rheology. From a broader perspective, measurements of the microstructure
within colloidal glasses will allow for the development of microscopic theories
of amorphous materials that will provide both practical and fundamental
insights. A major outreach component initiated by the PI is the development of
the Mid Atlantic Soft Matter Workshop (MASM). This workshop provides an ideal
forum for researchers within the region whose interests reside at the interface
of conventional disciplines. The workshop also naturally assists in the career
advancement of young scientists by acquainting them with the local academic and
industrial research community.