* 0847923
* Opening the doors of possibility:   Creating new space through the compactorization of the Harvard University Herbaria (HUH)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* James Macklin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 03/31/2014
* USD 349,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Harvard University Herbaria (HUH) is one of the largest and most
active in the country. The vascular plant herbaria, containing over 3.6 million
specimens, represent an exceptionally rich scientific resource. This project
will focus on the reorganization and compactorization of these collections.
Through the purchase and installation of compactorized storage units, the HUH
will optimize its use of space and accommodate future growth, as well as
reorganize its vascular collections. &lt;br/&gt;The HUH?s collection is heavily
used by the scientific community, as documented by its many visitors, the high
frequency of loan requests, and the large number of research publications that
make use of HUH specimens. This project will improve both physical and
intellectual access to the collections. With the collection near capacity, new
compactorized shelving will improve storage conditions for the specimens and
will facilitate future growth of the collection. These upgrades will improve the
physical accessibility of the collections for faculty, students, and visiting
scholars and will permit the creation of upgraded workspace. Reorganizing the
collection based on the most up-to-date angiosperm classification will enable
researchers to use the collections more meaningfully. Students will be employed
in the project and will be trained in the practice of botanical curation.
Outreach efforts will feature a museum exhibit highlighting the ways in which
HUH collections are being used to study the pattern of species loss to climate
change in New England. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;