* 0847582
* Integrating an extraordinary Lepidoptera collection: The Ulf Eitschberger Collection at the McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and Biodiversity of the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Andrei Sourakov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 501,741.00

The Eitschberger Lepidoptera collection of is one of the largest and most
significant collections of butterflies and moths ever donated to a public
museum. Containing nearly one million specimens from all major groups and world
regions, it has already been the basis for hundreds of scientific publications.
This project will make the collection accessible to the scientific community and
general public by integrating it into the Florida Museum of Natural History's
(FLMNH) Lepidoptera collection at the McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and
Biodiversity. Currently, the Eitschberger collection is largely inaccessible
because the specimen storage containers are incompatible with the museum's
storage system. This project will therefore provide the storage equipment and
scientific expertise necessary to properly sort, identify, prepare and house
these specimens.

Integration of this collection will substantially strengthen the FLMNH
Lepidoptera collection, which simultaneously will be reorganized, and specimen
data for key groups will be made available via the Internet. The project team
will complete several publications based on the collection, and training in
museum techniques will be provided to high school and university students.
Ultimately, the Eitschberger collection will be open to the students,
researchers, enthusiasts, photographers and authors that regularly visit the
McGuire Center, and will thus help the museum to illustrate the importance of
natural history collections in society.