* 0847899
* Curation of Vertebrate Spirit Specimens of the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Richard Prum, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2013
* USD 350,000.00

The Yale Peabody Museum (YPM) houses a world-renowned collection of vertebrate
specimens. Approximately 30 percent of the entire holdings of the Division of
Vertebrate Zoology (VZ) are fluid-preserved specimens. The goal of this project
is to recurate the entire fluid-preserved vertebrate zoology collections of YPM,
to facilitate accessibility of the collections, and to promote their use in
research and education. YPM-VZ?s fluid-preserved collections have been amassed
over more than 160 years by Yale academics, researchers from other institutions,
and government agencies. We will recurate of the entire spirit specimen
collections in the YPM-VZ including fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and
mammals. These activities will include rejarring, relabeling, changing fluids,
checking identifications, evaluating data quality, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The rehousing and improvement of storage conditions of the VZ spirit collections
will help preserve these unique materials, and foster comparative biological
research on them. Recuration will foster accessibility to visitors, faculty, and
students wishing to use the collections. The project will provide curation,
identification, and database training for Yale undergraduates, and high school
interns (most of whom are under-represented minority students) through the YPM's
after-school intern program. &lt;br/&gt;