* 0847798
* CAREER: Dissecting the Neural Mechanisms for Face Detection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Doris Tsao, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 850,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three year old infant can recognize
visual objects better than any machine. Despite decades of work on the problem
of complex object recognition, the principles used by the brain to solve this
problem are still unknown. One major experimental difficulty has been the
diversity of feature preferences exhibited by visual neurons: For any given
cell, it is unknown which set of visual features will result in a robust neural
response. Over the past three decades, evidence has gradually accumulated for a
system in the temporal lobe that may allow researchers to overcome this
difficulty, consisting of a specialized set of areas dedicated to detecting and
recognizing faces. The face patch system creates unprecedented possibilities for
dissecting the principles of information flow in inferotemporal cortex, by
giving direct access to anatomically distinct components of a unified object
processing network. The stunning selectivity of this system for faces suggests
that face detection is one of its major functions. Understanding in detail the
strategies for face detection used by this system should illuminate the most
difficult problem in object recognition: how to recognize a visual form despite
substantial changes in appearance. With the support of the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Doris Tsao and colleagues at the California Institute of
Technology will tackle the problem of how cells in face-selective areas of the
brain are able to detect faces. The work will use functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to first identify these areas. Then, the feature selectivity of
cells in these regions will be characterized. This will be followed by
experiments in which subjects perform tasks in which they actively detect faces,
while neural activity is recorded. Neural activity in specific face areas will
be artifically increased or decreased, and the effect on face detection behavior
will be observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the present project will
likely spawn fertile exchange between neuroscience, computer science, and
psychology. The results may lead to new insights into the brain circuits that
are altered in prosopagnosia, a selective inability to recognize faces that
afflicts a surprisingly large percentage of the population. The results may also
provide new insights into social disorders such as autism and social anxiety
disorder, since faces are by far the most socially significant class of visual
stimuli that we perceive. Understanding the design principles used by the
world's best face detection system may motivate design of better artificial face
recognition algorithms (which have broad applications in security and
entertainment). Finally, the research will offer training opportunities for
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. Pedagogical activities included in
Dr. Tsao's CAREER grant include teaching an interdisciplinary course combining
computational modeling of object recognition with biological experiments. Face
perception is intriguing and accessible to almost everyone--likely because
almost everyone has a set of specialized face areas. Thus the results of these
investigations will likely be disseminated broadly, to enhance scientific
understanding in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;