* 0847988
* SGER: The Effects of Severe Flooding on the Educational Development of Public School Students
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Kevin Leicht, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2010
* USD 62,897.00

Research on student educational performance and careers has a long and
distinguished history in American social and behavioral science, but research on
the social consequences of disasters and catastrophic risk have been far less
frequent. The devastating floods in Eastern Iowa in June 2008 provide an
opportunity to assess the effects of students' flood experiences on their
subsequent educational development and careers. The investigators had previously
been working under contract to the Cedar Rapids Community School District to
develop a model of the changing geographical patterns of students attending its
schools for the purpose of reorganizing their school attendance policies and
areas served. When unexpected flooding from the Cedar River that was 11 feet
(3.3 m) higher than in any previously recorded flood event in the area submerged
some residences not even included in the 500-year flood maps for the city, tens
of thousands of residents were displaced. Based on previously collected data,
the investigators were able to determine that 1,834 students lived in
neighborhoods that encountered flooding. This Small Grant for Exploratory
Research will enable these investigators to conduct research that is grounded in
social scientific theories of educational performance and disaster aftermath
that focus on disrupted and reconstituted network ties as key components of
successful recovery. The investigators will conduct a longitudinal survey of
fourth-grade through eighth-grade grade student families in the flood zone (676
students from approximately 420 families) and track students and families who
remain in the larger Cedar Rapids community and those who left it. Affected
students will be paired with a control group of non-flood affected students of
similar race and ethnicity, family income status, grade in school, and school
attended in 2008-2009 in an attempt to assess the distinctive effects of flood
victimization on family life and educational
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will systematically assess the
longitudinal effects of a natural disaster on the educational performance of
youth using and integrating prevailing social scientific theories of educational
development and community responses to disaster. Project results should permit
comparisons to be made with research conducted in New Orleans in the aftermath
of Hurricane Katrina and the more limited research program of those who studied
the aftermath of the 1997 flood in Grand Forks, North Dakota. The data from this
project should allow the larger research community to engage in more
sophisticated analyses of natural disaster impacts on youth and families,
because flood-affected students and families will be systematically compared
with similar control groups of students and families unaffected by the flood.
Enhanced understanding of community and individual responses to disasters like
the Cedar Rapids flood will be increasingly valuable for policy makers,
planners, and other community leaders as they try to prepare for major
catastrophes.