* 0847347
* SGER: Hydrometeorological Studies of the 2008 Flooding in Iowa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* James Smith, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 74,243.00

Intellectual Merits of this Proposal: In this study, analyses will be carried
out to examine hydrometeorological mechanisms associated with the 2008 flood
event in Iowa. Hydrometeorological studies of the Iowa flooding will utilize
both modeling and empirical analyses and follow procedures developed at
Princeton and the University of Iowa for extreme flood studies. Model analyses
will utilize the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model. Observational
studies will center on rainfall analyses using HydroNEXRAD rainfall fields.
Empirical studies will also utilize cloud-to-ground (CG) lightning data from the
National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) to examine the role of organized
thunderstorm systems for heavy rainfall production and stream gaging data from
the U. S. Geological Survey (USGS) for characterization of anomalies in the
regional water balance for the 2008 flooding in Iowa. Analyses of the 2008 Iowa
flooding will include intercomparisons with major recent flood episodes in the
central US, notably the ?Great Flood? of 1993, the July 1996 flooding in the
upper midwest and the 1997 flooding in the Red River of the North. For each of
these flood episodes, ?antecedent? conditions have been identified as important
ingredients in the hydrologic and hydrometeorological evolution of the flood
episode. Analyses of the 2008 Iowa flooding will examine the hydrometeorological
?history? of the flood episode extending back to Fall of 2007. Analyses will
center on processes associated with extreme flooding in the Iowa River above
Iowa City and the Cedar River above Cedar Rapids. Extreme flooding in these
watersheds was directly associated with a series of storm events that passed
over the region during the period from May 21 through June 14, 2008. Simulation
studies using WRF will be carried out to examine: 1) mechanisms associated with
the repeated development of organized thunderstorm systems during the May ? June
2008 flood period, 2) the role of land surface processes for heavy rainfall
production over the flood region and 3) the role of atmospheric moisture
transport for heavy rainfall production over the flood region.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts of this Proposal: Hydrometeorological analyses of the 2008 fl