* 0847535
* CAREER: Functional Nano-Composit Materials: Synthetic Methodology and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Dmitri Talapin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 01/31/2014
* USD 605,000.00

DMR-0847535&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop
novel nanostructured inorganic materials with programmable physical and chemical
properties. The approach involves new chemistry for solution-based fabrication
of inorganic functional materials from nanoscale building blocks. Specifically,
functional nanostructured phases will be synthesized by combining colloidal
inorganic nanomaterials (metal and semiconductor clusters, nanocrystals,
nanowires, etc) and molecular metal chalcogenide complexes. Various molecular
metal chalcogenide complexes, such as SnS44-, Sn2Se64-, In2Se42-, Ge4S104- will
be used to completely replace original hydrocarbon surface ligands at the
surface of colloidal metal and semiconductor nanostructures. After formation of
a nanostructured assembly, new surface ligands will be converted into an
inorganic solid, linking individual nano-building blocks into a macroscopic
array of strongly electronically coupled functional modules. The project will
combine the development of synthetic methodologies, detailed structural,
electronic and optical characterizations of new materials and fabrication of
prototype electronic and optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a generalized
methodology for preparation of nanostructured inorganic materials through
?modular? self-assembly of nanoscale functional building blocks. This approach
may lead to a novel class of solution processed semiconductors for the
applications ranging from solar cells to thermoelectric heat converters, light-
emitting devices and printable electronics. The integration of research and
educational components will generate broad outreach and educational activities
including participation in the conceptual design and development of the
Nanoscience exhibit for Chicago Museum of Science and Industry. The Museum
attracts approximately 2 million visitors per year, nearly 280,000 children in
school groups and youth organizations visited the Museum in 2007. Aimed at
inspiring youth to consider education and careers in the physical and biological
sciences, the objective of new exhibit is to convey the excitement of modern
scientific research, its multidisciplinary nature, and the synergy between
different areas of science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;