* 0847217
* CAREER: High Pressure Melting and Phase Transitions in Model Compositions of Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrew Campbell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2012
* USD 477,303.00

Many of the geological processes that are observed on the surface of the Earth
are manifestations of processes occurring at great depth in the planet.
Consequently it is important to understand the constitution and dynamics of the
deep interior, as well as the evolution of these processes over time. It is
known that the Earth?s innermost region, its core, is mostly iron, but the
remaining 10% or so of its constitution is uncertain. Identifying this component
of the core is key to answering a number of geophysical and geochemical
questions about the origin, evolution, and dynamics of our planet?s interior;
for example, the extent of oxidation/reduction and loss of volatiles during
Earth formation, and the energetics of the processes generating the Earth?s
magnetic field, are linked to the composition of the core. This project will
allow us to better understand the Earth's core through experiments designed to
measure the properties of iron-rich alloys at high pressures and high
temperatures, comparable to the conditions that exist in the planet's deep
interior. Specifically, in these experiments we will measure the temperatures of
melting in candidate alloy compositions that represent proposed compositions of
the core, and also determine the composition and structure of the solid phase(s)
that coexist with the melt at high pressures. These data will allow us to test
the plausibility of the candidate compositions of Earth's core.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diamond anvil cells, with infrared laser heating, are used
to generate the high pressures (&gt;100 GPa) and temperatures (&gt;3000 K)
necessary for the experiments. In the investigator's home laboratory, optical
methods, including a newly developed method of measuring temperature
distributions in the experiment, will be used to determine the temperatures at
which melting and other phase transitions occur. Further characterization of
these transitions will be performed using synchrotron X-ray sources to probe the
structure of the samples in their high pressure, high temperature state. As part
of their research training, students will benefit from participating in the
development of improved techniques specific to these experiments. The greater
educational aim of this CAREER project is to integrate this research, and
teaching mineral physics, into a broad effort to expand the opportunities for
geophysics education at the University of Maryland.