* 0847605
* CAREER: Causes for the Indian Ocean Vertical Warming Structure and its Decadal Change during Recent Decades
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Weiqing Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2014
* USD 610,286.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Warming of the upper Indian Ocean since
the 1950s has been detected and shown to have a complex vertical structure:
near-surface warming accompanies upper-thermocline cooling in the tropics and
weaker warming underneath. Causes for the complex structure and its decadal
change are unclear. The overall goal of this project is to develop an in-depth
understanding of the Indian Ocean warming structure and its decadal to inter-
decadal change in the past a few decades. The objectives to achieve this goal
are to: (i) explore the physical processes that cause the north Indian Ocean and
south Indian Ocean surface warming trend; (ii) qualify and quantify the causes
for the observed thermocline cooling and weaker warming underneath, and estimate
the effects of the cooling thermocline on the sea surface temperature (SST);
(iii) document the decadal and inter-decadal change of the vertical warming
structure, and investigate the mechanisms that cause the change. Data analysis
will be combined with model experiments. Various observational datasets and data
assimilation products will be analyzed, and a suite of carefully designed model
experiments will be performed using an ocean general circulation model (OGCM),
in order to achieve in-depth understanding of processes. A linear model will
also be used to provide insight into the wave processes that occur in the OGCM.
In addition, results from some climate models of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) will be analyzed and
compared to the OGCM solutions, with a hope to shed some light on the effects of
anthropogenic forcing on the Indian Ocean warming
trend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed project will
advance our scientific understanding of, and provide new insight into how the
complex vertical warming structure of the IO is formed, and how and why the
structure varies on decadal timescales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
Results from the proposed project will provide scientific guidance for planning
the sustained field programs, and may also contribute to decadal climate
prediction, which has a strong societal need. The research project directly
involves professional training of graduate students. The education objectives
are to: (i) provide research experience for undergraduate interns through their
participation in the research project by collaborating with the office of the
wellestablished diversity program, SOARS (Significant Opportunities in
Atmospheric Research and Science), at the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR), and (ii) to enhance graduate education at the University of
Colorado (CU). The intellectual merit of the education plan lies in its
advancement in undergraduate and graduate education in oceanography in the land-
locked state of Colorado. Its outcome will have broader impact at national and
international levels through mentoring interns from various regions of the U.S.
and by dissemination of results. Since the SOARS program targets students from
under-represented groups, these activities will also contribute to broadening
participation in the geosciences.