* 0847646
* CAREER: Composite Materials of Functional Block-copolymers and Nanoparticles: Understanding the Assembly Processes and Structure-property Relationships
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* So-Jung Park, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 12/31/2013
* USD 572,993.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The self-assembly of amphiphilic block-copolymers and
nanoparticles offers a powerful route to create multifunctional nanostructures.
However, the assembly behavior of the two components has not been vigorously
studied, and researchers have been relying on the simple solubilization approach
to encapsulate nanoparticles in polymer matrixes. The Park group has recently
shown that the cooperative assembly of nanoparticles and block-copolymers can
lead to ordered arrays of nanoparticles in discrete block-copolymer aggregates.
The proposed research will further investigate what controls the co-assembly
process of the two components in selective solvents and how nanoparticles affect
the morphology and properties of block-copolymers. Such knowledge is key to the
design of nanoparticle/polymer composite materials with preconceived
architecture and properties. Furthermore, the Park group will extend the
strategy to block-copolymers containing conjugated polymer segments, where
block-copolymers not only act as structure-directing molecules but also provide
an additional functionality to the composite system. This unique combination of
materials and the self-assembly capability of block-copolymers will lead to
advanced multifunctional nanometer to micrometer scale materials with
controllable structure and properties.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The incorporation of nanoparticles in polymers offers an
effective way to control the mechanical, optical, and electrical properties of
soft materials for applications ranging from flexible, low-cost solar cells to
biological imaging and medicine. The proposed research aims to elucidate how the
interactions between nanoparticles and block-copolymers affect the morphology of
polymer/nanoparticle composite particles. This study will provide a guide for
selecting suitable block-copolymer/nanoparticle pairs and assembly conditions to
create composite materials with desirable architectures and properties. The
broader impact of the proposed activity seeks to exploit highly visible
nanoscience to better engage pre-college and undergraduate students in science.
Educating graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in an interdisciplinary
field of chemistry is another important outcome of the proposed study. The
proposed research uses concepts and tools in several different areas including
materials science, surface chemistry, and spectroscopy. Students will discover
opportunities at the interfaces between seemingly unrelated fields and learn how
to solve problems at those boundaries.