* 0848325
* Controlling Microscale Collagen Peptide Assembly with Metal Triggers
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Jean Chmielewski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2012
* USD 501,000.00

Controlling Microscale Collagen Peptide Self Assembly with Metal
Triggers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collagen is one of the major structural proteins
of the extracellular matrix and is found associated with skin, bone, tendons,
ligaments, and blood vessels. As such, there is great interest in using collagen
for applications in regenerative medicine and tissue engineering. Natural
collagen has limitations, however, for these applications due to difficulties in
precisely controlling the protein's structure at the nano- and micro-scale and a
limited ability to modify its chemical structure. These difficulties could be
overcome by using synthetic fragments of collagen (peptides) as building blocks
for larger, functional biomaterials. To this end, the Chmielewski group has
designed collagen peptide building blocks that can be assembled using metal
ion/ligand interactions to generate unique micron-scaled structures, such as
fibers, spheres, meshes and disks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the
proposed research are to understand the mechanism used in the formation of the
collagen peptide assemblies and to fully optimize the conditions needed to
generate distinct collagen peptide microstructures on demand. Specific questions
that will be addressed include: (1) What roles do the metal-ligand combination
and the chemical structure of the collagen building block play in the assembly
of nano- to micro-scaled structures? (2) What is the mechanism of the formation
of the collagen peptide microstructures? (3) Can features of different building
block design strategies be combined to create modular
microstructures?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial designs of collagen peptide
assembly using metal-ligand interactions have provided fascinating
microstructures, some of unprecedented sizes and shape. The intellectual merit
of the proposed studies is focused on gaining a firm understanding of the
parameters and mechanisms of the assembly process. The metal-promoted assembly
of collagen peptides into micro-scale materials is evocative and may have broad
impact on many areas of science, including bio-nanotechnology, tissue
engineering and drug delivery. The results of the proposed scientific questions
will, therefore, have a broad impact on society, as will the training of the
students who participate in this interdisciplinary area of research.