* 0848515
* Multinucleating Pendtadentate Ligand Scaffolds for Cooperative Bimetallic Oxidation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* James Gardinier, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program supports the efforts of Professor James Gardinier of Marquette
University for the design and study of iron(IV)=O species that contain
pentadentate ligands for C-H bond activation reactions. The new ligands will
modulate the steric and electronic properties of the transition metal complexes,
impacting ligand substitution and potentially providing cooperatively-enhanced
reaction chemistry for bimetallic ensembles. Despite widespread interest, many
fundamental questions about iron(IV)=O species remain unanswered in both
biochemical and catalytic processes; this research targets some of these
important questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Gardinier has created and
maintained a web library of spectra for d-d transitions. This website is
accessible to both researchers and educators seeking to enhance the
undergraduate curriculum. Professor Gardinier also actively participates in the
Upward Bound Program, which enables students in grades 9-11 from low income
families to develop the skills required to complete high school. The
introduction of mini-workshops on current inorganic research projects exposes
these students to modern research topics.