* 0848403
* SGER: Understanding Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Community Response to Natural Disaster
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* David Bennett, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2010
* USD 44,484.00

While the magnitude of natural disasters can be great, community responses
before, during, and after calamitous events can also be significant. Community
response includes both top-down and bottom-up activities, including activities
coordinated by elected or appointed community leaders and the efforts of
neighborhood residents to self-organize to protect the local environment. This
Small Grant for Exploratory Research will examine the dynamics of community
response to the June 2008 flood of the Iowa River in Iowa City, Iowa, a flood
that crested at a level more than 9 feet (2.7 meters) above the river's flood
level of 22 feet (6.7 meters) and 20 feet (6.1 m) above the river's median gage
height for mid-June. (The peak flood flow rate of more than 40,000 cubic feet
per second (1,130 cubic meters per second). was more than ten times the median
flow rate for the same time period.) The investigators will collect time-
sensitive data that will provide a foundation for modeling community response to
a significant natural disaster. They will focus first on collecting data
regarding the community's physical response to the flood, such as where, to what
height, and when did sandbagging operations occur). They also will start to
collect data about what strategies were followed to protect local buildings by
conducting interviews to ascertain why sandbags were deployed to particular
locations and what influenced decisions to reallocate resources. These
interviews will be conducted with City of Iowa City administrators and
University of Iowa facilities management staff to gather details about the
sequence of actions associated with their attempts to save property and reduce
damage and disruption. These data will be used to compare the spatiotemporal
characteristics of the actual response with stated objectives in order to
understand how objectives shifted during as the disaster unfolded. These data
will be the used as input the development of spatially explicit simulation
models that integrate physical flood characteristics with the spatiotemporal
characteristics of top-down and self-organized community
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance basic understanding
about the ways that communities respond to natural disasters like floods, with
results that can be generalized to other locations as well as other types of
disasters. The project will be especially valuable for helping to compare the
spatiotemporal characteristics of the actual response with stated objectives in
order to understand how objectives shifted during an ongoing disaster. The
project will provide valuable education and training opportunities for a number
of students, and it will help city and university administrators evaluate what
transpired during the June 2008 flood, thereby enabling them to be more
effective in preparing for and responding to future
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;