* 0848293
* Mechanistic Investigations of Olefin Polymerizations and Selective Oligomerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Lawrence Sita, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 02/29/2012
* USD 489,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Lawrence R. Sita at the University of
Maryland, College Park to investigate mechanisms for the coordination
polymerization and selective oligomerization of 1-alkenes as mediated by
molecularly-well-defined transition metal complexes. Novel dynamic and
reversible bimolecular processes that are competitive with first-order chain-
growth propagation are being identified and established as mechanistic control
points by which the production of a near continuum of different polyolefin
grades between two limiting materials can be accomplished using only a single
catalyst. When combined with living coordination chain-transfer polymerization,
it is anticipated that practical commercial volumes of these new polyolefin
materials can be realized. The supported work further provides a critical
vehicle through which outreach activities will be conducted to educate the
general public regarding the current needs, limitations, and impact of the
global polyolefins industry and related research. Students conducting the
studies receive training in both fundamental and practical apsects of chemistry
and will be well prepared to enter the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Civilization and the quality of life as we know
it is wholly dependent upon "plastic" materials prepared through the
coordination polymerization of ethene, propene, and higher 1-alkene using
catalysts that are largely discovered in empirical fashion. Detailed
investigations of mechanistic processes that govern these catalysts can provide
new and transformational strategies by which the range of plastic materials can
be greatly increased while dramatically reducing the research and development
cycle.