* 0848517
* Structure and Reactivity of Organic Cations in the Gas Phase and Condensed Media
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Thomas Morton, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2013
* USD 408,325.00

This project probes the relationship between the 3-dimensional structure of
organic molecules that carry an electric charge and their chemical reactivity. A
key objective of this program is to compare the behavior of ions in the gas
phase with those in condensed phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The picture of how
ions behave in the gas phase in relation to their behavior in condensed phases
remains incomplete, although there are many parallels. Some ions cannot be made
in solution and can be explored only in the gas phase, but others can be made
under a variety of conditions. Comparison reveals the effects of solvent and of
pairing with opposite charges. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the
proposed activity&lt;br/&gt; Undergraduate instruction plays an important role
in disseminating new results. The PI has invested much effort in teaching small
sections (beyond his assigned teaching load) to communicate insights from
research. Offered through the UC Riverside's Honors' Program, these sections
introduce students to hypothesis testing based on conformational analysis and
ion chemistry of small molecules. The PI has developed a course in which, from
fall 2006 through the end of 2008, approximately 120 sophomores and juniors (of
whom &gt;25% are under-represented minorities, including 8 Chicana/o, 9 other
Latina/o, 11 Pacific Islander, 3 African American) have been instructed how to
perform molecular modeling on a computer independently, with a view towards
comparing computed predictions with experimental data.&lt;br/&gt; In regard to
research publication, development of mass spectrometric methodology for
analyzing how bacteria oxidize alkanes is germane to environmental issues
regarding worldwide extraction and transportation of petroleum. With respect to
peptide mass spectrometry, development of MS/MS methodology for detecting and
quantitating amino acid and peptide stereoisomers will make it possible to
assess more routinely how widespread post-translational modification via amino
acid epimerization may turn out to be in biological systems.&lt;br/&gt; In the
research laboratories, a major objective is the education of Ph.D. students to
combine organic chemistry with instrumental methods.