* 0848346
* Multiscale Chemistry of U, Np, and Pu Under Acidic and Basic Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Aurora Clark, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
Program supports the efforts of Dr. Aurora E. Clark of Washington State
University for the rational design of separation and waste storage strategies of
uranium, neptunium, and plutonium complexes using multi-scale computational
chemistry methodologies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The storage and separations of
nuclear fission products is an overarching problem with implications for
environmental remediation, US defense, and domestic energy technologies. The
safe and effective treatment of fission products mandates a detailed
understanding of their chemical behavior under a variety of environmental
conditions (e.g. pH). In particular, an understanding of the behavior of
actinides in the III-VII oxidation states across multiple length and time scales
is needed. Characterization of this multiscale behavior requires major
advancements in experimental capabilities thus, rigorous theoretical
descriptions, whose predictive capability can guide future studies and system
design, are of great value. Currently, there is little information regarding the
hierarchical condensed phase order of actinide solutions and this hinders new
technologies within the nuclear fuel cycle that can capitalize upon their
reactivity under various pH regimes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
utilizes a combination of state-of-the-art density functional theory, classical
simulations, and ab-initio molecular dynamics to examine actinides (uranium,
neptunium and plutonium ) under extreme pH conditions. This data provides
insights into acid/base ligation, counter ions effects, solvation properties,
and reactivities of these actinides. To streamline computational efforts in
actinide chemistry and to enhance the University's infrastructure, Professor
Clark has established the WSU Computational Actinide and Nuclear Science
database, a repository for the data and new computational tools developed within
her group. The impact of this work will be further enhanced through the training
of post-graduate, undergraduate and high school students in nuclear science
where there is large demand and need for US expertise. Professor Clark also
works with collaborators at Moscow High School in Idaho to extend nuclear
science education and computational chemistry experiments to high school
students.