* 0848815
* RNA - Amino Acids Interactions: Toward an Elementary Translation System
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Albert Libchaber, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

In modern organisms, three main reactions enable the conversion of the
information contained in genes into functional proteins through the rules of the
genetic code. The first reaction (1) corresponds to the formation of aa-AMP from
of an amino acid (aa) and an ATP molecule, and is a thermodynamic requirement
for the second reaction (2), the attachment of the amino acid onto the 3 end of
a cognate transfer RNA (tRNA). The third reaction (3) leads to the
polymerization of tRNA-bound amino acids into proteins during the translation
process (on the ribosome). Approximately twenty versions of the aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase are capable of successively catalyzing reactions 1 and 2. The early
genetic system could not possibly have relied on any such coded proteins, and it
is therefore thought that some RNA molecules were able to catalyze these
reactions following the rules of a simplified genetic code. The goal of this
project is to clarify the mechanisms of interaction among RNA structures, ATP
and amino acids (as well as AMP-activated amino acids) by which these three main
chemical reactions could be fulfilled without protein. Studies have already
demonstrated that reaction 2 and an analog of reaction 1 can be catalyzed by
certain RNAs. The product of reaction 1 (aa-AMP) is however quickly hydrolyzed
in water, proving difficult to study. This instability requires the coupling of
reactions 1 and 2 on a same molecule, and occurs precisely on the aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases. It is therefore expected that some yet unidentified RNAs have this
same catalytic property. The resolution of this issue constitutes the basis of
the present research project. Data from earlier experimental studies, suggest
mechanisms by which this coupling can be achieved on very short RNAs (~25 bases)
that form simple folding structures, such as small bulges. The critical
parameters allowing these reactions will be studied both experimentally and
computationally (with molecular dynamic simulations). The PIs will also use
selection-amplification procedures (SELEX) to uncover these RNAs from pools of
random molecules. Reaction 3 will also be investigated, in particular to
establish whether the ribosome is indispensable for peptide bond formation, or
if it is only necessary to establish a ratchet-like mechanism. This work will
clarify the implications of the elementary properties of the amino acids and the
nucleotides in water for the mechanisms responsible for the emergence of the
genetic code. Since the polymerization of the amino acids through reactions 1-3
is a process out of equilibrium, new results in this field will help to clarify
the connection between biological coding and the laws of non-equilibrium
thermodynamics. This project will be beneficial to undergraduate students,
introducing them to one of most fundamental issues of modern biophysics, the
bridge between the work of Boltzmann (thermodynamics) and Turing (coding).