* 0848637
* MOLECULAR ENCAPSULATION AND ELECTRON TRANSFER
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2014
* Angel Kaifer, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2014
* USD 680,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Angel E. Kaifer at the
University of Miami, who will study the relationship and interplay between
molecular structures and electron transfer reactions. This proposal is aimed at
elucidating fundamental questions related to electron transfer (ET) reactions
and how the ET rates are affected by a host in supramolecular systems. This is a
major continuing effort of previous work to better understand electron transfer
reactions that occur within noncovalent encapsulated redox centers. By using a
redox active guest and a suitable host, the resulting inclusion complex is a
structure in which the redox center is partially or completely encapsulated by
the host cavity. It may be viewed as analogous to biological host-guest
macromolecular systems. These experiments will seek to understand quantitative
and qualitative changes in reactivity of encapsulated molecules, such as
reorganization energy rates and related thermodynamic parameters. Specific
objectives are to i) investigate ferrocene and its derivatives in various
cucurbit[n]uril (CBn) and cavitand hosts via noncovalent binding interactions,
ii) investigate mediated electron transfer between fully encapsulated ferrocence
centers and electrode surfaces, iii) continue binding property studies of CBn
hosts within a range of inclusion complexes, and iv) begin new research on the
use of nitroxide spin labels to probe the interior space of molecular capsules
to better understand the complex factors controlling self-assembly. Since CBn
hosts surpass cyclodextrins, a similar class of cyclical-shaped
oligosaccharides, in binding affinity and selectivity, these studies will
generate meaningful information to better understand supramolecular assembly and
molecular recognition of a valuable class of molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cucurbiturils are efficient host molecules in molecular
recognition and may find applications as supramolecular catalysts, drug delivery
vehicles, play a role in information storage devices, or other materials science
applications. Professor Kaifer will continue to actively engage women and
underrepresented minorities from high school to post-doctoral levels in his
research program. In addition to the excellent research being carried out,
Professor Kaifer emphasizes student training beyond the boundaries of the
traditional disciplines of chemistry. All group members are required to develop
synthetic expertise and must perform their own electrochemical and spectroscopic
experiments to characterize the electron transfer reactions, host-guest binding
interactions, self-assembly and/or aggregation processes in which their target
compounds may engage. The PI?s group has always bestowed a friendly and
nurturing atmosphere for the development and training of underrepresented
minorities as researchers. Several research components of this application are
specifically designed for undergraduate students, since their research work
often suffers from schedule limitations that do not affect graduate students and
postdoctoral associates. In terms of measurable outcomes in minority training,
Professor Kaifer makes the commitment that the research participants in this
project will include: (a) a minority/female undergraduate every year, (b) a
minority/female high school student every year, and (b) at least a
minority/female postdoctoral associate or graduate student during the grant
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;