* 0848607
* Structure and Dynamics with Solid-State NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 12/31/2012
* USD 455,300.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Nuclear magnetic resonance reports on the immediate chemical
environment surrounding the nucleus of an atom and provides a mechanism for
determining the geometrical arrangement of atoms within molecules. Such chemical
level details are critical for understanding molecular structure, function, and
reactivity. Under this award, supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Leonard J. Mueller will conduct
research at the University of California - Riverside centered on how to acquire,
assign, and interpret nuclear magnetic resonance spectra in increasingly
challenging systems. These experiments will be developed in the context of two
applications that push the requirements for sensitivity and resolution beyond
those routinely available. The first is correlation spectroscopy in solid-state
proteins, where they will build up a novel set of multi-dimensional solid-state
nuclear magnetic resonance experiments for establishing through-bond
connectivity in macroscopically disordered solids using scalar coupling-driven
correlation. These tools developed by the PI under this project will allow them
to make chemical shift assignments of large enzyme systems and will provide
chemical level detail on the substrate transformation in the active site. The
impact of this work will be a better mechanistic understanding of enzyme
function and the identification of potential targets for new antibiotics. The
second is the development of 13C correlation spectroscopy at the natural
abundance level. Here they will pursue a novel protocol optimized for
sensitivity at natural abundance and apply these techniques to steroid systems
with challenging relaxations rates and to structural questions in the materials
chemistry of organic nanorods. The impact of this work will be to extend solid-
state NMR correlation spectroscopy to the large number of academically and
industrially important compounds that cannot easily be isotopically
enriched.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will involve undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral researchers and the broader impacts of this work are
centered on increasing participation of underrepresented groups, enhancing
infrastructure for research and education, and advancing discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning. These include the
expansion of an existing summer undergraduate research program between the Joint
Sciences Department of the Claremont Colleges (a PUI) and the UCR Chemistry
Department and an international collaboration for training graduate students. As
well, the PI will collaborate with industrial partners to release pulse program
codes developed under this grant, enabling the quick dissemination of knowledge
and the development of additional applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;