* 0848665
* SBIR Phase II:  Molecular Interaction Measurement System: A Label-free Detection Platform.
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2011
* John Bilello, Ridge Diagnostics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2011
* USD 464,304.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to build upon
the feasibility of using MIMS technology to determine the presence and measure
the concentration of multiple protein biomarkers (specifically autoantibodies)
within a single sample. In order to achieve our primary objective in Phase II,
PHB proposes to produce a new highly-sensitive and stable MIMS system prototype
for clinical use. We will develop a prototype disposable, reliable, easy to use
biochip cassette with limited potential for biohazard exposure. To reduce the
need for off-chip processing, PHB will implement a cartridge- based fluidic
channel to remove blood cells. We will develop specific attachment strategies
for antibodies and/or F(ab)2 fragments of antibodies that enable the efficient
capture of antigens to be used as targets for autoantibodies. This will
eventually lead to the development of reverse capture arrays for identification
of autoantigens against which autoAb expression may be used to differentiate
between normal and disease states. We will optimize the protein printing
methodology, and blocking protocols to enable the optical interference detection
system to provide reproducible results in molecular binding reactions on a
multiplicity of nanostructured protein chips. We will evaluate the performance
of the optimized substrate and platform in real-time with a representative set
of antibody targets. Our initial focus will be a panel consisting of
Thyroperoxidase antibody, TSH receptor antibodies and thyroglobulin antibodies.
These tests can potentially be used to diagnose an autoimmune thyroid disease
and to separate it from other forms of thyroiditis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are to develop the Molecular Interaction
Measurement System (MIMS) which has the potential to measure multiple analyte
types (protein, RNA, DNA etc.) in real-time. MIMS uses optical interference to
measure the changes in thickness, resulting from binding of a ligand to a
macromolecule attached to the surface of a detector chip. The array format of
the MIMS assay permits simultaneous detection of the binding of multiple
analytes. One application of interest and immediate clinical value is in the
detection of autoantibodies which target host tissue and mediate autoimmune
diseases. MIMS can enable specific detection without having to tag (e.g. with
radioisotope or fluorescence) a patients sample: resulting in more accurate and
cost effective diagnoses In addition, the finding that patients with cancer
produce autoantibodies against antigens in their tumors suggests that such
autoantibodies could have both diagnostic and prognostic value. Commercially,
MIMS can be a tool to easily, rapidly and cost effectively screen a large number
of patients with different types and stages of cancer and other diseases
providing value to clinicians, to patients and the clinical research community.