* 0848590
* Division of Labor and Labor Relations in Public Service Work
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* John Krinsky, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2012
* USD 112,026.00

For thirty years, municipal governments have restructured their workforces. An
increasing number of public services once performed by regular city employees
are performed through contracting to nonprofit and for-profit firms, volunteer
and national service labor, and through welfare-to-work programs. In New York
City, all of these types of labor are used in combination with standard public
employment to maintain parks and public areas, administer social services, and
perform clerical duties. This study focuses on the mix of formal and informal
work in maintenance operations in New York City's parks, and asks how the
diversity of working arrangements affects their management, workplace
relationships, institutional labor relations, and the career paths of their
workers. The study probes first, what the various kinds of workers employed in
the parks actually do, how they understand their work, compare it to others'
work, and manage relations within the workplace among peers and supervisors.
Second, the study asks how and why the composition of the parks maintenance
workforce changed, and who the institutional stakeholders are in the changes in
the maintenance workforce. Third, the study investigates how the changes in the
parks maintenance workforce affect the careers, mobility and workforce
development of low- and semi-skilled workers. Are there potential workforce
development benefits-e.g., the broadening of job-finding networks or increased
training opportunities-for low- and semi-skilled workers, or are there mainly
drawbacks as contracting-out, job-training, welfare-to-work and volunteer
programs expand? Each set of questions will involve different methods for
gathering and analyzing data, including ethnographic fieldwork, extensive
interviews, and documentary and archival research.

The broader impacts of the research include fostering intra- and
interdisciplinary dialogue among sociologists of work, urban sociologists, and
students of urban policy, political science, and political economy. It will
result in a book and several scholarly articles across several disciplines. The
research project is also designed to expose master?s level policy students and
doctoral-level students to multi-method research. Because the research will be
carried out with the collaboration of a French researcher, it will both foster
international dialogue on the issues germane to the study, and may begin the
process of a larger comparison of urban public work. Finally, the study results
will inform stakeholders from city government, labor unions, community
organizations, and antipoverty groups about the similarities and differences in
the needs of the diverse public workforce, and the challenges in managing it.