* 0848916
* SBIR Phase II:  Improving the safety and efficacy of epidural anesthesia
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Eric Willis, Insite Medical Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is focused on
commercializing a proprietary medical device to provide safe and accurate
delivery of epidural anesthesia. Epidural anesthesia provides excellent pain
control for childbirth, major surgery, and chronic back pain without having to
expose patients to the risks of general anesthesia. Epidural anesthesia involves
(1) accessing the epidural space, a miniscule potential space adjacent to the
dura, the thin protective covering of the spinal cord, then (2) delivering local
anesthetic to bathe the spinal nerve roots and block pain sensation. Currently,
epidural access requires blind insertion of a sharp-tipped needle through the
back that is immediately halted just prior to entering the dura. The difficulty
of the current method poses risks of anesthetic delivery to incorrect anatomic
locations and injury to nearby critical structures. Complications are estimated
to occur in 6-25% of cases. InSite Medical Technologies has developed a
technology that eliminates the sharp needle tip and provides highly controlled
access to the epidural space by uniquely engaging surrounding tissue. During the
Phase II project InSite will finalize product design, establish a quality
manufacturing system, attain an FDA 510(k) approval and achieve the first human
use of the device.

The epidural anesthesia market comprises an estimated 9.8 millions eligible
patients each year in the United States of which only 3.4 million patients
actually receive epidural anesthesia. The underutilization of epidural
anesthesia results from several barriers including procedure difficulty and
physician fear of complications. The epidural anesthesia market is segmented
into obstetric, surgical, and chronic pain applications. With over 4 million
births annually in the United States, obstetrics is the largest segment.
Currently, during childbirth, 2.4 million women (60%) receive epidural
anesthesia for pain control. The second largest segment is surgical anesthesia
where, despite known patient-outcome benefits, epidural anesthesia is used in
only 500,000 of 1.8 million eligible cases. Finally, spine-related pain
syndromes are treated increasingly with epidural steroids and implanted
stimulators, accounting for 600,000 annual cases. Outside the U.S., 19 million
epidural access procedures are performed annually with a massive potential
international market including 130 million births per year. By creating a safer
and more accurate system for delivering epidural anesthesia, InSite Medical
Technologies sees an opportunity to produce a premium medical device that
positively impacts patients' experience with epidural anesthesia.