* 0848523
* SBIR Phase II:  Biosensor Device for Recordation of Handwriting
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Michael Linderman, Norconnect Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 630,320.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II Project proposes the
construction of a biosensor device prototype that will produce text from
electromyographic (EMG) signals recorded from hand muscles. This biosensor
device will enable the user to enter text into a computer or a mobile device
without the need of special paper, pen, or other devices to track the pen.
Recent advances in various technologies have made it practical to develop the
EMG detection and analysis techniques suitable for character recognition. Taking
advantage of advances in electrophysiology, pattern recognition, signal
processing, and computer engineering, this project proposes to develop a
practical system to decipher the EMG signals generated by biosensors mounted in
the digital glove. The project will use the test bed system that was developed
during Phase I project and helped to prove the concept. The knowledge of hand
EMG patterns of various characters that were gained during Phase I will be used
in the development of hardware device. The development will be conducted in the
areas of Data Collection, Data Representation (preparation), and Data Analysis.
The improvements are expected in all three areas, due to the use of more
advanced electrodes, data processing filters, and the application of Neural
Networks algorithms.

The proposed approach will remove several limitations faced by current
technology and should provide a more durable, flexible, accurate, and user
friendly product that can be easily adapted to different users for taking notes,
or writing SMS messages for cell phones. The technology will significantly
impact the condition of Carpal Tunnel Syndrome, a common occupational illness
being reported among typists. EMG-based fingerless glove can also be used as
alternative communication device by disabled people who are not able to talk, or
who have hearing problems. The resulting product has many applications in
education, medicine, tele-robotics, and can be used by mobile workers. As a
wearable computer device, this product will help to improve users' image and
self esteem. This research project will contribute to the better understanding
of muscle interactions. Finally, the handwriting application that will be
developed, can become a test bed for analyzing and comparing various pattern
recognition algorithms, including traditional statistical algorithms and neural
networks, for example Self Organizing Maps (SOM), State Vector Machine (SVM), or
Time Lagged Recurrent Networks (TLRN). These algorithms already have numerous
applications in various fields.