* 0848877
* SBIR Phase II:   Catalyst for Biomass Gasification Processes
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,10/31/2011
* Richard Long, NEXTECH MATERIALS LTD
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 10/31/2011
* USD 508,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on improving
efficiency and reducing cost associated with the production of energy, liquid
fuels, and value-added chemicals from gasified biomass. Unlike most other
sources of biofuels, gasification would not directly compete with food sources
since virtually any organic matter can be used as the feedstock. Examples of
feedstocks include agricultural residue, wood chips, and municipal waste.
However, biomass gasification is currently a capital intensive process because
of the difficulty with producing a clean syngas (free of tars and pollutants)
for use in downstream turbines or chemical production steps. Tar removal is
necessary to protect down-stream equipment in the process. Within this project,
NexTech will develop and commercialize a novel catalytic monolith capable of
reforming tars into a useful product, syngas, improving system efficiency. This
will be done by first optimizing the processing steps required to produce the
monolith, then verifying the monolith performance in independent testing. The
end product will provide gasifier users with a simpler and less expensive method
for tar removal than currently used approaches. The production of energy and
liquid fuels from biomass will have a number of beneficial societal impacts. The
gasification process is carbon neutral, since it uses CO2 that was captured from
plants; therefore, biomass gasification will replace energy production from
fossil fuels, thus reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Unlike fuel crops, biomass
is a waste product that has no use for human consumption, so the technology does
not compete with food sources. Further, using biomass as a source of energy will
reduce the dependence of our nation on foreign sources of energy. The technology
being developed could have application to a wide range of other catalytic
reactions as well, including lean burn diesel engine exhaust treatment,
hydrocarbon reforming and gas-to-liquid processes. From a scientific standpoint,
the technology being developed in this project is unique from traditional
catalysts, and the basic principles could be applied to a wide range of
applications. Additionally, the work being carried out during this project will
improve understanding of catalyst deactivation from sulfur poisoning and carbon
formation. Overall, the project will contribute novel results to the body of
literature in catalysis and materials development.