* 0848902
* The Evolution of Protein Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Floyd Romesberg, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2012
* USD 405,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry program, Professor
Romesberg from The Scripps Research Institute will investigate issues relating
to the evolution of protein dynamics. Proteins have evolved to perform their
various biological functions that enable life; however, little is understood
about how the process of evolution builds proteins for specific functions. One
function central to all proteins is molecular recognition - the ability of a
protein to find its binding partners within the complex milieu of the cell.
Perhaps the single most remarkable system where the evolution of biological
molecular recognition may be studied is the immune system, where antibodies
(Abs) that recognize virtually any foreign molecule (or antigen, Ag) may be
evolved from precursor (or germline) Abs within days of first encounter. The
fundamental hypothesis of the proposed research is that the immune system starts
with flexible and conformationally heterogeneous germline Abs that can bind a
wide range of Ags with an induced-fit mechanism, and then introduces mutations
that evolve them into more rigid mature Abs that bind only their target Ag with
a lock-and-key mechanism. Thus, Professor Romesberg proposes that during
evolution, Abs are selected based in part on a dynamic property, i.e.
flexibility. To test this hypothesis, a variety of modern biophysical techniques
will be employed, including nonlinear ultrafast laser spectroscopy and NMR
spectroscopy, to characterize Ab dynamics and Ag-binding as a function of the
specific mutations introduced during evolution. While the proposed research is
focused on Abs, it should have important ramifications for how molecular
recognition is evolved in other systems, such as with enzymes and their
substrates or inhibitors and with signaling cascades and their signaling
molecules. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to participating in the community outreach
programs already in place at TSRI, including hosting high school student
interns, presenting seminars, and participating in a lecture series at the
Reuben H. Fleet Science Center in San Diego, a summer program for high school
educators will be developed to bring the proposed work to a larger audience. The
broader impacts of the proposed research are to introduce today's younger
scientists, as well as the general public in the San Diego area, to
contemporary, interdisciplinary research rooted in the fundamentals of
evolution.