* 0848132
* EAR-PF: Investigations of Ambient Seismic Noise
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Moira Pyle, Pyle                    Moira          L
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2011
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Moira Pyle is awarded an NSF Earth
Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education
at Saint Louis University. This project seeks to improve our understanding of
the generation of ambient seismic noise and to explore new methods of utilizing
seismic noise to study the interior of the earth. Crosscorrelation of noise
between two arrays of seismic stations will be performed and array analysis
techniques will be employed to investigate what coherent energy exists. Data
will come from the permanent arrays of the International Monitoring System as
well as available temporary array deployments. Different seasons as well as
years will be examined to study the seasonal and temporal differences in noise
generation. Seismic remote sensing of the interior of the earth typically uses
waves generated by earthquakes or man made sources such as explosions, however,
a method using surface wave information contained in ambient seismic noise has
recently been developed to examine Earth structure. Evidence that the noise also
contains body wave energy that has interacted with the deep earth provides an
opportunity to use noise to examine even more of the earth. The ability to use
noise to study a wide range of the earth will allow for far better global
coverage because it can help reduce the limitations of location and timing of
earthquake occurrence. The proposed study will provide an opportunity for an
undergraduate student to participate in a research project and explore interest
in geophysics while developing research skills extremely useful for further
study. The principal investigator will gain valuable mentoring experience
working with undergraduates as well as sharing the methods and related work from
the project by contributing lectures to graduate geophysics courses. Simplified
explanations of the ideas behind the project and basic seismology will be
presented to visiting school groups.