* 0848335
* Workshop for Conversations Related to Motivating Interest in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering among Oklahoma K-12 Students
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Deborah Trytten, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 09/30/2011
* USD 49,996.00

A phased workshop will be held at the University of Oklahoma (OU) to engage
school administrators in conversations to enhance their awareness of engineering
as a discipline and to establish how the OU College of Engineering can optimally
utilize its resources and expertise to support and increase student
participation and engagement with engineering. The first phase of the workshop
engages OU staff and administrators from rural school districts in a dialogue to
understand the obstacles to mathematical and scientific literacy in the K-12
that inhibit incoming college student?s interest in and ability to pursue
engineering majors. The second phase is similar in scope and mission, except
that the K-12 representatives invited will include superintendents, principals
and curriculum directors from urban and suburban school districts in Oklahoma.
The workshop has three major objectives. The first is to increase awareness in
Oklahoma?s K-12 superintendents and principals of the importance of encouraging
K-12 students to prepare to study engineering at the university level. The
second is to develop a plan through which OU College of Engineering, K-12
superintendents, principals, and teachers and professional and industrial
partners can cooperatively facilitate and implement appropriate engineering
education programs and activities for K-12 students and their parents to enhance
interest and motivation in science and mathematics. The third is to identify
potential strategic partners for the College of Engineering?s Sooner Engineering
Education (SEED) Center from Oklahoma K-12 superintendents and principals and
professional organizations and industrial donors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will attempt to discover a mutually beneficial and acceptable path for
promoting engineering among K-12 and identifying how the (SEED) center or other
similar engineering education centers can engage appropriate federal, state,
professional, and industrial partners in a collaborative and long-term plan for
increasing the number and diversity of students pursuing engineering degrees.
Results from these workshops will be disseminated to engineering educators
through major publications, and research results also will be disseminated
directly to Oklahoma educators. The results of the workshop dialogs will be of
interest to engineering programs across the nation since the Oklahoma state
demographics is similar to several states in the nation. The action plan
developed from the workshop should aid SEED and other institutions with similar
constituents in recruiting and retaining prepared engineering students from
poorly represented rural communities.&lt;br/&gt;