* 0848753
* Collaborative Research: Ensemble-Based Predictability, Sensitivity and Data Assimilation in PREDICT
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sharanya Majumdar, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Anna Hallar
* 08/31/2013
* USD 214,462.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is part of the Pre-
Depression Investigation of Cloud-systems in the Tropics (PREDICT) project. The
central scientific hypothesis of this study is that properly simulating the
initial formation of synoptic-scale, pre-tropical-depression wave trough in
numerical forecasting models is most essential for the accurate modeling of
tropical cyclone genesis. It is within this disturbance that the critical layer,
which acts to shield an incipient rotating disturbance from wind shear and dry
air intrusion, is hypothesized to exist. To investigate this and other
hypotheses, an ensemble-based framework based on the THORPEX Interactive Grand
Global Ensemble (TIGGE), the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model and an
ensemble Kalman filter will be prepared in Year 1 for real-time prediction
during the PREDICT field experiment (mid-Year 2). During the field experiment
observations will be performed of tropical cyclones developing and travelling
through the eastern Atlantic and Caribbean regions. Ensemble-based techniques
will be used to diagnose the important physical processes, and the associated
scales and parameters, that need to be sampled to optimally limit prediction
errors. The remainder of Year 2 and all of Year 3 will be devoted to analysis of
observations using models as diagnostic tools, including production of a
convective-scale reanalysis that will include all data collected during the
field campaign and will be used by other PREDICT PIs for their research. The
intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the potential to advance
understanding of the processes and predictability associated with tropical
cyclone genesis, via multi-scale, multi-faceted numerical model ensembles. The
broader impacts of the proposed activity include improved probabilistic
predictions of tropical cyclone genesis, and subsequent intensity change. Better
forecasts of wind and rainfall structure at landfall will be possible. Two
graduate students will be trained to run models that capture inner-core
processes within tropical cyclones and to address unsolved issues related to
their predictability. Furthermore, data and results will be shared between the
research and operational communities.