* 0848950
* SGER: IMR: Development of Scientific Computing in the Cloud for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* John Rehr, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2009
* USD 58,861.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;"Cloud Computing" is a term that has gained
prominence recently to describe the use of a large body of compute resources
located at many different locations. These resources are typically owned by
third-party organizations and are made available to consumers in terms of the
capabilities of each computer rather than the underlying hardware in use. This
model proved its success almost immediately in the web services hosting domain,
the principle target for most cloud service providers. Our aim here is to
determine whether these same resources can be adapted for scientific purposes.
Thus we propose to develop applications of cloud computing for scientific
calculations and making such calculations feasible for working scientists
lacking sufficient compute resources at the present. Modern scientific
applications require high-performance computing facilities which are beyond the
reach of many practitioners who lack both the experience and funding to complete
serious scientific calculations, even though their work might be enhanced by
currently feasible calculations.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of resource virtualization is to divorce workflow from locality constraints,
thereby allowing it to migrate freely amongst available physical resources. This
flexibility yields tremendous scheduling advantages, as jobs can be placed and
often migrated in order to make the most efficient use of available hardware.
Resource virtualization is certainly nothing new. For example, Condor allows a
user to access a large pool of compute resources, each one of which may be a
completely unique hardware configuration. Condor's virtualization strategy is to
"trick" the application into thinking that it is on the home machine. The
drawback is that Condor must replace system libraries, which are architecture-
and OS-specific. Hence, this strategy can be very time consuming to support.
Another virtualization strategy uses ?grid computing.? Writing an application
that is "grid-enabled" means writing an application with the appropriate
protocols in place so that it can be moved around by the grid middleware. The
disadvantage here is that most scientists do not have the background or the time
to write grid-enabled programs.&lt;br/&gt;We argue that within administrative
differences between Cloud and Grid computing can be found the potential for CC's
most intriguing and useful advantages. For instance, Amazon?s EC2 ("Elastic
Compute Cloud") provides not just another web services platform, but a fully
virtual computer. An EC2 "compute instance" gives you a comprehensive set of
virtual hardware, complete with disk space, RAM, and IP address. On this virtual
platform, you then install your own operating system. The compelling aspect of
this strategy is that it virtualizes exactly what needs to be and no more: the
hardware. Doing so provides the utmost extreme in generality: if I can run an
application on the desktop sitting in front of me then I can run it in the
Amazon Cloud.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to test this idea and compare
the performance and economy of this Amazon Cloud approach with a traditional
computing cluster.