* 0848966
* SBIR Phase II:  Virtual Learning Environment for University Physics
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Hatem Wasfy, ADVANCED SCIENCE AND AUTOMATION CORP
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 676,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes the
development of a web-based collaborative Virtual Learning Environment for
teaching freshman university physics, called the Virtual Physics Lab (VPL). The
VPL will deliver an individualized self-paced learning experience using high-end
multimedia lectures, and interactive virtual-reality simulations. The multimedia
lectures are delivered using a synchronized multimodal combination of both
highlighted text and speech that is delivered by near-photorealistic intelligent
animated virtual instructors. The multimedia lectures include interactive Flash
animations, movies, and 2D/3D animated illustrations. The VPL's interactive
simulations are delivered in a video-game-like 3D virtual environment using
physics-based models to simulate physics concepts such as pendulums, impact,
buoyancy, magnetism etc. The VPL is highly interactive and uses pre-topic, in-
topic, and post-topic questions to keep students engaged and to assess whether
or not students need further training in any given subject. The VPL also
includes collaborative/competitive mini 3D computer games that use relevant
physics principles to increase the students' interest about the material being
taught, and to add entertainment and competitive dimensions to the learning
experience. The VPL's interactivity and the visually stimulating instruction
will result in faster assimilation, deeper understanding, and higher memory
retention by the students than traditional text-book/classroom learning.

The VPL has the potential to radically change the way physics is taught. Due to
the current exponential rate of increase in human scientific and technical
knowledge, there is a need for students to assimilate more knowledge at a faster
rate. Current classroom and text-book instruction delivery methods cannot
satisfy this need due to a variety of reasons, including, delivery of the
lecture in non-engaging and minimally interactive way, use of antiquated static
graphical illustrations, variability of teacher skill, lack of one-on-one
teacher attention, and variability of student learning styles and speeds. The
VPL will help overcome those limitations. Particularly, it will enhance the
quality, accessibility, and speed of learning. It will enhance the student
experimentation, creativity and problem-solving capability. Freshman university
physics was chosen because it is one of the essential foundations for training
high-caliber engineers and scientists who will ensure the continued leadership
of the US in developing new technologies and in conducting cutting-edge
scientific research. The US market for the proposed learning tool is estimated
at 500,000 licenses per year. A larger market exists worldwide in English
language speaking countries, and for future versions of the VPL that will be
translated into other languages.