* 0848320
* Baseline Support of the University of Utah Cosmic Ray Physics Group (including the Telescope Array)
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2011
* USD 2,271,046.00

This award will provide funds for the base support for the Utah Cosmic Ray group
that serves as host to the Telescope Array (TA) experiment. TA is a large
international endeavor, located in central Utah near the town of Delta, aimed at
the study of Ultra?High Energy Cosmic Rays. The High Resolution Fly?s Eye
(HiRes), the previous successful enterprise of this group, has observed the long
anticipated GZK cut?off in the spectrum due to interactions with the microwave
background. The first data from the Auger Observatory now appear to confirm
this. However, the sources of the highest energy particles and questions about
how they are accelerated in the first place are among the most important topics
in particle astrophysics today. One suspected source is Active Galactic Nuclei
(AGNs) which are among the most energetic objects known in the Universe. There
are tantalizing hints of correlations with BL Lac objects which are AGNs with
their jets pointed towards us. The TA experiment draws on the highly successful
experience of HiRes and utilizes fluorescence telescopes, a technique developed
by the Utah group. TA is a hybrid experiment with the world?s largest surface
scintillator array measuring the footprint of the extensive air shower when it
reaches the Earth and with multiple fluorescence telescope observatories
measuring the shower in the space above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After
commissioning finishes later this year, TA will be the most sensitive cosmic ray
detector in the Northern Hemisphere. This group plans to continue their
activities in support of detector installation, commissioning and operation.
With extensive experience with HiRes, the group is also taking a lead role in
the analysis of TA data, especially the fluorescence
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASPIRE is the Astrophysics Science Project
Integrating Research and Education. Since 1997, ASPIRE has been creating some of
the Web?s most engaging and interactive science lessons and labs and provides
direct outreach to area teachers, students, and the public. Efforts include
providing outreach and support to local groups, running summer workshop sessions
for students, and visits to rural schools such as those in Millard and Delta,
UT. As an outreach program, ASPIRE has been able to effectively and affordably
have a great impact for a number of students and educators.&lt;br/&gt;