* 0848083
* Investigation of the Mechanism of Light-Induced Chloroplast Movements
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Roger Hangarter, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 09/30/2015
* USD 650,000.00

Intellectual Merit. Light-dependent chloroplast movements are observed in most
green plants. These chloroplast movements serve as a rapid mechanism for fine-
tuning photosynthetic productivity in response to changes in light intensity.
For example, movement of chloroplasts to the upper and lower surfaces of leaf
cells in dim light can improve light capture, whereas chloroplast movement to
the sides of cells when the light intensity is high can protect them from
photodamage. The project is focused on the function of several novel genes that
this investigator recently identified as essential for the chloroplast movements
to occur. Genetic, molecular and physiological approaches are being used to
understand the molecular mechanism of chloroplast movements. The research is
expected to elucidate details of the motility mechanisms responsible for
chloroplast movement and provide new insight into the nature of the light signal
transduction pathway involved. The findings will also reveal new insights into
the basic cell biology of the complex activities of the actin cytoskeleton.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will provide training to the
graduate and postgraduate students doing the research and to undergraduates
seeking research opportunities in the lab. Because light-induced chloroplast
movements can impact photosynthetic potential, knowledge gained from this
research has the potential to help in development of plants with improved yield
and biomass accumulation. Research findings from the work will be used in
outreach activities to teach about plant science to public audiences. These
include museum exhibits, public lectures, and web-based content (e.g., see
http://plantsinmotion.bio.indiana.edu ).&lt;br/&gt;