* 0848650
* Ion Reaction, Ion Dissociation and Ion Collection in the Open Laboratory Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Robert Cooks, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2013
* USD 950,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program supports Professor R. Graham Cooks of Purdue University to devise means
of performing significant parts of the mass spectrometric experiment outside the
mass spectrometer, in the open laboratory environment. In this way, it is hoped
to achieve gains in speed and performance, while minimizing the inefficiencies
associated with transferring ions into vacuum. Working with ions in the ambient
environment also enables fuller exploration of the fundamental chemical
relationships between the reactions of ions in solution and those of ions in the
mass spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These studies gain broad impact because
mass spectrometry is an analytical tool used widely in science and industry for
chemical analysis; it has special roles in pharmaceutical discovery,
environmental monitoring, food safety, forensics and biomedical research. Its
high sensitivity, chemical specificity (low false positives), and the diversity
of applications have elevated it to an outstanding position among methods of
chemical analysis. Work in the Cooks laboratory also addresses the urgent
national need to improve the infrastructure of science by contributing to the
training of instrumentation scientists. Efforts are directed especially towards
attracting women and minorities into this area.&lt;br/&gt;