* 0848635
* RUI: Analytical Method Development for MSn Characterization of Humic Substances
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alexandra Stenson, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 148,000.00

With co-funding from the Hydrolgic Sciences Program in the Division of Earth
Sciences, the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program supports Prof. Alexandra
Stenson of the University of South Alabama to investigate development and use of
micro-preparative chromatography followed by ultra-high resolution multi-
dimensional mass spectrometry for elucidating the structural composition of
humic substances of environmental importance. The most immediate stumbling block
to molecular characterization of humic substances is the immense complexity of
such samples. Fourier Transform-Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometry (FT-
ICR MS) has been demonstrated to resolve individual humic ions and to provide
information on the molecular level (e.g. molecular formulae). More detailed
structural (vs. merely compositional) data will require multidimensional MS
experiments on individual ions, an approach that is currently hindered by sample
complexity. Thus, the first goal of this research is to reduce sample complexity
through tailored "micro-preparative" chromatography. Metal-complexation and in-
cell reactions are employed to garner further functional group information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of structural information on humic substances is
presently an issue for such important environmental considerations as solid and
liquid waste-management (including radioactive waste), as well as the precise
detailing of metal-, carbon-, and nutrient-cycles. This work promises to lay the
groundwork for complete structural characterization, which, once achieved, would
be transforming to a plethora of environmentally important fields.
Undergraduates are thoroughly involved in the work, providing extraordinary
research opportunities.