* 0848345
* The Genetics of Innate Immunity and Disease Resistance in Reef-Building Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Steven Vollmer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 440,250.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global emergence of infectious
diseases has radically altered marine ecosystems, especially tropical reef
communities. Reef-building corals, the cornerstones of tropical reefs, have been
especially hard hit. A prime example is White Band Disease (WBD) on the
Caribbean Acropora corals, the staghorn coral A. cervicornis and elkhorn coral
A. palmata, which caused an unprecedented die-off of these dominant shallow-
water corals, and spurred their threatened listings on the USA Endangered
Species Act (ESA). While significant inroads have been made towards
understanding the basic etiology and ecology, for many coral diseases including
WBD, little to nothing is known about the genetic response of the coral host
during disease exposure and the genetic basis of natural disease resistance in
corals, even though this knowledge is fundamental to understanding coral host-
pathogen interactions and critical to the conservation of these threatened
corals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the Caribbean staghorn coral A. cervicornis
and WBD as the host-pathogen system, this study will produce the first
experimental data on the genetics of disease infection, innate immunity and host
resistance in reef-building corals. In situ transmission experiments will
identify resistant and susceptible staghorn corals. A transcriptome-wide survey
of resistant and susceptible corals exposed to WBD will identify genes that are
differentially expressed (i.e. up or down regulated) when corals are exposed to
disease, and identify gene expression patterns that differ between resistant and
susceptible staghorn corals. A survey of the staghorn coral genome will then be
used to identify genetic markers associated with WBD resistance, and survey the
frequencies of these resistance markers in remnant staghorn coral populations
from across the Caribbean. These transcriptome and genome surveys will provide a
comprehensive picture of coral gene regulation during disease exposure and the
genetic mechanisms underlying natural disease resistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include outreach efforts through
journal publication and media outlets to capture the public's awareness on topic
of the natural disease resistance in an ESA listed coral. Field and laboratory
training and experiences are planned for multiple graduate and undergraduate
students. Curricula will be developed to teach students about genes, DNA and
coral reef health in both English and Spanish, and the materials will be
distributed to teachers in the US and Panama. The transcriptome sequence data
and microarray platform will be freely available to the scientific community as
an open resource. In addition, this research will advance knowledge of the genes
involved in coral disease exposure, innate immunity and host-resistance, while
providing conservation managers in the Caribbean the first information on
natural disease resistance in a threatened coral and a genetic tool for
surveying the future resilience of staghorn corals populations to WBD.