* 0848925
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-Time Roboting Grasping System
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Chu-Yin Chang, Energid Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,249,200.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
create an information-based robotic grasping framework to enable practical
grasping of objects for any robotic manipulator and any robotic hand, or even
multiple hands. Grasp algorithms are stored in an XML database organized in a
tree structure that allows rapid access and uses intelligent caching for very
large databases. When a new object is presented to the grasping system, best
matches are found in the database and the corresponding algorithms are
extrapolated to determine the best grasp for the new object. Shape, surface
properties, and articulation are used for matching. The techniques support the
grasping of moving objects that can be tracked with a vision-based system. For
constructing the grasp database, human supervisors train new grasps by simply
picking up objects and giving special cues. Collection devices, such as data
gloves and machine vision systems, are used to collect the supervisor?s hand
position and contact forces, and a learning module finds new grasps by coupling
supervisory input with simulation-based optimization, using high-fidelity
dynamic modeling. For optimization, control and configuration parameters (in
end-effector space) are perturbed iteratively using nonlinear numerical
optimization techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the creation of a
comprehensive grasping framework as proposed in this project will have broad
impact to research, industry, and society. Traditional grasping systems require
specialized coding for new tasks and new robots. The proposed system will
facilitate specific instantiations of general grasping algorithms. Application
to virtually any robot manipulator, any hand, and any object to be grasped will
be possible. This unprecedented flexibility, coupled with advanced and
innovative grasping algorithms will play a role in advancing general purpose
robots (those that can do multiple tasks without reprogramming). Robots with the
ability to grasp hold promise for industries with labor shortages. The
agricultural industry, for instance, will use robotic grasping for harvesting.
Grasping robots will work in dangerous environments. An example application is
rescuing injured humans in dangerous situations. Next-generation robots will
assist the disabled with intelligent manipulators that can open doors and pick
up objects. Grasping robots will support manufacturing and warehouse businesses.
The simulation capability that is part of this research will allow new grasping
strategies to be tested safely in a virtual environment before being implemented
and fielded.