* 0848088
* Effects of Grain Boundary Segregation on Grain Boundary Diffusion and Chemical Kinetics in Olivine Aggregates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Marshall Sundberg, Sundberg                Marshall       I
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2010
* USD 80,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Marshall Sundberg has been granted
an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral fellowship to develop an integrated program
of research and education at the University of Minnesota. This experimental
study will quantify the effects of grain boundary chemistry and structure on
grain boundary diffusion of Mg2+, O2-, and Si4+. Synthetic, fine-grained
forsterite aggregates will be doped with controlled amounts of Ca, Pr, and Ni.
Following high-temperature/high-pressure anneals, tracer diffusion profiles of
30Si, 26Mg, and 18O will be measured in order to calculate the bulk diffusivity
of these cations in both doped and un-doped samples. One important goal of this
research is to evaluate the role that trace elements play in influencing the
kinetic behavior of rocks and thus better apply the results of laboratory
experiments to the Earth. The kinetic effects of grain boundary segregation will
facilitate a better understanding of grain boundary structure and properties,
with potential applications as diverse as the fracture toughness of fine-grained
materials, fast-ion conductors, the kinetics of solid-state electrolytes, and
the high-temperature creep strength of ceramics, metals, and
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan will consist of
graduate/undergraduate level seminar in solid-earth kinetics, in which the
results of these experiments will be included. In addition, Dr. Sundberg will
mentor undergraduate students in this investigation through the summer research
program (REU) currently run by the Department.