* 0848825
* SBIR Phase II:   Lens-forming nanocomposites for high strength, clear ophthalmic lenses
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Thad Druffel, Vision Dynamics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2011
* USD 532,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project
addresses the development of a UV curable bulk nanocomposite having enhanced
optical and mechanical properties for ophthalmic lenses. The work focuses the
incorporation of metal oxide nanoparticles into a transparent polymer to
engineer the refractive index and mechanical properties. This requires the
synthesis of stable nanoparticles approximately 20 nm or less in diameter. The
nanoparticles require a surface treatment that will aid in the monomer stability
and impart improved mechanical properties to the polymerized lens. The
functionalized dispersion can then be incorporated into a second monomer and
then polymerized into a finished ophthalmic eyeglass lens using the lens casting
system currently used by several hundred Vision Dynamics LLC customers. This
extends the capabilities of an independent retail dispenser to deliver quality
eyeglass lenses to consumers in less than an hour. The project will further the
understanding of nanocomposites which are a very unique and important
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project is directed
toward the ophthalmic eyeglass lens market which is a $7B industry in the United
States. Much of the eyeglass lenses in this industry are imported from overseas
and through recent consolidations the three largest producers of lenses are
foreign companies. If successful this technology removes the distribution rungs
between the consumer and the optician, allowing independent retailers to more
efficiently deliver quality eyewear to their customers. This allows retailers to
continue to compete in this difficult landscape that has been dominated by
acquisitions and mergers squeezing the independents. Furthermore, UV curing has
been identified as a green coating technology for its low VOC emissions and low
energy consumption. Currently UV cured polymers are limited in refractive index
so this technology will play out in several industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;