* 0848762
* STTR Phase II:  General Robot Controller for Legged Mobile Robots with Integrated Open Source Software
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Jerry Weinberg, RoadNarrows LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 718,133.00

This Small Business Technolgy Transfer (STTR) Phase II project focuses on the
development of a generalized processing and sensor pack complete with open-
source software and curricula for using legged robots as an educational platform
for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) courses. The
innovation of this proposal is a middleware product called SkewZone Brain and
Sensor Pack. This Brain Pack which consists of processing boards, plug-in
sensors, wireless communication, software interfaces and mechanical hardware for
attachment to commercially available legged robots, serves as a value-added
layer between the low-level operations of a robot platform and the high-level
software. Educators will be able to migrate their Brain Pack from one robot to
another, allowing software, curriculum, and hardware reuseability. The Brain
Pack provides sufficient sensory feedback to close the loop on the mechanical
control of the legged platform. Higher-level cognitive algorithms, such as path-
planning, vision, and behavior-based systems, can be easily developed or reused.

The distinctive features and challenges of legged robots provide unique
opportunities for high-school and college curricula in numerous STEM topics.
Robots are currently used in a variety of classes. However, current educational
robot platforms are dominated by wheeled robots; legged robots with a biological
basis are almost absent. Robots, which have sufficient on-board processing
power, sensors, a wireless interface, and open-source software, are necessary
for building curricula that meet educational standards and for interesting
research assignments.