* 0848436
* Brockport Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science Scholars Program - Completing Their Degrees (BPMACS Continuation)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Stanley Radford, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 07/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

The Brockport Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science Scholars Program -
Completing Their Degrees (BPMACS) provides twenty-eight $5000 scholarships per
year to economically disadvantaged, academically talented juniors, seniors and
masters students in the fields of physics, mathematics and computer science at
The College at Brockport, State University of New York. The project's goals are
to: 1) recruit, select and award scholarships to 28 talented but economically
disadvantaged juniors, seniors and graduate students per year in the designated
fields; 2) retain 95% of BPMACS awardees through to graduation with
Baccalaureate or Masters degrees; and 3) achieve and then maintain at least 10%
minority participation and 50% female participation averaged across the cohort
group of the three disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is accomplished
through a set of activities including, but not limited to the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each BPMACS scholar is assigned a mentor, one of
the six faculty members from the Advisory Board, with each mentor having about
five BPMACS scholars from their discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BPMACS scholars
are encouraged to conduct research projects with faculty in the three
departments; the project provides limited funds from the BPMACS administrative
budget to cover travel expenses for student research presentations at regional
professional meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BPMACS scholars act as Big Brothers
or Sisters for lower division Physics, Mathematics, and Computer Science (PMACS)
freshmen or sophomore scholars in their respective mathematics, physics or
computer science field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BPMACS utilizes the SUNY Brockport
recruitment program to recruit high quality students of diverse backgrounds,
leverages the focused lower-division PMACS diversity recruitment program, and
works with the Admissions Office to recruit additional low-income, academically
talented transfer students in the three targeted
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A sense of community among BPMACS scholars and
faculty is developed through semester talks, social events, and exposure to
workplace opportunities in their field through alumni and external advisory
board presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project assists BPMACS scholars in
obtaining summer and post graduation employment in their field, through the
support of the SUNY College at Brockport Career Services Office, an annual Job
Fair, academic major faculty members' contacts, and the leveraging of existing
college/industry ties and departmental community advisory
boards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work with the newly established and funded
Rochester Area Colleges Center for Excellence in Math and Science efforts to
enhance the quality of mathematics and science education at all levels in order
to attract and retain BPMACS students who major in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the previously successful
S-STEM funded BMACS program and adds physics as a degree area receiving
scholarship support.