* 0848790
* Zero-point level isotope effects in isolated molecules and hydrogen bonded solids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Bruce Hudson, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 03/31/2014
* USD 431,250.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Bruce S. Hudson of Syracuse University will
investigate the nature of hydrogen bonding, with specific focus on the changes
in molecular zero point energies and crystal phase changes that accompany
hydrogen-deuterium exchange processes. The major experimental techniques used
are vibrational inelastic neutron scattering (INS) spectroscopy and nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR). The INS data will be collected at ISIS
facility in the United Kingdom and the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. Density functional theory (DFT) modeling methods will be
used to compute the INS vibrational spectra. DFT and other quantum chemical
methods will be used to compute the effect of D substitution on 1H and 13C NMR
spectra. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study is to establish the
limits of validity of theoretical descriptions of hydrogen bonding in the
organic solid state. This is a necessary condition for the rational design of
nanostructured materials, nonlinear optical materials and organic electronic
devices, for the control of polymorphism in pharmaceuticals and in predicting
the structures of globular proteins or designing inhibitors of their
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students participate
in this research, as well as postdoctoral research associates. The research will
lead to the development of fundamentals of hydrogen bond interaction in self-
assembling organic structures, which are the most important structure-specific
interactions that are in reversible equilibrium at room temperature under
ambient conditions and thus useful for self-assembly. &lt;br/&gt;