* 0848858
* Synthetic and Mechanistic Investigations of CO-releasing Divalent Metal Acireductone and Flavonolate Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Lisa Berreau, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports
Professor Lisa M. Berreau of Utah State University (USU) for the preparation and
characterization of divalent metal acireductone and flavonolate complexes.
Carbon monoxide (CO) has recently been implied in smooth muscle relaxation and
may be involved in triggering (or inhibiting) apoptosis. The mechanistic
pathways of the CO-release that occur upon treatment of these complexes with
oxygen are elucidated. The understanding of CO regulation and production may
give insight into links between metal homeostasis and other regulatory
mechanisms in biology. This work investigates the structure, stability and
reactivity of C1(H)-substituted acireductone complexes with Ni(II) chelated by
multidentate pyridine-based ligands and clarifies the role of single electron
transfer and radical chemistry in the oxidation of a metal-coordinated
acireductone. An understanding of the role of the metal ion identity in
directing the regiochemistry of the acireductone oxidation is also being
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate, undergraduate and high school students
participate in the research. The activities of the ACS Student Affiliate Group
at USU bring students in contact with the elementary, middle and high school
students in the local area. Professor Berreau and her group prepare hands-on
chromatography experiments that are made available to middle school science
teachers in Logan, Utah. Two students from a local charter high school are
hosted in the laboratory each summer.&lt;br/&gt;