* 0848663
* Two-dimensional systems of molecular rotors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* John Price, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,200,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
(ASC) Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Solid State and Material
chemistry (SSMC) Program of the Division of Material Research (DMR) supports the
highly synergistic collaborative research project of Profs. Josef Michl, John
Price and Chrles Rogers of the University of Colorado at Boulder. This project
aims to use a combination of molecular self-assembly followed by adsorption of
specially synthesized molecules to create a new state of matter, the ordered
two-dimensional ferroelectric molecular dipole system. Two-dimensional lattices
of interacting dipoles are predicted to display order states, including
ferroelectric states for triangular arrays. Some of these phases further allow
the existence of extraordinarily low barriers to synchronized rotation of the
total dipole moment vector. The realization of such states would open up
opportunities in e.g., rf signal processing, fast light modulation, and data
storage. The synthetic challenge is to achieve two-dimensional structures where
long-range dipolar interactions are of strength comparable to or exceeding the
local steric interactions, thus allowing for the appearance of long range
dipole-based order. Such ordered rotor materials are referred to as
rotoelectrics. Prof. Michl and his students will synthesize rotor molecules,
molecular crystal materials and completed rotor arrays. They will also perform
molecular dynamics computations of rotor molecule and assembled system
structure, to guide and advise the synthetic work. Prof. Rogers and his students
will study rotor array symmetry, electro-optic properties, and array dynamics
using surface-sensitive nonlinear optics and ultra-fast optical pump/probe
techniques. Prof. Price and his students will study dipolar rotor arrays by low-
frequency and radio frequency resonant dielectric spectroscopy. The associated
groups will provide training in multidisciplinary nanotechnology to students
from undergraduate through post-graduate levels. They will also provide summer
internships to involve high school teachers in their research and develop web
site materials and outreach presentations to K-12 students.