* 0848130
* SGER:  Improving the Credibility of MANET Simulation Scenarios
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* William Navidi, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 01/31/2010
* USD 69,668.00

Improving the Credibility of MANET Simulation Scenarios&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ad
hoc networking involves computers, typically wireless mobile nodes (MNs) that
cooperatively form a network without specific user administration or
configuration. In other words, ad hoc networking allows an arbitrary collection
of MNs to create a network on demand. There are numerous scenarios that do not
have an available network infrastructure and could benefit from the creation of
an ad hoc network: rescue/emergency operations, law enforcement activities, and
tactical missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the mobile ad hoc networking
(MANET) field typically uses simulation in order to imitate the appearance or
character of the MANET being studied; indeed, most of what is known about MANETs
has been discovered through simulation. A simulation study involves several
steps, each of which must be carried out properly in order to obtain reliable
results. Unfortunately, much of the MANET simulation research that has been done
is seriously flawed. In many cases, simulation scenarios provide environments
that are not rigorous enough to provide meaningful results; in some other cases,
the environments provide more stress than is desirable. As a result, published
MANET simulation studies generally lack credibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this project is to enhance the credibility of MANET simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is to develop tools and methods
for the MANET research community that will improve the credibility of
simulation-based studies. The broader impact of this work is to assist the MANET
community in moving from incredible simulation studies to credible simulation
studies.&lt;br/&gt;