* 0848477
* Biradical-like Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Josef Michl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2013
* USD 1,032,478.00

Intellectual Merit. Professor Michl and his collaborators will work on reactive
intermediates, new reactions, and new structures in the area of alkylated
derivatives of the icosahedral carborane cage CB11 and will examine their
broader implications. They will investigate the scope and mechanism of new
reactions that were discovered in the current grant period, apply new techniques
for the characterization of their intermediates, elucidate the observed
substituent effects on carbon acidity and explore a new group of compounds in
which a main group metal is attached to the cage carbon. They will pursue the
synthesis of novel oligomeric structures that ultimately promise facile three-
dimensional hole hopping and could be useful as a source of a new kind of
conducting polymers. Finally, they will pursue the use of especially inert
anions derived from the CB11 cage by partial trifluoromethylation and partial
fluorination for the production and characterization of simple cations that may
be known from gas phase studies but lie beyond the current horizon of solution
chemistry of isolable compounds, such as H3+, SiH5+, SiH3+, or Zn2++.
&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts. The project involves undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students and will take place in a research group that has
traditionally promoted the education of women and active international contacts
and is highly interdisciplinary in scope. Collaboration with physicists has been
common and the presently proposed work involves organic, inorganic, physical,
and theoretical chemistry. The group's activities include many international
collaborations, and each graduate student is expected to spend a few months
performing research abroad. Workshops and conferences will be organized, some
abroad. The activities have traditionally involved collaborations with industry
and national laboratories and will continue to do so. The results will be
broadly disseminated. The PI is the editor of a major review journal, for which
he also often writes contributions. Traditional journal publication of articles
and reviews is complemented by articles in trade journals. In addition to
lecturing to professionals, the PI and group members give public lectures and
lectures to K-12 students, domestically and abroad, on the radio and TV. Some of
the international activity occurs in the Czech Republic, the PI's country of
origin, where he has a part-time appointment. General benefits to society go
well beyond the training of competent scientists. Some of the past scientific
discoveries have been taken up by industry (Li+ catalysis of alkene
polymerization, for example), and it is expected that some of the efforts
proposed presently will as well (possibly new kinds of electrically conducting
solids for solar cell or molecular electronics, and possibly new materials for
the production of plastic electronics).