* 0848972
* STTR Phase II:  Compact, Low-cost Remote Sensing of Methamphetamine Labs
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Wm Randall Babbitt, Bridger Photonics, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2013
* USD 799,903.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project addresses an
urgent law enforcement need for a sensitive, portable, low-cost, laser remote
sensor to detect illicit methamphetamine (meth) production labs from a distance.
The research objectives are to: 1. Refine, optimize, and package laser
subsystem, 2. Design, construct, and optimize receiver subsystem, 3. Integrate
laser and receiver subsystems onto compact breadboard and test, 4. Design and
construct first-revision prototype. To accomplish these objectives, the team and
Montana State University will optimize the performance of the critical high-
energy, narrowband, mid-infrared pulsed laser system that was developed under
the Phase I effort. The laser subsystem will be miniaturized and packaged for
use in the sensor and for direct sales to bootstrap the sensor
commercialization. The receiver subsystem will be designed, constructed, and
optimized for performance, size, weight, and cost. The laser and receiver
subsystems will be integrated and the unit will be field-tested. The first
revision prototype will then be designed and constructed, incorporating
identified improvements and modifications, and law enforcement customer input.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meth use in our country has reached epidemic
levels. It is considered the most addictive illicit drug, can be easily produced
with widely available and inexpensive ingredients, and is rapidly becoming more
popular with young adults. Almost 1/5 of 2003 federal sentences were meth
related and the state of Illinois estimates a $2B/yr meth-related burden. In
2005, 65% of Montana?s young adults reported that meth is ?very or somewhat
easy? to obtain. Meth?s abundance is often attributed to the fact that it is
alarmingly easy to produce in makeshift clandestine labs (in homes, apartments,
motels, storage facilities, etc). These labs also pose lethal hazards to law
enforcement, first responders, and children inhabitants. Washington State
reported that children are or have been at 35% of the lab sites. Although 2005
legislation restricting the sale of a key meth ingredient reduced the number of
labs, there is now resurgence. Moreover, the labs are becoming increasingly
difficult for drug enforcement to uncover as the producers become more
sophisticated and mobile. Drug enforcement personnel on local, national, and
international levels require the ability to detect meth labs rapidly and in
widely varying locations and circumstances. If successful law the outcome of the
project will enable enforcement personnel to have a higher success rate in
detecting these meth manufacturing laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;