* 0848616
* Novel Methods for Synthesis of Oxabicyclic Frameworks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Steven Burke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2011
* USD 260,000.00

Novel catalytic methods for synthesizing the 8-oxabicyclo[3.2.1]octane nucleus
are to be developed in this project, with two fundamentally distinct strategies
under investigation. In the first of these, a transannular cascade reaction
involving an oxa-Michael/aldol/oxa-Michael mechanism will be developed. In the
second project area, a metal-catalyzed [2+2+2] tricycloisomerization reaction
will be investigated for generating the 8-oxabicyclo[3.2.1]octane moiety. Two
alternative tactics for implementing each of these fundamentally distinctive
strategies will be examined. Specifically, inter- and intramolecular
nucleophilic addition by oxygen to initiate the Michael/aldol/Michael cascade
will be studied in the first case. In the [2+2+2] cycloisomerization segment of
the project, two catalysts [Rh(I)-Sn(II) and CpRu+] will be evaluated for
reactivity and mechanistic profiles. A positive consequence of the bridged
polycycle-generating cascade reactions to be developed will be short and
versatile synthetic routes to the biologically interesting steroidal alkaloid
cortistatin A. Beyond this, broad adaptability of these methods is anticipated.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Steven D. Burke of the Department of Chemistry at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison. Professor Burke's research efforts revolve around the
development of methods and strategies for the synthesis of biologically active
substances. Successful development of the methodology proposed will have an
impact on synthesis in the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries.