* 0848435
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The New Prophet:  Harold C. Urey, Scientist, Atheist, and Defender of Religion
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Naomi Oreskes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project funded is by the Science,
Technology, and Society Program. It is a social and biographical study of the
life and career of the American physical chemist Harold Clayton Urey
(1893-1981). It focuses primarily on the public work Urey did as an American
Nobel Laureate to negotiate the respective roles of science and religion in
society. Although he was a dedicated atheist from a young age, Urey eventually
became a public advocate of the importance of religion for public and scientific
life. From the Depression of the 1930s to the height of the Cold War, his public
positions on science and religion evolved in the midst of changing social and
political contexts. They also evolved as he moved between research projects from
the isotope chemistry that won him the Nobel Prize in 1934, to the Manhattan
Project, to geochemistry, and finally to cosmic chemistry and planetary
exploration. This project uses oral histories, archives, and published sources
from the periods in question to put Urey's public positions in context and to
examine the relationship between Urey's experiences as scientist and citizen
from WWI to NASA's Apollo program and his ideas of the relationship between
science and religion. It also examines Urey's inability to act on these ideas or
to gain acceptance for them among the majority of his
peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urey's evolving discussions of science and religion
are important for two principal reasons. First, the dominant narrative of the
20th century is one of secularization, with science and scientists billed as the
primary forces of secularization. Urey's story will thus give us an interesting
perspective from which to question and add some needed nuance this narrative.
Second, Urey's ideas of science and religion, while shaped by social and
political contexts, also reflected the role that he felt science and scientists
should play in society. Studying Urey's ideas more closely in the context of his
scientific work will give us insight into Urey's motivations for engaging in Big
Science projects such as the Apollo program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
relies upon several archives and libraries: the papers of Harold C. Urey at the
University of California, San Diego Mandeville Special Collections Library; the
oral history collection and journal collection of the Chemical Heritage
Foundation; the archives of the Conference on Science, Philosophy, and Religion
(1939-1968) at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America; the papers of Linus
Pauling at the Special Collections Library of Oregon State University; the
archives of the Atomic Scientists of Chicago at the Special Collections Library
of the University of Chicago; the oral history interview with Harold C. Urey at
the Columbia University Library; and the oral history collection of the American
Institute of Physics.&lt;br/&gt;