* 0848689
* SBIR Phase II:  Solar Thermal Stirling Engine Combined Heat and Power System
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Samuel Weaver, Cool Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,115,775.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project advances the
development of an integrated solar energy system which delivers heat and
electrical energy to a building's occupants. At Cool Energy, development
continues on the SolarFlowTM System, a solar thermal system for combined heating
and electrical power generation from medium-temperature heat energy (100-300Â°C)
captured with evacuated-tube solar thermal collectors. The innovative system
design integrates high-performance solar collectors with a novel advanced-
materials Stirling engine and controller to use a single solar system to produce
electricity and thermal energy for space and water heating. Economic value to
the customer is maximized using an optimizing predictive control system to
regulate the delivery of heat and electricity. Building on the successful Phase
I program for selection of advanced engine components and the demonstration of
significant electricity production from the engine prototype, the Phase II
demonstration program encompasses system integration of the next-generation
Stirling engine prototype with the system controller and solar collectors. The
core intellectual merits are the advances in the Stirling engine design (with
broader applications than solar power), the implementation of the predictive
control system, the integration with the solar collectors for field testing, and
the advanced engine and system design tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
supports a technology demonstration that has enormous potential for helping to
replace the world's depleting supply of highly polluting fossil fuels with
cleaner, sustainable sources of energy. The costs of traditional energy are
rising rapidly, causing significant hardship to much of the world's population,
including in the US. Disproportionate effects are visited on the poor as the
costs of heating fuels and electricity escalate. Rising carbon emissions
threaten ecosystems and human populations worldwide over the coming centuries.
Cost reduction of renewable energy technology is a main driver of this Phase II
demonstration project, as only through lowered costs of clean energy will the US
and the world be able to attain domestic energy security, economic stability,
and environmental responsibility. Concentrating on market success to enable
widespread adoption, Cool Energy has expended a great deal of effort on modeling
the economics of the SolarFlow System in various regions of the US. Further,
partnerships have been cultivated with potential customers, distribution
partners, manufacturing partners, and investors to build a strong business
foundation to foster rapid penetration of this technology into commercial
channels upon its successful demonstration.