* 0848524
* STTR Phase II:  Self-Reinforced Composites Made of Immiscible Polymers from Recycled Products
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Donggang Yao, Novana, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2011
* USD 700,967.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is seeking to
develop and commercialize a novel method for recycling immiscible polymer (IP)
wastes into value-added products. In this new method, the IP waste is converted
into highly-orientated filaments with a surface of a relatively lower melting
point polymer and a core of a relatively higher melting point polymer. These
high-strength bicomponent fibers are then processed into desired composite
components by melting and fusing the surface polymer; because only the surface
polymer is melted during processing, the end product is reinforced by its high-
strength core fibril of the higher-melting-point polymer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this project will be an
enabling process to cost effectively produce self-reinforced composites from
recycled, immiscible Polyprophelene(PP)/nylon. For the carpet recycling market
alone, this approach will reduce more than 5 billion pounds per year of carpet
waste. By converting the waste stream into value-added products with improved
mechanical properties the carpet waste will never reach our landfills. This
process eliminates complicated sorting and separation steps, uses less energy
for production, and reduces crude oil consumption needed for virgin polymers.
For transportation applications, the self-reinforced composites' excellent
strength to weight ratio can help produce lighter component parts, enhancing
fuel efficiency. The new reinforced materials can be further processed by
molding/forming processes to create 3-D parts with enhanced mechanical
properties. This technology shows that recycled polymer blends prepared in an
appropriate way can deliver superior value-added performance over virgin
polymers.