* 0848591
* Catalytic Nitrogenation of Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kenneth Nicholas, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue studies on
the development of new methods for the direct formation of C-N bonds via
activation of C-H and C-C bonds. Four new aspects of catalytic nitrogenation
reactions are targeted for study during the next funding period: 1)
cyclocondensations of nitro- and nitrosoarenes with olefinic nitrosophiles and
application of nitrosoarene/acetylenic alpha-dicarbonyl reactions in the
construction of the indolocarbazole skeleton common to several classes of
biologically-potent natural products; 2) identifying the reactive intermediates
and mechanism of ligand-assisted, copper-catalyzed benzylic aminations, and
expanding the reaction scope and utility, including the development of
enantioselective variants; 3) establishing metal-, Lewis acid- and proton-
catalyzed nitrogenation reactions of typically unreactive saturated and aromatic
hydrocarbons; and 4) finding metal complexes capable of reductive cleavage of
azo compounds leading the way to establish azo compounds as convenient and
effective nitrogenation reagents. A coordinated experimental and computational
program will be conducted to accomplish these objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program is supporting the research of Professor Kenneth M. Nicholas and his co-
workers of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of
Oklahoma. Prof. Nicholas' research programs focus on the development of new
catalytic reactions and elucidation of their reaction mechanisms. These new
catalytic reactions will provide novel, direct, and selective routes to several
classes of valuable organonitrogen products. The metal-mediated processes
leading to these compounds proceed from readily available starting materials and
are expected to be highly regio- and chemoselective, functional group tolerant,
economical, environmentally benign, and complementary or superior to existing
methods. Moreover, the products derived from these studies are of immense value
chemically, technologically, and societally.