* 0848572
* SBIR Phase II:  Process Control Sensor for Fine Particles
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Craig Saltiel, Scattering Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2011
* USD 624,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project
proposes to develop Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) instruments capable of
measuring fine particles in suspensions beyond the limits of current technology.
By simultaneous or independent use of three innovative techniques, larger
detection aperture, smaller field size, and optical, homodyne amplification, the
team can now measure hydrodynamic radius over greater ranges of particle size
and concentration than was formerly possible. Two key ideas for this effort are:
1) the construction of a numerical model of the complex phenomenology of DLS
with eight free and independent parameters; 2) the ability to apply this new
understanding to the quantitative analysis of existing instruments, and to
optimize new system designs for extended applications. These ideas have been
confirmed empirically, correctly defining operational boundaries, formerly less
well understood and quantified. A key advantage is the ability to design DLS
systems with superior ranges of performance, versatility, accuracy, and cost,
noting especially that deeper understanding improves performance and reduces
error limits of reported data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly capable and
economical instruments are made available for characterizing suspended colloidal
particles, from sub-nanometer to micron radii and from almost opaque to almost
completely transparent. Extended capabilities include process control of high
concentration colloidal materials, common in manufacturing from paint to
chemical machining slurries, from foodstuff to pharmaceuticals. At the opposite
end of the spectrum of difficultly lie suspensions scattering very little light,
such as proteinaceous drugs, fuel cell catalysts, and many other materials of
great interest to in-vivo non-invasive measurement of small sample volumes.
Aside from a ready market in both real time monitoring and offline analysis for
quality control in existing industrial processes, the extended capabilities
offer attractive research opportunities into the properties of nanomaterials, a
burgeoning field of interest and importance. Such instruments and their enhanced
capability will increase materials research opportunities and be economical
enough to use in a teaching environment, significantly augmenting the many and
complex technologies already used for the assessment of these important
materials. In contrast with more invasive measurements that may require dilution
or evaporation for sample preparation irrevocably altering what is to be
measured, extended DLS techniques complement and may be applied to undisturbed
samples as small as a picoliter.