* 0848718
* SBIR Phase II:  Software to Aggregate, Correlate, Analyze and Trend data for Knowledge Management in Decision Making
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Aaron Kopel, Chatterspike, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2011
* USD 600,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
challenges for entities seeking to derive reliable and actionable information
from enormous quantities of online "chatter" (online content from a variety of
sources such as blogs, industry-focused sites, and media-generated material).
Phase II will focus on technical objectives that will enhance the quality and
reliability of the information produced by the ChatterSpike concept researched
in Phase I. These objectives fall into three categories: data cleansing, context
analysis, and basic commercial readiness. Their achievement will require the
design, development and implementation of novel, niche-focused algorithms that
will enable the mining and evaluation of thousands of online sources and the
production of data with quantifiable quality metrics relating to authority,
reliability, influence, and sentiment. The resulting product will
algorithmically determine and quantitatively measure and evaluate these
parameters in real time as it mines online sources for data, validating its
conclusions and re-validating them every time it performs a retrieval operation.

By focusing on specific industry niches, the technology produced will enable the
production of automated, highly tailored, detailed reports with a high degree of
quantitatively-confirmed reliability. This capability will result from the
creation of novel algorithms designed to exploit cutting-edge theoretical
approaches to extracting, validating, and evaluating information from a
multiplicity of online sources. These reports will be superior to the manual
reports produced by currently available technologies and approaches. In
addition, if successful, the technology will have significant societal benefit.
Companies will be able to react more quickly to meet consumer demands and to
correct negative trends in consumer opinions. The technology will also be able
to detect trends reliably at a very early stage; in some cases weeks or months
before they become obvious and are detected by other methods.