* 0848196
* New catalytic functions for [4Fe-4S] clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Eduardus Duin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2013
* USD 424,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program and the Molecular and Cellular Biology program supports work by
Professor Eduardus (Evert) C. Duin at Auburn University, Alabama, to probe the
reaction mechanism of the penultimate and ultimate proteins in the 1-deoxy-D-
xylulose-5-phosphate (DOXP) pathway, GcpE and LytB, and the role of their
active-site iron-sulfur clusters in this process. Kinetic experiments will
provide insight in the role of several transient EPR-active species in the
reaction mechanisms. The species will be characterized using the combination of
EPR/ENDOR spectroscopies and isotopic labeling of selected atoms in the
substrate structures. In addition further details on the mechanisms of the
enzymes will be obtained through substrate modulation studies. The combined data
will provide a complete understanding of the mechanisms of the GcpE and LytB
enzymes. Since both enzymes seem to be involved in a completely new type of
catalysis this will be an important contribution to the iron-sulfur field. In
addition, this knowledge will benefit the commericialization of biotechnology
through increased ease of production of commercially interesting isoprenoids and
the development of novel herbicides that are less harmful to humans. The funding
also supports the Biochemistry division research and teaching efforts through
the acquisition of equipment for rapid-mix/rapid freeze studies.