* 0848554
* Structure Generation in Language Comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Colin Phillips, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 06/30/2015
* USD 546,856.00

This project aims to understand how speakers encode and navigate structured
mental representations, through a series of studies of how speakers' knowledge
of grammatical constraints guides online interpretation processes. Previous
research has found that the real-time use of grammatical constraints shows a
remarkably uneven profile of successes and failures. Comprehenders show
impressive facility in deploying some rather complex grammatical constraints,
but they show striking inaccuracy in other cases that one might expect to be
rather easy. This "selective fallibility" profile is unexpected under current
theoretical models, and it presents an opportunity for new insights into how
speakers store and manipulate sentence structures in memory. The project
explores the hypothesis that the uneven profile reflects the different
contributions of prospective and retrospective memory search processes. The
project contrasts the predictions of two approaches to linguistic memory
retrieval: one based upon structure-guided search and another based upon
parallel cue-based retrieval in content-addressable memory. The project consists
of six sets of studies on constraints such as subject-verb agreement, forwards
and backwards coreference relations, bound variable anaphora, negative polarity
item (NPI) licensing, and null subject licensing. The experiments use four
experimental techniques (self-paced reading, event-related brain potentials
(ERPs), speeded grammaticality judgments, and eye-tracking during reading). The
project will gather data on the processing of English, Spanish, Hindi, and
Brazilian Portuguese. It will also support a new collaboration with researchers
in Brazil. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a basic challenge to the
integration of linguistics, psycholinguistics, and the cognitive neuroscience of
language. It has been common to assume a clear division of labor between the
mechanisms that speakers use to survive the pressures of real-time language
processing, and another set of mechanisms that capture speakers' linguistic
acceptability judgments. However, if it is possible to understand linguistic
computation as real-time computation, then it becomes feasible to integrate the
concerns of linguistics, psycholinguistics and cognitive neuroscience. The
project supports broad-based training of students, including members of
underrepresented minorities and undergraduate and high school students. The
project will also create new international partnerships with teams of
researchers in the UK, Germany, and Brazil, and will help to develop
infrastructure for experimental research on Portuguese and the indigenous
languages of Brazil. More broadly, by elucidating the detailed mechanisms used
to encode and navigate structured representations in memory in healthy adults,
the project will contribute to an understanding of normal and atypical language
learning and age-related difficulties in language processing.