* 0848462
* A Chemical Modification- and Mass Spectrometry-Based Method for Thermodynamic Analysis of Protein-Ligand Binding
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Fitzgerald, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Divisions of Chemistry and
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences support Professor Michael Fitzgerald of Duke
University to develop and apply a mass spectrometry-based method known as SPROX
(Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation) to assess protein folding and
the thermodynamic stability of protein-ligand complexes. Protocols are being
optimized for model proteins and their ligands, and will then be extended to the
analysis of protein-ligand binding in real biological mixtures (e.g., yeast cell
lysates). The assay to be developed should have unmatched multiplex
capabilities. It will create a unique opportunity to detect not only direct but
also indirect binding, wherein binding of a target ligand to one protein either
precludes or induces binding a second protein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
strategies and protocols to be created will be readily transferable to almost
any protein-ligand system or biological mixture regardless of the ligand (i.e.
small molecule, DNA, peptide, or other proteins) or binding affinity. The
research provides interdisciplinary research experiences for both graduate and
undergraduate students, and as well as high school students from the North
Carolina Project SEED program, which is an on-going science enrichment program
designed to steer disadvantaged, underrepresented minority students from North
Carolina high schools into chemistry and chemistry-related careers.