* 0848867
* SBIR Phase II:   Bioinformatics knowledge-based, universal library design for a non-immunoglobulin, protein-scaffold
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Guido Cappuccilli, Protelix Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 499,825.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project seeks to fully
establish ProtElix' scaffold-based human fibronectin libraries (14th fibronectin
type III module of Human Fibronectin) as platform technology to discover novel
antibody-mimics drug candidates for a wide range of therapeutic applications.
The social and commercial implications of this discovery may include developing
second generation protein drug antagonists which are less expensive, more
efficacious and safer than current monoclonal antibody-based drugs. Overall,
this Phase II Project will be divided in two stages: a research plan during
which different binding and stability optimization strategies will be executed.
Moreover, ProtElix technology will be tested with several protein targets (CD20,
EGFR, VEGFR2, VLA-4) in order to fully assess the universality of the platform
itself. The second stage of the project will be focused upon drug development
activities. Lead candidates will undergo full kinetic characterization in vitro
and in vivo and will be tested for PK/PD in small animal models. By the
completion of phase II, a comprehensive discovery platform for proprietary human
14FN3-based antibody mimics libraries will be fully developed and the
"drugability" of lead candidates assessed.

The application of protein scaffold to develop new therapeutics is becoming an
area of great commercial potential with high social implications as it relates
to lower the cost and increase the accessibility of therapy to several life-
threatening diseases. In particular the use of antibody-mimics to selectively
block therapeutically important protein targets could be the key to overcome the
clinical limitations and potential toxicity and lack of efficacy of current
antibody-based therapeutics. The flexible format of ProtElix scaffold platform
technology together with its proprietary mutagenesis technology for producing
"intelligent" library diversity will provide an attractive alternative to
pharmaceutical and biotech companies for the discovery and development of next-
generation biotherapeutics. In addition, the intrinsic characteristics of the
Fibronectin Type III domain (i.e. small size, no disulfide bonds) would lead to
cheaper cost of manufacturing and potentially more effective and safe drugs
(higher tissue penetration and faster clearance) compared to immunoglobulin-
based antibodies. If successful, this project will take the potential
applications of scaffold-based therapeutics to a higher level than first
generation antibodies, including cancer, autoimmune diseases, cardiovascular and
infectious diseases.