* 0848606
* Organic Radicals in Biomass Decomposition: Mechanisms &amp; Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* G Ellison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2012
* USD 492,400.00

Organic Radicals in Biomass Decomposition: Mechanisms &amp;
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;Barney Ellison (an organic chemist) and John Daily (an
engineer) propose a new set of experiments to study the thermal decomposition of
biomass. A) Based on Daily's fluid-dynamical modeling studies, Ellison will
design and build a novel apparatus that uses a high temperature nozzle to
decompose simple biomass materials such as sugars, oxygen heterocycles, and
alkylaryl ethers. The hyperthermal, supersonic nozzle will be especially
designed for non-volatile, biomass samples. The cracking products will be
monitored simultaneously by vacuum ultraviolet photoionization mass spectroscopy
and infrared absorption spectroscopy. B) Biomass gasification produces
stabilized organic radicals such as propargyl and allyl which undergo
bimolecular reactions that form aryl rings (C6H6). The team proposes to develop
a new double resonance measurement to examine the vibrational spectra of these
radicals. This novel experiment will use a coupled pair of infrared and vacuum
ultraviolet lasers.&lt;br/&gt; The team also proposes to study the thermal
decomposition of small biomass samples under controlled conditions in a high
temperature, supersonic nozzle. The objective of this work is to use a mass
spectrometer and infrared spectroscopy to characterize the decomposition
reactions of simple sugars and oxygen heterocycles. Such experiments could
provide insight to the molecular weight growth reactions that lead to the
formation of tars (aromatic compounds). A major problem in all biomass
gasification schemes is the presence of aromatic compounds in the biomass gas
stream. Model organic compounds, such as furan or furfural, will be pyrolyzed in
a hyperthermal nozzle and products will be identified and characterized in the
new experiment.&lt;br/&gt;To make maximum use of the hyperthermal nozzle as a
flow reactor requires detailed characterization of the gas flow and heat
transfer characteristics. Daily will model the turbulent gas flow to
characterize the hot nozzle. The design of the nozzle assembly is such that the
flow chokes at the inlet orifice and again chokes at the downstream end due to
friction and heat transfer. Thus the flow within the nozzle is isolated from
downstream conditions, which in this case is held at vacuum conditions. Of
course, the real gas flow through the nozzle is neither adiabatic, frictionless,
nor uniform, and to accurately model it requires a numerical approach. Where the
flow is in the continuum domain, the Navier-Stokes equations apply and can be
solved using finite difference or finite element Computational Fluid Dynamics
approaches. The flow downstream of the nozzle does not meet this condition, and
Direct Simulation/Monte Carlo approaches are required.