* 0848712
* STTR Phase II:  A Lithographic Gelcasting Process using Nanoparticulates: An Enabling Technology for Mass Production of Microdevices with Nanoscale Features
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Jesse Shrock, Advanced Powder Products, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop and
commercialize a novel Lithographic Gelcasting (LGC) manufacturing process for
microdevices that is amenable for economical volume production. Molds will be
made using photolithography and filled with nanoparticulate materials. The
resulting parts will then be sintered and the photoresist removed. The
objectives of the proposed work are to develop the nanoparticulate casting
process into a robust, repeatable, and high-yield manufacturing process for mass
production, through the use of statistical process models that relate the
manufacturing process parameters to desired outcomes, and determine the range of
process capability and design space as it relates to manufacturing and design
attributes such as feature size and geometry, achievable tolerances, process
yield, and manufacturing costs. This effort will be conducted on known
client/partner designs so that actual components will be produced for an end
application while the process is being developed. The motivating application for
this work is the fabrication of microsurgical instruments, a class of devices
that is quite challenging from the perspective of feature size, material, and
physical properties. The proposed manufacturing method will impact many types of
devices and systems that will benefit from attractive material properties and
mass production capability.

If successful the proposed manufacturing methods have the potential to impact
surgical instruments used in procedures as disparate as laparoscopy and its
endoscopic or transluminal variants, neurosurgery, robotic-assisted surgery,
flexible endoscopy such as colonoscopy, ophthalmology including vitreoretinal
surgery, transluminal vascular procedures, and biopsy. In 2004 surgical and
medical instruments comprised an approximately $24 billion industry. Millions of
minimally invasive surgical procedures are performed annually in the U.S., where
individual disposable instruments typically cost $100 - $3,000. Other industries
requiring three dimensional precision parts could also be impacted. Besides the
commercial potential the success of this enterprise could impact the economy of
the local community in Central Pennsylvania.