* 0848030
* Robustness &amp; Variability in Cell Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Gregoire Altan-Bonnet, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/29/2012
* USD 471,570.00

Cells are constantly bombarded with molecular signals that they must interpret
in order to respond appropriately to environmental cues. Much of the cellular
decision making is carried out via signaling cascades that translate the
engagement of surface receptors first into altered protein phosphorylation
patterns and then into gene regulation. A critical issue in this field of signal
transduction is to understand how cells accurately respond to environmental
cues. &lt;br/&gt;To address this issue, two types of cells (PC12
pheochromocytoma and T lymphocytes) will be studied in this project. For these
cells, the activation of a specific signaling cascade (e.g. mitogen-associated
protein kinase pathway or MAPK) is triggered upon sensing of external ligands,
and this cascade results in either cellular quiescence, differentiation and/or
proliferation. PC12 cells can discriminate between nerve growth factor and
epidermal growth factor ligands by differentially regulating the dynamics of
their signaling response. T cells detect the presence of few foreign-derived
ligands while avoiding spurious activation by large quantities of self-derived
ligands. In both types of cell, this ligand discrimination has been shown to be
highly tunable (e.g. during neurocytic or thymic development) and at the same
time reliable (despite stochastic variability among
cells).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will combine computational
and experimental approaches to reconcile this robustness and variability in cell
signaling. First, computer models of cell signaling will be developed to probe
the theoretical robustness of ligand discrimination in the context of stochastic
fluctuations in chemical reactions, and phenotypic variation (i.e. expression of
different levels of signaling components). Second, the variability of signaling
responses due to phenotypic variability will be monitored experimentally:
alteration in cell responsiveness will be mapped onto the differential
expression of key signaling components at the single cell level. The PI will
also use perturbation (through chemical inhibition of kinase/phosphatase enzymes
or up/down regulation of signaling components) to modulate cell responsiveness
and test theoretical predictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on
the PI's development of computer models of signal transduction, as well as the
development of multiplexed detection of phosphorylated states in individual
cells. Thus, it is a unique opportunity to merge theoretical and experimental
approaches to study the systems biology of cell
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses a fundamental paradox in signal transduction whereby PC12
cells and T lymphocytes utilize feedback regulation of MAPK activation to
enforce ligand detection with functional variability yet with reliability.
Understanding such feedback regulation will allow the derivation of general
principles at the systems biology level to explain how signaling networks can
reconcile robustness and variability in their input/output relationships. The
project will include the training of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
students in systems biology, ranging from experimentation to computer modeling.
Tutorials, journal clubs and discussion groups will be used to introduce
students and postdoctoral fellows to systems biology. Moreover, new
implementations of biochemical computer models will be broadcast to the
scientific community such that other researchers can use them, edit them, and
test their own hypotheses in signal transduction. Experimental data will also be
deposited in repositories (e.g. DREAM3 database) to help the systems biology
community test different modeling approaches.