* 0848302
* Computer Science and Information Technology Systems (CS/ITS) Cohort Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Ron Coleman, Marist College
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 03/31/2015
* USD 551,970.00

The goals of the Computer Science and Information Technology and Systems
(CS/ITS) Cohort Scholarship Program are to recruit and graduate an initial
cohort of academically-talented and financially-disadvantaged students; to
improve the program for future cohorts, and to recruit new cohorts each year.
Full scholarships are provided to an initial cohort of 12 eligible students. The
college covers the remainder of the cost of attendance after all financial aid
and NSF scholarships are awarded. Process and outcome evaluations are conducted.
Results are used to modify the program as needed to benefit future cohorts that
are enrolled each subsequent academic year. Planning focuses on coordinating
academic and social support structures needed to recruit and retain students. A
freshman year experience establishes the cohort as a learning community through
a four-day summer orientation, a two-semester course in game development and
design, a self-management course with an information technology focus, and
shared housing. Throughout their college experience, supplemental instruction
and tutoring, industry mentoring and career placement services, applied research
and internship opportunities, and extracurricular activities are offered to
cohort students. Students are paired with industry mentors and based on their
skills and interests have opportunities to work directly with industry through
internships and applied research. An existing game development program is
expanded to a two-course sequence to introduce computer science and information
technology concepts and best practices. Applications include scientific
visualization, modeling, and physics and mathematical simulations, and training.
Cohort students may choose to pursue further game studies through the Game
Design and Programming Concentration or elect to pursue other concentrations
within the CS/ITS major. The project broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in computer science and information technology systems
and enhances the infrastructure for research, education, mentoring, and
employment opportunities.