* 0848280
* Approaches to Improved Synthesis Design:  Mechanistic and Synthetic Studies on New Annelation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Paul Wender, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2012
* USD 797,063.00

The focus of this project is to advance understanding of the mechanisms and
selectivities of recently introduced reactions, on the investigation of new
reactions, and on the use of new reactions to produce novel scaffolds,
materials, ligands, and catalysts. The research will include studies on the
regioselectivity of [5+2] cycloadditions, studies of new 5- and 3-carbon agents
for new [5+2] and [3+2] cycloadditions, serial [5+2]/[4+2] cycloadditions and a
new [5+2]/Nazarov process for one step syntheses of [5.3.0] systems, studies on
[3+2] cycloadditions of vinylaziridines (VA), Lewis acid mediated [3+2]
cycloadditions of VAs, metal catalyzed [2+2+2+2] cycloadditions to produce
cyclooctatetraenes and the use of these to make new materials, ligands, and
catalysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Paul Wender in the
Department of Chemistry at Stanford University. Professor Wender's research
seeks to create new ways of doing synthesis and to use that expertise to advance
the frontiers of chemistry, biology, medicine and materials science. New
reactions offer new ways to think about synthetic problems, new process options
that could minimize or avoid environmentally problematic steps and process
inefficiencies, and often new mechanisms and insights that add to our basic
knowledge of bonding, structure, and reactivity. At its most fundamental level,
synthesis provides the opportunity to create new compounds with functions that
advance knowledge of chemistry and open opportunities for the preparation of
materials of value to our society including probes, medicines, materials, fine
chemicals, agricultural chemicals, and functional devices.