* 0848263
* Functional analysis of Arabidopsis NSC1/DMI1 Ca2+ permeable channels
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Zhen-Ming Pei, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 525,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Zhen-Ming
Pei&lt;br/&gt;Project no. IOS-0848263&lt;br/&gt;Project title: Functional
analysis of Arabidopsis NSC1 Ca2+ permeable
channels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Global environmental change
will affect crop production and plant ecosystems, and inevitably impact the
overall health of the human population. In order to deal with changes in crop
production caused by global climate change, tt is crucial to understand how
plants sense environmental signals. It is known that various external signals
trigger elevations in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i), which are mediated
by Ca2+ channels in the plasma membrane and/or endomembranes. However, the
molecular nature of these Ca2+ channels remains largely elusive in plants. The
long-term goal of the PI is to elucidate the Ca2+ machinery in plants. The PI
and his research group have used an expression cloning approach and isolated a
gene encoding NON-SELECTIVE CALCIUM CHANNEL 1 (NSC1) in Arabidopsis. NSC1 is
localized likely to the nuclear membrane in planta, forms Ca2+-permeable
channels and mediates Ca2+ flux. Interestingly, NSC1 regulates basal [Ca2+]i and
B. subtilis biofilm formation in roots. The specific aims of the project are to
(a) characterize the ion channel properties of NSC1 using heterologous
expression systems, (b) reconstitute the NSC1 into planar lipid bilayers, (c)
determine the subcellular localization of NSC1 in Arabidopsis, and (d) determine
the roles of NSC1 in controlling basal [Ca2+]i and regulating B. subtilis
biofilm formation. As NSC1 is the first endomembrane Ca2+ channel cloned so far
that controls [Ca2+]i, this study should allow a better understanding of plant
Ca2+ machinery and plant response to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Acid rain affects tree growth
in forests across the world. It depletes Ca2+ from forests and soils, affects
Ca2+ homeostasis in trees, and alters their responses to environmental signals,
possibly including communication with beneficial microorganisms. The PI is
leading a group to study how acid rain affects forests (in China), aiming to
identify molecular targets for genetically engineering forest species. This
project will provide unique opportunities for professors and students from
primarily teaching universities to conduct research. One postdoc, one graduate
student and several undergraduate students will participate in this project.
Over half of them are female and one is minority. The results from the project
will be incorporated into the PI?s three undergraduate courses: Molecular Plant
Physiology, Sensory Signal Transduction, and Cell and Developmental Biology.
Undergraduate students, including members of underserved minorities, will
participate in the research program, as well as professors from primarily
undergraduate-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;