* 0848756
* Conceptualization Tools for Unit Load Warehouse Design Based on Autonomous Vehicle Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/21/2008,09/30/2009
* Ananth Krishnamurthy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 09/30/2009
* USD 109,442.00

The research project is aimed at closing the gap between the relatively new
autonomous vehicle storage and retrieval system (AVS/RS) hardware and control
system technology, and the design conceptualization tools needed to assess their
impact on unit load storage and retrieval ULS/R operations. The proposed
research will advance the analytical foundations of AVS/RS modeling through
development of a new class of specialized queuing network models and lead to
creation and deployment of analytical conceptualization tools comparable to
those available for crane-based automated storage and retrieval system
(CBAS/RS's). The models developed through this research will capture several
unique features of AVS/R operations such as vehicle and lift interfacing,
storage and retrieval interference effects, selective transaction dispatching,
consolidated load buffering, and explicit linkage of S/R operations with in-
process material flows. The proposed research will be conducted as a joint
effort between Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and University of Louisville,
with active participation of industry. In terms of educational activities, this
project will lead to multiple doctoral theses and undergraduate student research
opportunities at the two participating universities. The project will lead to
the development of media-rich multimedia based educational modules that can be
used in universities and industry.

The conceptualization tools developed in this research will enable accurate and
efficient prediction of AVS/RS performance and direct comparisons of CBAS/R and
AVS/R technologies with respect to cost and performance. The models will be
deployed through decision support tools that integrate the systems level
problems of ULS/RS design with several operational level decisions for these
systems. The project will also lead to the development of web based
instructional modules summarizing the findings of this project. Prototype
versions of the conceptualizing tools will be disseminated to universities and
industry with the help of the Material Handling Institute of America (MHIA).

