* 0848540
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding (Indian) Techno-mirgration: Experiences and Structural Conditions
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Aalok Khandekar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,900.00

This dissertation research, supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society
program at NSF and the MPS directorate under the Math/Physical Sciences &amp;
Society Dear Colleague Letter initiative, focuses on technomigration.
Technomigration is the movement of a group of technologically educated, highly
skilled people; this project looks at technomigration between India and the
United States. It will document and analyze the experiences and perceptions of
technomigrants and the structural conditions that shape the mobility, and the
ability to be highly mobile, for Indian technomigrants. The goals of this study
are to understand: (a) global flows of technoscientific labor and how it is
valued across diverse physical and social spaces, and (b) the ways in which
Indian technomigrants understand and value their own mobility. Ethnographic
engagement with Indian technomigrants (in the U.S. and in India) will be used to
trace their educational and career trajectories, and to understand the interplay
between the experiential and structural dimensions of technomigration.
Participant observation at various seminars and conferences, and policy analysis
of documents will support the ethnographic analysis. This study will draw on and
contribute to literatures in the fields of Science and Technology Studies and
Cultural Anthropology. It will add to the empirical record on Indian
technomigration, analyze the role of technoscience as an enabler of mobility and
diaspora-formation, and link theories of value to contemporary theories of
globalization. The analysis resulting from this study can potentially inform
national and global immigration policies with respect to high-tech labor. A
focus on the subjective experiences of Indian immigrants will also give voice to
their concerns. &lt;br/&gt;