* 0848420
* Conference on Disaster Preparedness and Response; held at Georgia Tech
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Pinar Keskinocak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2009
* USD 30,000.00

?Disaster Preparedness and Response? ? a proposed conference to be held at
Georgia Tech ? will focus on various topics relevant to planning, preparing, and
responding to disasters, as well as recovery and mitigation. The main objectives
of the conference are to articulate the opportunities and challenges in
preparing and responding to disasters, both from a humanitarian and a
corporate/economic perspective, to identify important research issues, to create
academic awareness for the research opportunities and to establish priorities
for non-government organizations (NGOs), corporations, and the government in
terms of their strategies, policies, and investments.

Natural and man-made disasters swept through various parts of the world and
received much attention over the past decade. In addition to natural disasters,
there are also manmade crises that result from terrorist activities, war, etc.,
which often have similar effects on populations in terms of danger and lack of
basic necessities, including shelter, water, food, and safety. These disasters
often damage or destroy the infrastructure, change the social and economic
conditions, significantly affecting peoples? lives. They also have a big impact
on businesses and the economy overall. It is now well understood that planning,
preparing, and responding to a disaster requires the collaboration of many
parties, including NGOs, the private sector, and the governments. Focusing on
preparedness (rather than on response only) emerged as a key interest area for
all parties involved. Given the complexity of the problems faced and the lives
at stake, there is a tremendous need and potential for academic research in this
area, and the impact of this research is expected to be significant both in
terms of the number of lives that can be saved and the economic value. The
proposed conference will focus on the identification of research areas in
disaster preparedness and response that are likely to be successful and have
high potential impact.

