* 0848841
* Collaborative Research: Spectroscopy and Chemistry of Open-Shell Atoms in Solid Hydrogen Matrices
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Robert Hinde, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2013
* USD 387,000.00

Professors David Anderson of the University of Wyoming and Robert Hinde of the
University of Tennessee are supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Division for a collaborative investigation of the infrared (IR) spectroscopy and
chemistry of cryogenic molecular hydrogen solids containing open-shell atoms as
substitutional impurities. Through a combination of experiment (Anderson) and
first principles simulations (Hinde) the project goal is to use the IR
spectroscopy to quantify how the presence of the hydrogen ?solvent? perturbs the
electronic structure of the open-shell atom. Most chemistry occurs in the
presence of a solvent and these fundamental studies are aimed at understanding
how solvent effects are manifested in simple atomic radical reactions with
molecular hydrogen. This will be accomplished by first developing a theoretical
framework for understanding the solvent-induced perturbation of the electronic
structure of chlorine atoms (Cl) trapped in solid hydrogen. The knowledge gained
in these halogen atom studies will then be applied to oxygen atom (O) doped
solid hydrogen to study solvent perturbations of the prototypical combustion
reaction of O-atoms with molecular hydrogen. The goal of this research is to
develop the spectroscopic analysis such that solid hydrogen doped with atomic
radicals can be used as a new reaction medium to study the details of low
temperature chemistry in a condensed phase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frozen
molecular hydrogen is a unique crystalline solid that is distinguished as a
quantum solid due to pronounced quantum mechanical effects of the hydrogen
molecule at the low temperatures at which hydrogen freezes (T&lt;13.8 K). These
studies of chemical reactions in a quantum solid will have direct impact on our
understanding of quantum mechanical effects in low temperature chemical
reactions, the ability to use light to control chemical reaction pathways, and
potentially provide transformative insight into both high gravimetric storage
and clean production of molecular hydrogen. This research will also provide a
rich vehicle for undergraduate and graduate research experience and training.