* 0848797
* The Phagosensor Technique: Quantifying the force fields generated during phagocytosis using deformable microcapsules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jennifer Curtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2013
* USD 242,867.00

In this project the PI will introduce a new quantitative technique that permits
systematic studies of several fundamental areas in biological physics, including
phagocytosis, the actin cytoskeleton and its coupling to membrane, and
mechanotransduction. The approach, called the PhagoSensor Technique, uses
mechanically characterized, deformable particles as the phagocytotic target.
During phagocytosis, the soft particle experiences spatially and time-dependent
deformations which reflect the transient forces exerted by the advancing cell
extensions (pseudopodia) around the particle. High resolution imaging of the
particle deformations combined with simultaneous imaging of the pseudopodia will
provide unprecedented data regarding cell dynamics and mechanics during
phagocytosis. The cell-generated force field that deforms the particle will be
extracted via image processing and application of elastic shell theory. This
work addresses three aspects of phagocytosis. First, the robustness and
reproducibility of the mechanical signature of phagocytosis will be
characterized. Second, the measured force dynamics will be correlated with the
most prominent model of phagocytosis, which claims that there are three phases
with at least two different and independent sources of contractile force. Last,
the mechanosensitivity of macrophage cells by varying the elastic moduli of the
PhagoSensors used during experimentation will be investigated. The fascinating
and dramatic aspects of the biophysical studies, such as the visually
stimulating process of one cell eating another or the holographic optical
tweezers will be used to: (1) captivate 4-5th graders once a month in a hands-on
after school Science Club; (2) to inspire undergraduates in universities like
Florida International University (FIU) to pursue a career in quantitative
biophysics; and (3) to extensively train undergraduates at Georgia Tech in a
challenging interdisciplinary environment.