* 0848123
* EAR-PF: Biogeochemical Cycling of Manganese and Its Effect on Drinking Water Quality
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Lee Bryant, Bryant                  Lee            D
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2012
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lee Bryant is awarded an NSF Earth
Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop an integrated program of research
and education at Duke University and the Swiss Federal Institute for Aquatic
Science and Technology. Her research will explore Mn biogeochemical cycling at
the sediment water interface using a freshwater reservoir oxygenation system as
a full-scale 'natural laboratory' in which oxygen level can be controlled in an
otherwise entirely natural aquatic ecosystem. Dr. Bryant has developed an
innovative research plan that combines laboratory and field experiments,
microbial analyses and computer simulation to elucidate Mn cycling as a function
of oxygen availability. Laboratory microcosms will be used to simulate reservoir
processes under controlled conditions. On-site field studies at an oxygenated
reservoir in southwestern Virginia (Carvin's Cove Reservoir) will be conducted
in parallel with the lab experiments. Microbial analyses will then be performed
to characterize the relationship between microbial community structure in
freshwater sediments and oxygenation. Newly gained knowledge of mechanisms
governing biogeochemical Mn cycling will ultimately be validated using a
mathematical model. Manganese (Mn) is an abundant metal in sediment that can
significantly degrade drinking water quality. Treatment of source water with
elevated Mn levels can be difficult due to the complexity of reduction-oxidation
reactions controlling the solubility of Mn. Ultimately, by quantifying Mn
biogeochemical processes as a function of oxygenation, the research will make a
valuable contribution to the shifting global perspective on management of the
water resources. The many new insights gained on Mn biogeochemical cycling may
be applied to cycling of other chemical species (e.g, iron, arsenic).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;An educational outreach component is cohesively integrated into the
research. Dr. Bryant will be an active participant in the FEMMES (Females
Excelling More in Math, Engineering and Sciences) outreach program at Duke. She
will integrate hands-on activities on fundamental concepts of the research
(e.g., sediment-water interactions, aquatic chemistry and water quality) into
the FEMMES curriculum.