* 0848845
* Living and Stereoselective Anionic Polymerization by Dinuclear Ambiphilic Silicon Propagators
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2012
* USD 260,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project seeks to develop a novel living and stereoselective anionic
polymerization using novel dinuclear ambiphilic silicon catalysts. Building off
the recently developed anionic polymerization catalyzed by silylium ions, this
project will continue work on the development of new features that will enable
this new polymerization system to become an important and versatile technique
serving for a wide range of living polymerization reactions and precision
polymer synthesis. Such new features include covalently linked dinuclear
ambiphilic silicon catalysts for fast propagating rates, asymmetric silicon
catalysts for stereoregular polymer synthesis, and efficient processes for
converting biorenewable monomers to sustainable polymers.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Eugene Chen of the Department of Chemistry at Colorado
State University. Professor Chen's research efforts revolve around the
development of new organosilicon chemistry and polymerization catalysis by
highly reactive silylium ions. Such chemistry and catalysis will contribute to
the discovery and understanding in organic and organometallic chemistry, polymer
synthesis, and sustainable chemistry. This research is important in chemical
catalysis and polymer synthesis, areas central to the global economy.