* 0848478
* Doctoral Disssertation Research: Motivations for Medical Migration in the United States/Mexico Borderlands
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Paul Brodwin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,117.00

Doctoral student, Matthew Dalstrom (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee), advised
by Dr. Paul Brodwin, will conduct research on the cultural and social
motivations for medical migration, briefly defined as the movement of people
across borders for health care. The project will be conducted in two cities
along the United States-Mexico border. Previous studies have illustrated that
Americans actively pursue health care opportunities in Mexico, but there is
little known about the institutional structures and cultural beliefs that enable
or encourage people to do so. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines three
questions: 1) Do Americans cross the border for health care predominately
because of lack of insurance and high medical cost, or are social and cultural
factors also important? 2) What factors determine the way American medical
migrants choose providers in Mexico? 3) How do American medical providers
balance nationalism and patient safety with their assessment of medical
migration? Research will be conducted through the use of surveys, participant
observation, and semi-structured interviews with the primary participants:
patients, doctors, dentists, pharmacists, and medical migration
brokers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important because it examines how
culture, as well as poverty, health care inequalities, and state policies
influence individual health care options and decisions. Furthermore, it will
contribute to the discussion of border health policy and the different ways that
individuals understand and utilize health care along the border. The research
also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.