* 0848653
* Religious Beliefs, Wealth, and Poverty
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Lisa Keister, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2012
* USD 119,739.00

Religion and material outcomes are closely intertwined. Early sociologists
considered religion to be a fundamental part of the study of inequality, and the
relationship has again begun to attract important attention. Recent evidence
demonstrates that religious affiliation, belief, and strength are critical
determinants of important indicators of well-being including education, work and
occupational status, income, saving, and wealth. Although recent research shows
that religion is an important cause of material outcomes, discussion of the
theoretical mechanisms driving these relationships is limited and empirical
research has focused on bivariate patterns. It was important for researchers to
begin by providing careful, systematic evidence of a causal relationship that
eluded previous generations of scholars. However, the literature has not yet
produced a comprehensive study of the contemporary relationship between religion
and inequality. This gap is particularly problematic because establishing
causality requires identifying interactions among outcomes such as education,
family processes, work, income, and saving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
research would begin to address this need. In particular, the objectives of this
study are to draw on and integrate early ideas with contemporary thinking and
empirical evidence to develop a comprehensive, empirically-grounded theoretical
statement about how religion affects inequality; to use the rich data contained
in contemporary U.S. datasets to simultaneously model the empirical relationship
between religion and education, work status, occupational prestige, earnings,
wealth components (e.g., homeownership, financial assets, debt), and total
wealth; and to use simulation modeling to integrate information from the various
data sets and to explore the policy implications of the
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The empirical portion of this project will use
multiple datasets and a combination of analysis methods to provide a more
comprehensive treatment of the religion-stratification relationship. I will use
both cross-sectional and longitudinal data sets to conduct both traditional
regression analyses and to develop a simulation model of religion and
stratification. This research has the potential to contribute to multiple sub-
fields within sociology, including the sociology of religion, stratification and
inequality, and economic sociology. The work will integrate ideas and empirical
evidence from these subfields and build on prior work in each area. The
integration of theory across subfields combined with rigorous empirical modeling
will create linkages across independent areas of research that are developing
rapidly and effectively but that might benefit from improved connections to each
other. For instance, this research has the potential to reintroduce one element
of cultural orientation to stratification research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research also has potential broader implications. Both religion and inequality
are social issues that rightfully attract considerable attention in public
discourse. This proposed research has the potential to inform those discussions
and to highlight the central role that religion plays in shaping inequality. In
recent years, religious ideology has also been an important part of many public
debates about other political, economic, and social issues, and this research
has the potential to inform these debates as well. Religion has particular
significance for underrepresented groups (e.g., African Americans and
Hispanics), and this work will explore the unique role that religion plays for
these groups and contribute to understanding the social and economic well-being
of these groups. The research will be available to non-academics through
publications in non-academic journals, op-ed pieces, and press releases. In
addition, graduate students will participate in all aspects of the research,
strengthening the teaching component of the study. &lt;br/&gt;