* 0848487
* Negative Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Compton, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 378,933.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Robert Compton of the University of Tennessee will
continue and expand his research on negative ions. Studies of dipole and
quadrupole bound anions will focus on photodetachment of these weakly bound
anions in the difficult energy region near threshold (millielectron volts).
Measurements of the photodetachment threshold will provide accurate electron
affinities of these anions which can be compared to less accurate values
obtained by Rydberg electron transfer and electric field detachment methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resonantly-enhanced multiphoton dissociation experiments
will be conducted at the Netherlands free electron facility (FELIX) on
vibrational spectroscopy of multiply charged anions. Collisional dissociation
studies of multiply-charged anions are being carried out at the ELISA ion
storage ring in Aarhus, Denmark. Another goal is to record the first
photodetachment circular dichroism cross section for a chiral negative ion such
as the tartaric acid anion and dianion. All of these studies will have a strong
theoretical component This research will be conducted with the assistance of
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as with collaborators within and
outside the United States. Through their participation in this research and the
collaborations with other American and international groups the students will
gain valuable experience that will prepare them for advanced studies or
employment in the academic, government or industrial sectors of the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;