* 0848968
* SBIR Phase II:  Microglassification: Dehydration Process for Protein Preservation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Gaul, Southeast TechInventures
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 615,678.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance the
recent discovery of an ambient temperature dehydration method
"Microglassification" that is designed to more efficiently stabilize
biomolecules for preservation. Lyophilization is the current process of choice,
but it has major disadvantages including high capital cost of equipment, high
energy costs, and long process time. Furthermore, with the advent of new protein
therapeutics, diagnostics, vaccines, such expensive and environment-sensitive
biomolecules can be irreversibly impacted due to the stresses of the freezing
and the drying process and may never reach the market due to insufficient
stability or even degradation that makes them antigenic and toxic in the body.
Incorporation of Microglassification to produce a dry formulation of a
biomolecule leads to following benefits: reduction in operation costs,
production time savings, increased yield and purity, increased long-term
stability, and reduced capital equipment costs.

The broader impacts of this research are not limited to broader temperature
tolerances for the microglassified products facilitating storage and transport
of sensitive biologics throughout the US, and also to developing countries. But
also this research furthers the fundamental understanding of water removal from
a protein (how molecular layers of water of hydration influence protein
activity), the structural changes that might occur in the protein, and the
protein interactions with its surrounding environment. It is expected that
Microglassification will provide the needed stability to enable a
biotechnological advance to reach the market, and, more importantly, reach the
patient.