* 0848246
* Subregional Analysis of the Human Medial Temporal Lobe in Episodic Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Barbara Knowlton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,995.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A major advance in the study of the brain has been the discovery of specific
regions that play a critical role in memory. These regions include the medial
temporal lobe, which includes several different interconnected structures. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Barbara Knowlton and
colleagues at UCLA will use functional magnetic resonance imaging to discover
the different roles of these regions in human memory, and how they work together
to support the rich, detailed memories of our experiences that define us as
people. Much of the work is motivated by theories of human memory that state
that one medial temporal lobe region, the CA3 region of the hippocampus, is very
important for the creation of distinct memories for events, and allows us to
keep memories for similar events from blending together. Dr. Knowlton and her
research team will test the idea that activity in the CA3 during learning is
directly related to how robust and long-lasting memories will be. The
experiments will also compare brain activity when people learn information by
trying to think about what is unique about each item to brain activity when
people learn information by concentrating on what is similar across items. The
research hypothesis is that there will be more activation in the CA3 region in
the first kind of learning because the brain will be forming distinctive
memories. Additionally, the research will test the idea that the same pattern of
activity that occurs in the medial temporal lobe when an item is learned will be
repeated when that same item is later remembered.

These experiments will provide important new information about how neural
circuits form human memories, and thus will be the source of insights into how
memory can be improved. Furthermore, this proposal will train graduate students
in high resolution and cortical unfolding techniques, which can be applied to
other areas of cognitive neuroscience.