* 0848856
* Protic Acid Catalysis of Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Jeffrey Johnston, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2012
* USD 390,000.00

This project will continue work on the development of new reactions catalyzed by
protic acids to form carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom (nitrogen and/or
oxygen) bonds. An emphasis is placed on the identification and development of
functional groups (e.g. diazo alkanes and azides) that can be activated toward
carbon-carbon bond formation by protic acids without protonative self-
decomposition. Inspection of the mechanism of these reactions will yield a
fundamental understanding of reactivity, and in so doing, provide a framework
for broader conceptual application and development. The development of
diastereoselective variations of these reactions will be an emphasis of this
phase, leading ultimately to their application in the synthesis of complex
contiguous aminopolyols. These studies continually expand the availability of
stereochemically dense small molecules, such as aziridines and beta-amino acids,
and particularly new chemical entities that can be transformed into common
pharmacophores or used as a basis for new materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Professor Jeffrey N. Johnston of the Department of Chemistry at
Vanderbilt University. Professor Johnston's research efforts revolve around the
development of novel stereoselective methods to form C-C and C-heteroatom (N/O)
bonds. This research will result in greener chemical methods to more rapidly and
efficiently prepare chiral small molecules. Successful development of the
methodology will have an impact on synthesis in the pharmaceutical and
agricultural industries.