* 0848366
* SBIR Phase II: Development of Hydrogen/Halogen Fuel Cell Technology for Renewables Based Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Trent Molter, Sustainable Innovations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 759,529.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop the
underlying technology behind a highly efficient energy storage system that can
provide reliable, dispatchable power from intermittent renewable energy sources
such as wind and solar. This technology is based on a novel hydrogen/chlorine
chemistry embodied in a regenerative fuel cell architecture that can address MW-
scale applications. This project will develop a better scientific understanding
of important technological barriers to commercial implementation of this
technology including developing an insight into parametric behavior through both
experimentation and modeling, improving reactant mass transport at the chlorine
electrode, and eliminating parasitic shunt currents in multi-cell module
architectures. Sustainable Innovations, LLC, will work with Harvard University
to develop an 8-cell, laboratory scale electrochemical module having a round-
trip efficiency of over 80% with design features that optimize mass transport
and reduce shunt currents and will evaluate the performance of this module
through a series of parametric and durability tests. This research will
culminate in the development and demonstration of a 100-Watt integrated system
and the development of a 135 kW system concept that will serve as a critical
building block for future commercialization efforts.

Concern about the increasing level of greenhouse gases is intensifying the
global interest in better ways to harness renewables such as solar, wind, and
hydroelectric power. Renewable power applications have experienced significant
growth as a result of this belief and also technological advancements that have
reduced their cost and increased their efficiency. Utility privatization and
deregulation have opened the market for innovative power technologies, and some
consumers have elected to use renewables even when they are more expensive than
grid power. But renewables can't always generate power on demand because they
depend upon favorable natural conditions, such as the presence of sunlight or
wind. The development of cost effective, efficient energy storage systems that
could create dispatchable power from inherently intermittent renewables may
enable the widespread use of these technologies. Various technologies,
particularly batteries, have been implemented for applications requiring energy
storage, but conventional batteries have significant efficiency, cycle life and
life cycle cost limitations which reduce the overall cost effectiveness of
renewable installations. New technologies, such as hydrogen/halogen regenerative
fuel cells with improved efficiency, cycle life and cost are needed to add value
and utility to intermittent renewables creating technical and economic drivers
for widespread commercial deployment and global electrification.