* 0848824
* RUI: Probing Early Events in Amyloid-beta Association by Single-Pair Forster Resonance Energy Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Robin Lammi, Winthrop University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2014
* USD 251,274.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Robin Lammi and undergraduate researchers at Winthrop
University will investigate structural heterogeneity in dimers of
amyloid-&amp;#946; peptide (A&amp;#946;). Small oligomers of this protein are
closely linked to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer?s disease and likely serve as
critical nuclei in the growth of ordered fibrils used as nanowires and sensors.
By performing single-pair FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer (spFRET)
measurements on dozens of localized, fluorescently labeled dimers, one at a
time, Lammi and her students will directly probe the oligomer-to-oligomer
variation obscured in bulk-solution measurements, gaining unique, molecular-
level insight into persistent versus transient dimer structures. In addition to
affording new empirical insights into the earliest steps in A&amp;#946;
association, this project will permit intense, interdisciplinary training of
undergraduate researchers. The inclusion of a single-oligomer laboratory
experiment and the introduction of project-derived data and analysis techniques
in the undergraduate curriculum will bring advanced research methods into the
classroom, impacting all chemistry majors at Winthrop, including many students
from underrepresented groups.