* 0848089
* Towards an LSAMP Discovery and Innovation Center for International Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Randolph Duran, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2011
* USD 272,000.00

The pilot program has a goal to develop international research experiences for
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) students. As such a
Discovery and Innovation Center for International Undergraduate Research
Experiences (LSAMP-INT) will be initiated. In this pilot, 16 participants will
be recruited from LSAMP programs nationwide. These participants will be given
deep immersion experiences in a variety of renowed research laboratories around
the world. In particular, the students will be embedded in international (REU)
Sites (iREU). About half of the participants will be sent to a set of primary
iREU Sites involving France, Brazil, Argentina, and Ghana that are coordinated
by the PIs through the University of Florida. The other half of the participants
will be embedded in about 18 other iREU Sites that span much of the world and
represent most directorates of NSF depending on the experience and interest of
the LSAMP student participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cohort of students
will share common predeparture and post-program experiences designed to maximize
the broader impact of their international research experience. In particular,
scientists at the Smithsonian and Florida Museum of Natural History will
participate in the pilot program to enhance students' ability to communicate
research to the public impacting public understanding of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pilot year will be the pre-cursor to a multi-
year program to aid in the development of a diverse workforce with global
science competencies critical to continued U. S. competitiveness.