* 0848389
* III-SGER: Algorithms for Next-Generation Protein Modeling: Beyond Pair-wise Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Alexander Gray, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This work pursues the development of a new algorithmic framework which allows
for the first time efficient computation of higher-order interactions in
biomolecules. Algorithms are created to demonstrate two important applications
on much larger scales than were previously tractable, each representing a new
door to a larger class of further possibilities: Axilrod-Teller (3-body)
simulation, and Hartree-Fock (4-index) quantum-level simulation. The
multidisciplinary project brings together experts in computer science, protein
folding, and quantum chemistry.

Biomolecular simulations usually break down complex chemical systems into a
balls-and-springs mechanical model augmented by torsional terms, pair-wise
point-charge electrostatic terms, and simple pair-wise dispersion (van der
Waals) interactions. However such models often fail to capture important,
complex non-additive interactions found in real systems. Though the criticality
of multi-body potentials for more accurate and realistic molecular modeling has
been argued by various authors, their evaluation in systems beyond tiny sizes
has not been previously possible due to the unavailability of an efficient way
to realize the computation, which is cubic or higher.

The work augments a framework for computational problems called Generalized
N-Body Problems, which contains any such higher-order physical potential. The
framework was originally developed to accelerate common bottleneck statistical
computations based on distances, utilizing multiple kd-trees and other space-
partitioning data structures to bring down computation times both asymptotically
and practically by multiple orders of magnitude. This work extends the framework
with higher-order hierarchical series approximation techniques, demonstrating
how to do a fast multipole-type method for higher-order interactions for the
first time, effectively creating a Generalized Fast Multipole Method.

The algorithms are validated in biochemical systems chosen to clearly illustrate
many-body interactions: hydrogen bonds and three-body dispersion interactions.
Parameters for potential functions are obtained using customized machine
learning methods on dual data sets generated by the co-PI's labs: high-quality
quantum mechanical benchmark data and experimental protein structures.

The goal is to demonstrate working many-body codes able to explore the effect of
modeling higher-order interactions on a larger scale and more systematically
than ever attempted previously. The intellectual merit of the work is the
elucidation of the first multi-tree multipole method capable of accurately and
scalably performing these fundamental types of higher-order physics
computations. The potential broader impact is the ability to perform more
accurate next-generation molecular modeling, with implications for fundamental
biology and drug design.

For further information see the project web page at
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~agray/gfmm.html