* 0848976
* Advancing cITP-NMR and Reverse-phase Ion-Pairing Separations of Anionic Oligosaccharides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Cynthia Larive, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 06/30/2013
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Cynthia K. Larive of the University of California, Riverside is
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to work on the development of capillary isotachophoresis-nuclear
magnetic resonance (cITP-NMR) methodology for the analysis and structure
determination of oligosaccharides from important biopolymers like heparin and
chondroitin sulfate. This work also aims to advance methods for the separation
of these molecules by reverse-phase ion-pairing chromatography and includes
magic angle spinning NMR experiments as an aid to understanding the nature of
the intermolecular interactions among the analyte, the ion pairing reagent, and
the chromatographic stationary phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research offers
potential applications in biochemistry and the pharmaceutical industry, which
rely heavily on separation methods for compound purification and
characterization. In addition, the work offers students (including
undergraduates and members of underrepresented groups) opportunities for
experience with state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation and methodology.
Research advances will be incorporated in the classroom, bringing the excitement
of research to students at an early stage of their education. Educational
aspects of this work will be disseminated through the Analytical Sciences
Digital Library, http://www.asdlib.org, a free portal of peer-reviewed and
annotated electronic resources for teachers, learners and practitioners of
analytical science.