* 0848162
* Site-isolation of catalysts within "smart" thimbles for cascade reactions and recycling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Ned Bowden, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2012
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop methods to
site-isolate commercially available Pd, Mn, Cr, and Co catalysts using polymeric
thimbles. The structures of the catalysts will not be altered; the method of
site-isolation will be compatible with catalysts that have been optimized for
their reactions rather than optimized for site-isolation. These catalysts will
be recycled and used in sequential reactions with more than one catalyst present
in a reaction vessel. Multiple catalysts will be added to a reaction vessel
because they will be site-isolated from each other, but organic molecules will
be free to react with multiple catalysts. The mechanism of site-isolation will
also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Ned B.
Bowden of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Iowa. Professor
Bowden's research effort centers on the development of general methods to site-
isolate catalysts without altering their structures. This work will allow
catalysts to be recycled, products to be isolated with very low loadings of
hazardous metal contaminants, and new sequential reactions to be developed. This
work will have an important impact on pharmaceutical, agricultural, and other
industries that use metal catalysts to yield small molecules.