* 0848468
* SGER:   Node Compromise Models and  Their Defending Considerations in Mobile Ad-hoc Sensor  Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Kia Makki, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

Node compromise occurs when an attacker through some subvert &lt;br/&gt;means,
gains the control of a node in the network after deployment. &lt;br/&gt;Once in
control of that node, the attacker can alter the node to &lt;br/&gt;listen to
information in the network, input malicious data, cause &lt;br/&gt;black hole,
or any one of a myriad of attacks on the network. &lt;br/&gt;Generally a node
compromise occurs in two ways. The first way is &lt;br/&gt;called
physical/external attack, when the attacker physically &lt;br/&gt;accesses or
captures a node, and then directly connects the node &lt;br/&gt;to his/her
computer via a wired connection of some sort. Once &lt;br/&gt;connected the
attacker controls the node by extracting the data &lt;br/&gt;and/or putting new
data, etc. Most researchers in this area have &lt;br/&gt;only considered this
kind of node compromise attack and many &lt;br/&gt;methods have been discovered
to detect such attacks. The second &lt;br/&gt;way is called soft/internal
attack, when the attacker compromises &lt;br/&gt;a node in a network via
software/viruses which can spread over &lt;br/&gt;the physical communication
channels or over the air interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;The soft attack method is hard
to be detected and is the main or &lt;br/&gt;the only reason that leads to the
emergence of compromised nodes &lt;br/&gt;in some practical applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research aims at developing node compromise
&lt;br/&gt;distribution models and their defending considerations for
&lt;br/&gt;Mobile Ad-hoc Sensor Networks. Specifically, the research
&lt;br/&gt;involves an exploratory investigation of modeling attack
&lt;br/&gt;distribution that can help system to estimate the probability
&lt;br/&gt;of a node being compromised and thus defend against it
&lt;br/&gt;effectively and efficiently. We develop several models for a
&lt;br/&gt;node compromise based on different application environments.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, we develop an analytical framework to theoretically
&lt;br/&gt;evaluate our node compromise distribution models. The analytical
&lt;br/&gt;results will be evaluated by extensive simulations and
&lt;br/&gt;experimental measurements.&lt;br/&gt;