* 0848120
* Development and Application of Method to Study Protein Kinetic Stability
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Wilfredo Colon, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Like a child strapped to a high-chair, certain proteins are trapped in their
native structure, unable to transiently sample partially and globally unfolded
conformations. This appears to be a method used by "mother nature" to protect
some proteins from degradation or misfolding, either one of which would
compromise the function of the protein and the well-being of the organism.
Proteins that possess this property are described as being kinetically stable
because, unlike most proteins, their long "shelf-life" and stability towards
degradation is kinetically controlled by a slow unfolding rate. These proteins
are trapped by a high energy barrier towards unfolding. The structural basis and
biological significance of this property remains poorly understood. The
investigators recently demonstrated a correlation between kinetic stability and
a protein's resistance to the detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and
subsequently developed a simple diagonal two-dimensional (D2D) SDS-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) method to identify kinetically
stable proteins in complex mixtures (cell lysates). The goal of this project is
to apply the D2D SDS-PAGE method in combination with mass spectrometry and
proteomics analysis to a diverse organisms to explore the biological
significance and pervasiveness of kinetic stability, and to develop a new method
to quantify kinetic stability. Results of this project should lead to a better
understanding of the structural basis of kinetic stability and its roles in
nature. The outcome of the project will provide simple methods to facilitate the
study of protein kinetic stability in mainstream biology labs. Finally, since
proteins are being increasingly used in a variety of applications, including
pharmaceuticals, renewable energy, and agriculture, this project could lead to
the engineering of proteins with an extended shelf-life for practical
applications of benefit to society. Broader impacts. The project will provide
the community with a simple, inexpensive, sensitive, and accessible assay to
quantify the kinetic stability of any protein of interest, either purified or in
its biological milieu. Furthermore, this project has the potential to provide
novel insight about the biological role of protein kinetic stability that could
catalyze further studies and advance our theoretical understanding about the
role of chemistry and physics in life processes. From an educational
perspective, this project will involve postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
researchers working together in a stimulating environment that integrates
research training and learning. Learning through hands-on research is the most
effective method for exposing undergraduate students to science and its career
opportunities. Since its inception, the lab of the principal investigator has
been engaged in training and mentoring many undergraduate students, including
women and underrepresented minorities. Undergraduate students have been
coauthors in numerous publications. In addition to research training, students
involved in this project will participate in frequent group meetings that will
provide a forum to present their research and develop their communication
skills. Yearly participation at local or national meetings will give them an
opportunity to disseminate their results through poster presentations. Students
will be actively involved in writing early drafts of manuscripts for publication
in peer-reviewed journals.