* 0848082
* An Alkylative Dearomatization-Annulation Approach to the Polyprenylated Phloroglucinol Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* John Porco, Jr., Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2012
* USD 425,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this project, alkylative dearomatization processes will be developed for
synthesis of the polyprenylated phloroglucinol natural products. In preliminary
results, methodologies for efficient construction of the
bicyclo[3.3.1]nonan-9-one core of the polyprenylated phloroglucinol clusianone
have been developed. In this funding period, the scope of the methodology will
be expanded and the improved method will be applied towards the syntheses of
nemorosone and the adamantane natural products hyperibone K and plukenetione A.
In addition, the project aims to develop a catalytic, asymmetric dearomatization
process by making use of computational docking algorithms to understand reaction
mechanisms and design new asymmetric catalyst candidates.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor John A. Porco Jr. of the Department of Chemistry at
Boston University. Professor Porco's research efforts revolve around the
development of methodologies for the synthesis of complex natural products and
their derivatives. His efforts will contribute to chemical synthesis by
furthering the development of underutilized alkylative dearomatization processes
and will have a positive impact on synthesis in the pharmaceutical and
agricultural industries.