* 0848645
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Polymer Matrix Composites Based on Nanofiber Fused Microfiber Architecture
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Jason Lincoln, Performance Polymer Solutions Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 657,949.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
characterize a novel class of polymer matrix composite materials using a
continuous NanoFiber Fused-Microfiber (Nf2-M) reinforcement technology. This
patented approach, carbon nanofibers are grown in a continuous manner directly
from the surface of continuous filaments (introduced in tow form) in a
continuous, easily scaled process. Unlike traditional approaches which involve
difficult mixing operations to introduce carbon nanofibers into the matrix resin
at very low loading levels and with questionable dispersion, this approach
produces continuous three-dimensional reinforcement networks which are easily
incorporated into composites using standard fabrication techniques, including
filament winding and prepreg wet lay-up processes. No additional or modified
composite fabrication steps are needed. This technology has enormous potential
for a multitude of commercial applications.

The broader/commercial impact of this project are threefold: 1) providing a
foundation for a new technology in materials science research; 2) utilizing the
fundamental findings to develop and engineer enabling materials to meet growing
needs in industry for current and future applications; and 3) providing a low
cost, commercially available, high performance carbon fiber reinforcement
technology that has the potential to change the face of the composite materials
industry. Global market forecast for reinforcing carbon fibers is ~$12.2 billion
annually by 2011, and the approach of this project can take advantage of the
multitude of existing markets, such as sporting goods, electronics, consumer
products, commercial aerospace and automotive industries.