* 0848223
* A Proposal for a Workshop on Designing Cyber for Future Energy Systems.  To be Held in Washington DC, November 19-20, 2008
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 10/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the objective of the two-day workshop to
define a vision for future energy systems and to identify the key role of cyber
technologies in shaping their performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE
INTELLECTUAL MERIT OF THIS PROPOSAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is
challenged with an agenda of conceptualizing frameworks to solving the design,
planning and operating problems that plague electric power systems. The result
is an infrastructure that functions both reliably and efficiently. The same
frameworks would be useful for protecting electric power systems under malicious
attacks, i.e., making them secure. The workshop must reflect a natural
progression of the current ongoing research and the joint vision arrived by the
workshop participants. Such novel frameworks require: (1) modeling of an
electric power system as a single technical, economic and policy dynamic
process, (2) advances in control engineering and systems theory to analyze the
interdependencies of interest and to design near optimal feedback from the
technical, economic and policy signals, in which optimality is measured in terms
of efficiency and reliability, and (3) IT-based implementations of control
algorithms operating on technical, economic and policy feedback to highly
distributed and flexible sensors and actuators. The envisioned approaches must
consider human decision makers as part of the system. The challenge is to
conceptualize how generalized systems theory, combined with IT and the specific
modeling of critical infrastructures has the potential to become a backbone of a
flexible robust electric power system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT OF
THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this workshop will be
organized and made available as a Special Report to be used by academia,
industry and government for pursuing future work in enabling today's electric
power grids with cyber. As a result, both educational and research efforts will
be more aligned with the future needs. In particular, the material will be made
available to universities which are engaged in preparing future leaders in the
area of electric energy systems. The educational needs will be discussed as a
means toward implementing the vision put forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expectation is that the workshop material would form the basis for badly needed
technology transfer, in particular the deployment of cyber technologies into
next generation electric power systems. The over-riding concept expected to
emerge is that cyber technologies are essential for implementing tradeoff
solutions with regard to cost, environmental impact and security. &lt;br/&gt;