* 0848855
* New Polymerization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Kenneth Shea, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2013
* USD 479,000.00

This project is concerned with the development of new chemical reactions for the
repetitive formation of sp3-sp3 carbon-carbon bonds. The products of these
reactions, carbon backbone polymers, comprise some of the most important
synthetic materials known. Traditional methods for polymer synthesis involve
polymerization of alkenes. The project will study new reactions involving the
polymerization of ylides and diazoalkane monomers with Lewis acidic
catalyst/initiators. These reactions build the carbon backbone one carbon at a
time and provide exceptional control over molecular weight and polydispersity.
Novel polymer topologies, not readily available by conventional olefin
polymerization, will also be studied using these new reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program is supporting the research of Professor Kenneth J. Shea of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Irvine. Professor
Shea's research efforts revolve around synthetic and mechanistic organic
chemistry and span polymers, functional materials and catalysis. His research is
of broad interest to polymer scientists for establishing structure/property
relationships, for synthesizing polymer compatibilizing and blending agents, as
standards for molecular weight calibration, and as surface modifiers for
commodity plastics. His method can also be used to synthesize polymers for
testing fundamental concepts of polymer physics such as the influence of
topology on polymer diffusion, melt behavior, crystallization and solution
viscosity. In addition, since many olefins do not readily polymerize, these
alternative synthetic methods can serve as an entry to completely new substances
and properties. Collaborations with the major producers of polyethylene have
been established which will lead to extensive characterization of the properties
of these materials.