* 0848716
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanomechanical Resonator Technology for Passive and Active Devices in Wireless Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Alexei Gaidarzhy, Sand 9, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2011
* USD 498,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project seeks
to develop novel radio-frequency components for wireless communication using an
innovative nanomechanical resonator technology platform. The team has developed
the world's highest-frequency mechanical resonator and will use this device to
create RF filters for wireless communications in the 100 MHz to 3 GHz range.
Building on the simulation results and optimal device designs the team will
fabricate, test and characterize nanomechanical filters for use in wireless
communication devices. There is a significant problem that designers of cellular
handsets and other wireless devices are facing when adding additional air
interfaces such as WiFi, WiMax, Bluetooth and Global Position Service (GPS) into
their products. Each additional air interface requires a new set of RF filters
and as the number of air interfaces multiplies the number of conventional
filters required increases dramatically. The goals of the Phase-II project are
to (i) develop nanomechanical filters in the 100 MHz - 3 GHz range; (ii) test
and characterize the device for optimal performance parameters; (iii) transfer
the manufacturing process to a commercial foundry for wafer-level fabrication;
(iv) package the devices using wafer-level packaging in an external foundry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this technology will allow the replacement
of existing discreet filters in cell phones and other mobile wireless devices
with the ability to access many different air interfaces with excellent radio
performance. This innovative technology will impact many industries that operate
on wireless technology. Also the product will be used in cell phones thus having
world wide impact.