* 0848479
* U.S.A. - Iceland International Research Planning Visit: Interactive Effects of Climate Warming and Nutrient Enrichment on Stream Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Alexander Huryn, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 04/30/2010
* USD 8,154.00

OISE 0848466&lt;br/&gt;Cross&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OISE
0848479&lt;br/&gt;Benstead&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this planning visit
researchers Wyatt F. Cross of Montana State University and Jonathan P. Benstead
from the University of Alabama will initiate an international stream ecosystem
project with partners, Gisli Gislason at the University of Iceland and Jon
Olafsson at the Institute of Freshwater Fisheries in Reykjavik. The U.S. team?s
strengths in quantitative food web analysis and ecological stoichiometry
complement the Icelandic partners? deep knowledge of steam and river fauna,
climate issues, and landscapes in Iceland. Their goal is to refine logistics and
develop plans for observing selected field sites in the unique geothermal
environments of Iceland for a three-year study of how temperature and nutrient
concentrations affect freshwater ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from
the intended long-term collaboration are expected to improve our fundamental
understanding of the complex and interactive effects of major drivers of
ecological change in mid-to-high latitude freshwater systems. If successful, we
should gain new, objective information about how physiological changes at the
organism level affect emergent community and ecosystem level properties. Results
may help inform policies and improve management of eutrophication, with
implications for the future provision of freshwater and societal use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research visit fulfills the program objective of
advancing basic knowledge of fresh water ecology by enabling experts in the
United States and Europe to share research resources and plan beneficial
projects in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts
include the training of U.S. graduate students by providing an early career
introduction to collaborative field work in Iceland, which is one of the few
places in the world where the components of this research are achievable within
a relatively small geographic area.