* 0848905
* Dynamics and Energetics of Viral DNA Packaging and Ejection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Douglas Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2013
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will study the
physical principles of viral genome packaging using phi29 as a model system. The
study will use previously developed technique based on optical tweezers for real
time visualization of viral packaging processes. The project will examine the
following effects on viral DNA packaging and ejection: (1) Screening of DNA by
polyamine ions: Host cell polyamines including putrescine2+, spermidine3+, and
spermine4+ are expected to substantially influence DNA packaging dynamics by
affecting DNA mechanics and electrostatics, packing forces, and motor function.
(2) Non-equilibrium dynamics: DNA packing forces will be investigated by
studying the time-dependence of the internal forces resulting from changes in
motor velocity induced by varying ATP concentration, and pauses in packaging
induced with non-hydrolyzable ATP analogs at various capsid filling levels.
Potential heterogeneity in packaging dynamics and force, as predicted in recent
theoretical simulations, will also be investigated with ensembles of single
molecule measurements. (3) Capsid shape: Different viruses have different capsid
shapes that may affect DNA packaging dynamics. (4) DNA binding proteins: The PI
will study the effect of protein "roadblocks" that interact with the DNA and
create an additional load on the packaging motor. Topics of broad interest in
physics and biology will be addressed, including polymer (DNA) conformation and
dynamics, molecular motor function, ionic screening, protein-DNA interactions,
and principles of viral assembly. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
supervised by PIs with varying backgrounds and the students will perform
research involving concepts and methods from the physical and biological
sciences. Undergraduates will participate in this research and new undergraduate
physics and biology course materials will be developed. Materials for K-12
science education will also be developed in collaboration with the R. H. Fleet
Science Museum in San Diego.