* 0848078
* Regulation of mRNA Stability by the Yeast Puf Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Wendy Olivas, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2013
* USD 460,976.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The long-term goal of
this research is to understand the molecular pathways that govern mRNA-specific
rates of degradation, a key step in the control of how much protein can be
produced from any one mRNA. mRNA molecules only exist for limited amounts of
time before they are targeted for degradation by specific cellular machinery.
Because the protein synthesis machinery can repeatedly translate a single mRNA
molecule to produce multiple proteins, the lifespan of an mRNA determines how
much protein will be produced from that mRNA. Decay rates of individual mRNAs in
eukaryotic cells can vary by more than two orders of magnitude, and modulation
of mRNA decay rates is an efficient method to rapidly alter protein expression
in response to environmental or intracellular changes. This regulation is often
mediated by interactions with elements in the 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of
mRNAs. Several types of RNA binding proteins are known to bind these 3' UTR
elements, yet little is known of the mechanisms by which the binding of such
proteins leads to functional changes in the behavior of the mRNAs. The Puf
protein family is a widely conserved group of eukaryotic RNA binding proteins
that control critical decisions in stem cell maintenance, cell development and
differentiation, neuronal plasticity and long-term memory by binding and
modulating the metabolism of target mRNAs. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
contains six Puf proteins, providing a good model system to study Puf protein
specificity and regulatory function. This research has already: 1) identified
several mRNA targets of Puf protein regulation, 2) established that Puf3p
mediates rapid mRNA decay by stimulating deadenylation and decapping, 3)
identified several mRNA decay factors that interact with Puf3p, and 4) provided
the first experimental evidence that Puf protein activity is dependent on growth
conditions. The main goal of this project is to analyze the mechanisms by which
the yeast Puf proteins differentially regulate the stability of their target
mRNAs in rapid response to changing environmental conditions. Based on
preliminary evidence, the hypothesis is that Puf protein activity is regulated
by a post-translational mechanism. The research objectives will be accomplished
using a combination of RNA decay analysis, co-immunoprecipitation studies, cell
microscopy, and mass spectrometry. This work will not only provide valuable
insight into the condition-specific regulation of Puf proteins and the
mechanisms by which Pufs influence mRNA stability, but should have a broad
impact on understanding the important developmental and neural requirements for
Pufs and 3' UTR control in other eukaryotes as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Funding for this project will not
only promote intellectual advancement, but will also support the Ph.D. training
and research of an African American student in the lab. Such training and
support will further her development into a role model for other under-
represented minorities in the molecular sciences, especially given that this
research will be performed at an urban campus with a higher than average
population of minority students. In addition, project funding will support the
training of thesis Master's students, non-thesis Master's students, and
undergraduate students. By introducing new techniques to the lab, including cell
microscopy and mass spectrometry, this project will also enhance the future
experimental capabilities and potential for this research program. Finally,
project support will enhance opportunities to engage diverse populations of high
school students from around the state in workshops and discussions to encourage
them to pursue careers in the sciences.