* 0848375
* Silver cluster emitters caged in DNA constructs
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Elisabeth Gwinn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2013
* USD 563,446.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry (ASC) program of the Division of Chemistry
will support the collaborative research program of Prof. Elisabeth Gwinn and
Prof. Deborah Fygenson of the University of California, Santa Barbara. Profs.
Gwinn and Fygenson and their students will study clusters composed of just a few
silver atoms that are stabilized within artificial, nanometer-scale DNA cages.
The goal of these studies is to use the exquisite structural control provided by
self-assembly of designed DNA strands to create tiny photon emitters with cage-
selected optical and chemical properties. Optical characterization at the single
molecule level, together with solution fluorescence, mass spectroscopy,
electrophoresis, and modeling will contribute to a fundamental understanding of
these fluorescent silver cluster-DNA molecules, which are poised for impact on
technology through future use in DNA-templated nanodevices and in probing the
structure of DNA constructs at scales below the resolution of existing
microscopies. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
interdisciplinary research project will be trained in a complementary suite of
advanced techniques that encompasses optics, chemistry, nanotechnology, and
biotechnology. The students will also be involved in Family Science Nights at
local public schools where they will use fun hands-on activities that tie to
their research to inspire K-12 students' interest in science.