* 0848997
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-Compact, Low-Cost, and Robust Volume Holographic Spectrometers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Chaoray Hsieh, ProSpect Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2012
* USD 637,850.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the
commercialization of a new class of ultra-compact, low-cost, robust, and
alignment insensitive spectrometer for diffuse source spectroscopy with lower
cost and considerably better overall performance compared to conventional slit-
based spectrometers. Intellectual merits: The spectrometers available in the
current market are based on core technologies invented around one hundred years
ago. The main problems of the traditional spectrometers are being bulky,
sensitive to input alignment, relatively expensive, and low optical throughput,
because narrow slits, lenses, high quality thin gratings, and the detector array
are required in the system. As the portability, cost, and sensitivity are top
concerns in recent biological and environmental sensing applications, a new
class of spectrometers that satisfy those needs is in high demand. The proposed
research is to commercialize an ultra-compact, low-cost, robust, and alignment
insensitive spectrometer, which is composed of only a volume hologram and a
detector array. The operation frequency range and the spectral bandwidth of the
proposed spectrometers cover the requirements of most practical applications.
The spectrometers can also be used to form special-purpose functional
spectrometers with any desired spectral transfer function.

If successful the proposed spectrometer will have a broad range of applications
in the fields of biochemistry, medicine, pharmaceuticals, industrial quality
assurance, homeland security, mineralogy, and environmental purposes.
Specifically, in the applications where the light source has a diffuse nature
(e.g., fluorescence spectroscopy) the developed spectrometer will show the best
sensitivity among all the existing technologies. The ultra-compact lightweight
nature of the proposed spectrometers makes them a perfect choice for handheld
sensing devices that are of high current demand in several fields mentioned
above. The entire US market volume that can be covered by this technology has
been $2.6B in 2005, with a prospected 7% growth rate through 2010. The use of
volume holograms (which are typically recorded in low-cost materials like
photopolymers) to replace multiple bulky optics (e.g., slit, collimating lens,
and Fourier transforming lens in the case of spectrometer) is an important
enabling technology that can impact several applications (e.g., imaging and
sensing) beyond the proposed functionalities.