* 0848474
* Project Science: A Program in Education and Training in Management of Big Science Projects
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Gary Sanders, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 144,000.00

August 14, 2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;Proposal: 0848474&lt;br/&gt;Title: Project Science: A Program in
Education and Training in Management of Big Science
Projects&lt;br/&gt;Institution: California Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Program: Elementary Particle Accelerator User Groups&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Sanders, Gary H.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient
management of large science facilities requires experience and skills not
usually found in the repertoire of research scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses the planning and definition of
educational programs for early-career scientists (undergraduate students through
postdoctoral fellows), to practicing mid-career researchers as they approach
leadership roles in project science settings or as they adapt to collaborating
in existing projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon the prior activity
"Project Science: A Program in Education and Training in Management of Big
Science Projects, the PI proposes to extend this research and workshop program
for up to two years while developing a follow-on proposal for a broader activity
combining these lessons learned workshops in the management of big science
projects, and the synthesis of the case studies into new insights and practices
in this field with a new activity that reaches out to the involved communities
through a monthly electronic newsletter, community based web presence and
electronic publishing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marvin
Goldberg&lt;br/&gt;Program Officer&lt;br/&gt;MPS/PHY/EPP&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;