* 0848014
* REU Site: Sensor Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 04/30/2013
* USD 320,000.00

This three-year REU site program at the University of Maine will engage eight
undergraduates per year in hands-on research experiences in sensor science and
engineering. The REU program will be integrated with the PIs' Graduate Teaching
Fellows in K-12 Education (GK-12) and Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
programs. REU participants will have the opportunity to interact with faculty
research mentors, graduate students, post-docs, technicians, visiting
scientists, and middle and high school teachers. REU students, GK-12 fellows,
IGERT fellows, and RET participants will participate in field trips to Maine
companies that perform sensor research such as The Jackson Laboratory and
Spectral Solutions. They will also participate in weekly seminars in the area of
sensors given by invited speakers, faculty research mentors, graduate students,
and visiting scientists. Weekend recreational activities will be an integral
part of the program and will enhance the REU students' sense of community and
improve their research group dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
research experience, REU students will participate in two complementary courses,
INT 398 Undergraduate Research Participation and ECE 465 Introduction to
Sensors. Each student will receive three credits for each course. At the end of
the research experience, students will present their research in conference
format and submit a written report or co-author paper(s) for publication in
peer-reviewed journals and/or symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts
will be targeted to women and minorities and students at non-PhD granting
institutions. Research results will be disseminated through campus presentations
and more broadly through professional journals and symposia. Society will
benefit as undergraduates, as a result of their participation in their research
experiences, choose to continue in graduate school or to excel in
technologically and scientifically challenging careers that advance such areas
as homeland security, food safety, transportation, communications, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;