* 0848265
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Electrostatic Interactions and Ordering in Highly Charged Colloidal Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Sanford Asher, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2013
* USD 750,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
(ASC) program of the Division of Chemistry supports the research program of
Professor Sanford A. Asher and Professor Rob Coalson of the University of
Pittsburgh. Prof. Asher's group is experimentally investigating and the Coalson
group is theoretically investigating how electrostatic interactions determine
the self assembly and structural ordering of Crystalline Colloidal Arrays (CCA)
which form photonic crystal materials. The project will investigate the nature
of electrostatic interactions in highly concentrated, low salt suspensions of
highly charged, monodisperse colloidal particles. The experimental part of the
project aims at unveiling the form of the fundamental electrostatic interactions
by direct measurements of electrostatic interactions using Colloidal Probe
Atomic Force Microscopy on concentrated, highly charged colloidal particle
dispersions. This work examines the charge induced self-assembly of these
particles into an fcc CCA array by monitoring light diffraction from the CCA.
These experimental results will be rationalized by theoretical calculations that
model colloidal particle interactions in high concentration, highly charged
particle dispersions. This project will lead to a fundamental understanding of
electrostatic interactions in strongly interacting colloids and macromolecules.
These interactions are ubiquitous in biological and material systems. Moreover,
an increased understanding will enable advances in nanoscience and
nanotechnology, especially in the bottom-up fabrication of photonic crystal
materials through charge induced self-assembly. The graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers who work on this project will be trained to become
innovative researchers and leaders in academic science, government research
laboratories and in industry. Through this research project, Prof. Asher and
Prof. Coalson will provide research training for undergraduate students as well
as enrichment opportunities for students of all levels in the greater Pittsburgh
community.