* 0848200
* Analysis of Predictability of Convective Initiation and Morphological Evolution Using Near-Cloud Permitting Grid Spacing Models
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Moti Segal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 06/30/2013
* USD 455,862.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate computer-based numerical
simulations of the initiation and morphological evolution of mesoscale
convective systems (MCSs), which embody lines and/or clusters of thunderstorms
and attendant lighter precipitation accounting for the bulk of growing-season
rainfall over the midwestern U.S., are important for forecasts of both
quantitative precipitation amounts and severe weather risks. Increased
computational speed has allowed operational model grid-mesh spacing to extend to
scales capable of resolving individual cloud features within these storm
systems. Even so, the initiation of these clouds occurs on spatial scales so
small (and is moreover sufficiently dependant on imperfectly-measured initial
atmospheric conditions at these fine scales) as to defy proper representation in
these models. Subsequent modeled evolution of the intensity and horizontal
patterning of larger mature thunderstorm elements may be inaccurately portrayed
for similar reasons, and is further impacted by deficiencies in cloud
microphysical schemes that in-turn influence simulated cold pools/gust fronts
and resultant low-level cloud forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
exploit an extensive archive of observed and simulated MCS events, including
observations from the IHOP and BAMEX field experiments and NOAA Hazardous
Weather Testbed project, to accomplish three primary objectives: (1) Complete
detailed analyses of archived simulations and corresponding observations of
convective initiation and MCS evolution to identify key processes controlling
these attributes; (2) perform systematic tests to determine sensitivity of such
simulations to both representations of cloud microphysical processes and novel
parameterization methods appropriate to fine-mesh scales characteristic of
state-of-the-art atmospheric models; and (3) develop methods for improved QPF
(Quantitative Precipitation Forecast) guidance making use of entity-based
verification techniques and ensembles of numerical simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research rests in achieving
a fuller and more accurate understanding of numerical simulation dependencies on
complex relationships between model resolution and those specific
parameterization schemes being employed, which in some cases trace back to far-
coarser models developed a decade or more ago. Broader impacts will emerge
through support of the education of several graduate students, through inclusion
of emerging research themes in classroom and student project-oriented
undergraduate studies, via interactions with National Weather Service
forecasters and public media interviews, and through contributions to improved
methodologies for forecasts of quantitative precipitation amounts/timing and
severe weather impacting the public.