* 0848017
* Exploring the Photobehavior of Organic Molecules in Restricted Spaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2014
* USD 770,000.00

With support from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor V. Ramamurthy
of the University of Miami will focus on the supramolecular photochemistry of a
special class of supermolecules namely guest@host complexes. In the context of
excited state chemistry, of the various organic hosts thus far examined, the
octa acid (OA), a synthetic cavitand host, which forms a capsular structure that
shields the hydrophobic guest organic molecule from the aqueous exterior, shows
considerable potential. To establish OA as a useful reaction medium, the PI
proposes to carry out experiments that seek answers to questions on the
following topics: (a) Features controlling the stoichiometry of guest-to-OA
complexes in water, (b) The dynamics of the OA capsule, (c) Controlled opening
of the capsule, (d) The intra-capsular dynamics of the guest molecules, (e)
Possible communication (electron, energy, and spin transfer) between
encapsulated guest and free molecules present in water, (f) Selective
orientation and conformational pre-organization of the guest within the OA
capsule, (g) Influence products distribution through controlling the free space
within the capsule. Topics (a) to (g) relate to the understanding of OA as a
reaction medium and associated dynamics of the guest@host complex while (h) and
(i) deal directly with the PI's primary interest of controlling photoreactions
in restricted spaces. The long-range scientific goal is to develop, on the basis
of well-established rules of molecular organic photochemistry and supramolecular
chemistry, a model to predict the photobehavior of organic molecules in
restricted spaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research proposed by Professor
Ramamurthy will help train graduate students on several aspects of modern
organic chemistry, physical organic chemistry and photochemistry. In addition to
providing excellent training for the students associated with the project,
Professor Ramamurthy has long been involved in fostering international
collaborations, disseminating scientific information through edited books and
guest edited journal special issues (in addition to refereed publications),
giving invited talks at national, international conferences and universities and
organizing national and international scientific conferences. He also serves the
scientific community as a Senior Editor of Langmuir, an ACS journal. The PI has
used his expertise in photochemistry to collaborate on writing two textbooks,
(1) Principles of Modern Photochemistry: An Introduction and (2) Modern
Molecular Organic Photochemistry with N. J. Turro, and J. C. Scaiano. In
addition, the PI is currently developing a course titled "Being a Scientist"
that includes topics such as scientific temper, ethics in science, mentor-
student relationship, choosing scientific problems, writing, submitting and
reviewing journal articles and grant proposals, developing oral and written
communication skills, quality and quantity in scientific research, influence of
citation index and impact factor, and the role of a scientist in society.