* 0848410
* Nonpeptidic Alpha-Helix and Beta-Strand Mimetics
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Paramjit Arora, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2013
* USD 385,300.00

With support from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for this new
award, Professor Paramjit Arora, of the Department of Chemistry at New York
University, will provide synthetic mimics of protein subdomains that can
modulate the function of chosen proteins. Targets include nonpeptidic oligomers
that mimic alpha-helical and beta-strand conformations, contain chiral
backbones, and display protein-like functionality. The beta-strand mimics are
synthesized by replacing amide bonds in a peptide by triazole rings. The
potential of these resulting triazolamers as inhibitors of specific proteases
and protein-protein interactions will be evaluated. The principal investigator's
group will also prepare nonpeptidic helix mimetics composed of oxopiperazine
units. The oxopiperazine oligomers will be synthesized using standard procedures
from natural and nonnatural amino acids. They will determine the solution and
solid-state conformations of oligooxopiperizines and test their potential to
inhibit protein-protein interactions. NMR spectroscopy in conjunction with
molecular modeling will be used to elucidate structural features of these
nonpeptidic oligomers that display protein-like functionality.

With this award, Professor Arora will demonstrate chemical design principles and
synthetic organic methods to prepare new classes of biologically active
compounds. This approach will afford biomimetic oligomers that are anticipated
to become valuable reagents for the biomedical community. This work represents a
new direction in bioorganic chemistry, providing access to nonpeptidic oligomers
that assemble from amino acids while preserving the chiral backbone and side
chain functionality. Students engaged in this work will gain broad experience in
molecular design, conformational analysis, synthesis, and biochemistry. Members
of the principal investigator's research team include graduate and undergraduate
students, including members of the underrepresented groups. The PI's research
group is comprised of greater than 50% women and underrepresented minority
students, including minority high school students from New York City high
schools. The results of the proposed research will be disseminated through
traditional and web-based methods. Students trained on the project will go on to
careers in the pharmaceutical or biotechnology industry, or academia, and will
thus contribute to the US scientific endeavor and the economy. Professor Arora
will continue to engage educators that teach at predominantly minority
institutions by organizing workshops that discuss research and teaching advances
at the interface of chemistry and biology through New York University's Faculty
Resource Network (FRN). The FRN is a faculty development initiative whose
mission is to improve the quality of teaching and learning at its member and
affiliate institutions, a consortium of 13 historically black colleges and
universities in the South and 15 regional liberal arts colleges. Professor
Arora's workshop introduces educators at these institutions to contemporary
approaches in drug design, and highlights the fundamental role organic chemistry
plays in understanding the complexity of biological systems.