* 0848311
* RUI:   Cryptochrome Structure and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Margaret Ahmad, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2012
* USD 260,205.00

This project will investigate the mechanism of action of cryptochrome blue light
photoreceptors in plants. Cryptochromes can sense blue light because the
photoreceptor protein is bound to a light-absorbing pigment, flavin (FAD), which
undergoes a chemical reaction in response to light. Cryptochromes control how
plants grow and develop at many levels, including seed germination, vegetative
growth, flowering, and entrainment of the circadian clock. However, very little
is known concerning how the light signal is transmitted from the flavin to the
protein backbone, and from the protein to the biological target molecules in the
cell. The current research project will take a structure/function approach to
the question of cryptochrome photoreceptor function by first screening for novel
mutations in the cryptochrome protein. Once identified, the cryptochrome genes
will be isolated from mutant plants by PCR amplification and the mutations then
characterized by direct DNA sequencing. Mutant cryptochrome proteins containing
these mutations will then be expressed in a baculovirus expression system at
high levels and analyzed by biochemical and structural methods. It will be
possible in this way to identify which characteristics of the protein are
necessary for normal functioning and thereby better understand the molecular
mechanism whereby the light signal is transmitted to its target molecules. Part
of this work will be carried out during student summer research in a laboratory
at the University of Paris, France, where the required equipment for more
detailed structural studies is available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This research project is designed to provide a high quality research experience
for undergraduate students. The students will be introduced to an advanced
research environment and work directly with scientists. As this introduction is
occurring for students at a time when career decisions are being made, it is
hoped that the experience will encourage students to pursue graduate studies in
science, especially those who may not otherwise have considered research as a
career option. A further significant benefit of the current research program is
the opportunity provided for working and living in a foreign country during
summer study at the University of Paris, with resulting increase in maturity and
adaptability of participating students. Funds from this project will also be
used to improve the research infrastructure at Penn State Brandywine, providing
new equipment and facilities that will be made available to the teaching labs.
In this way the research program will improve the content and depth of the lab
courses that can be offered to all the students in the degree program. Finally,
cryptochrome blue light photoreceptors are found not only in plants, but also in
animals such as birds and mammals, and even in humans. There is a lively
interest in these receptors in animals since they are involved in the circadian
clock in mammals and may be involved in magnetic sensitivity in migratory birds.
Since all of the structure/function studies that are performed in this project
will equally shed light on how animal type cryptochromes function, the results
of this project should be a general understanding of how biological functions in
a diverse group of organisms can be controlled by a similar protein, even
perhaps adding insights into how birds migrate and on how jet lag works in
humans.