* 0848334
* Computer-Guided Molecular Design
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Dale Drueckhammer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 380,350.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professor Dale G. Drueckhammer at the SUNY Stony Brook whose research
will further develop and demonstrate a general computer-based method for
molecular design. The project is based on applications of the computer program
CAVEAT, which is a unique program that allows the search of electronic databases
for compounds having bonds that match a set of defined vectors. In continued
development of this methodology, one focus will be on the incorporation of
fluorescent groups into a glucose receptor designed using this approach to
achieve fluorescence-based sensing. A new application of the method will be the
design of novel peptide/protein receptors. These receptors will be based on the
display of a pair of arsenic functionalities on a scaffold structure designed
using CAVEAT such that they will form reversible covalent bonds with the thiol
groups of a pair of specifically positioned cysteine residues in an alpha-
helical peptide or protein. Another major application of this project will be
the development of a novel nucleic acid mimic, designed to exhibit high affinity
and selectivity in binding to a specific sequence of RNA. The design
incorporates a sequence of purine and pyrimidine bases each attached to a furan
moiety, with individual units connected via the furan rings by a linker
structure identified using CAVEAT. This design will demonstrate a fundamental
new concept into how to use CAVEAT-based design to display a regular repeating
array of functionality on an oligomeric structure, an idea that is expected to
have broader applications. The final proposed application is to explore a
dimeric iron-ligand complex designed to perform controlled oxidation reactions
with molecular oxygen as the sole oxidant. CAVEAT will be used to design a
structure to link the pair of ligands to facilitate the splitting of molecular
oxygen into a pair of reactive iron-oxygen species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research will be to provide training to students in
computer-based design methods and synthetic chemistry. In addition to PhD
students, the project will provide training to undergraduates, and students in a
combined BS/MS program. The design methods developed will be generally
applicable to a wide variety of problems and applications in chemistry and
related fields and may become a widely used approach to molecular design. The
work has special relevance to sensor development, which may have applications in
fields including medicine, the environment, defense, and homeland security. The
improved virtual molecular databases that Professor Drueckhammer continues to
develop, may bring their broad applicability to the attention of other
investigators to whom they will be made readily available upon
request.&lt;br/&gt;