* 0848693
* 1,2-Addition of C-H Bonds Across Metal-Heteroatom Bonds:  Study of Reactions Central to Hetero-Functionalization of C-H Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Thomas Gunnoe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 02/28/2013
* USD 375,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor T. Brent Gunnoe at the University of Virginia
to probe the activation of carbon-hydrogen bonds by transition metal complexes.
Formally anionic heteroatomic ligands coordinated to high d-electron count
transition metals exhibit reactivity patterns consistent with highly basic and
nucleophilic character. This feature can potentially be exploited to develop new
catalysts for C-H activation and functionalization, and the mechanistic studies
of the 1,2-addition of C-H bonds across metal-heteroatom bonds will provide
fundamental details that are key to the development of catalysts for hydrocarbon
functionalization. The strategy is to build multiple transition metal based
platforms upon which to study the C-H activation transformations in an effort to
develop an understanding of the impact of metal identity, oxidation state and
heteroatom ligand identity on the reaction rates and substrate selectivity. The
research program will provide a training ground for undergraduate and graduate
students in the areas of organometallic chemistry and development of homogeneous
catalysts. In addition, a portion of the proposed research is in collaboration
with a PI from a primarily undergraduate institution, thereby providing
undergraduates with an opportunity for a productive research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selective functionalization of hydrocarbons
is important to the commodity chemical sector, fine chemical synthesis and the
efficient utilization of fossil fuels as energy resources. New methods for
selective hetero-functionalization of hydrocarbons can provide important new
synthetic paradigms with broad impact.&lt;br/&gt;