* 0848131
* The geometry of partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Robert Bryant, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 354,413.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0604195 Principal Investigator: Robert L. Bryant

Bryant will apply techniques of exterior differential systems and differential
invariants to problems of current interest in geometry, economics, and physics.
In soliton flows, two problems will be studied: Characterizing the complete
Ricci solitons in terms of extra equations that they must satisfy, such as
having higher multiplicity of eigenvalues of the Ricci tensor or its
(symmetrized) covariant derivatives and exploring a flow for CR-nondegenerate
hypersurfaces in complex manifolds with trivialized canonical bundle. In minimal
submanifolds, Bryant will work on constructing and understanding calibrated
submanifolds in Riemannian manifolds of special holonomy. In almost-complex
geometry, Bryant will develop a theory of almost complex 6-manifolds by studying
the functionals on the space of almost complex structures on a given 6-manifold
and the `quasi-integrable' class of almost complex structures, which has many of
the good bundle-theoretic properties of the integrable case but is considerably
more flexible. It has a good theory of Hermitian-Yang-Mills connections, at
least locally, and one may hope to define, study, and apply the associated
moduli spaces. Bryant will also study the minimizing properties of pseudo-
holomorphic curves in almost complex manifolds. In Finsler geometry, Bryant will
develop the theory of Finsler manifolds with constant flag curvature,
constructing new examples, understanding the properties of their geodesic flows,
and pursuing relations with twistor theory and exotic holonomy. In smaller
projects, Bryant will continue to study the problem of Hessian representability
of metrics and its close relations with integrable systems and will also begin
developing and generalizing the convex Darboux theory introduced by Ekeland and
Nirenberg for applications to econometric models. (The methods of exterior
differential systems are particularly suited to this latter problem and Bryant
expects some interesting interaction with econometricians along the way.)

Bryant will continue to develop geometric approaches to problems arising in
analysis, physics, economics, and biology. Many of the important advances in the
use of mathematics in the sciences have depended on developing a geometric
understanding of those problems, i.e., an understanding that focusses on
intrinsic aspects that are not tied to arbitrarily chosen coordinates. (The most
famous example of this is Einstein's general theory of relativity, which he
found by re-interpreting gravitation as `curvature of space', rather than as a
force whose complicated expression in observer coordinates was largely
irrelevant. More recently, the development of string theory and M-theory has
also resulted in geometric formulations of physics.) Geometric formulations
often lead to degeneracies in the mathematics that can be treated by
differential systems and their invariants (nonstandard tools that Bryant and his
coworkers are systematically developing), and Bryant is exploring applications
of these ideas to new areas.

