* 0848811
* SBIR Phase II:   Compact THz-ABCD Spectrometer
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Brian Schulkin, Zomega Terahertz Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,035,000.00

This NSF Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to develop
a compact THz-ABCD (air-biased coherent- detection). spectrometer based on a new
technique for generating and measuring ultra-broadband THz waves utilizing a
laser induced plasma in ambient air and selected gases. A focused optical pulse
with >100 uJ pulse energy and <100 femtosecond pulse duration in gas creates a
plasma (ionized gas molecules), which produces very intense (>300 kV/cm),
highly-directional (<6 degree), and ultra-broadband (10% bandwidth from 0.1 to
10 THz) THz waves in the far field. Through the reciprocal process, air or
selected gases also serve as an ultra-broadband sensor of pulsed THz waves
through air-biased coherent- detection (ABCD).The region of the electromagnetic
spectrum from 0.3 to 10 THz (1 mm - 30 um in wavelength) is now a frontier area
for research in physics, chemistry, biology, materials science and medicine.
Recently, the observations of THz wave generation and detection in the laser
induced atmospheric plasma provide new method in remote sensing and
spectroscopy. The use of air as THz wave emitter and sensor provides
unprecedented bandwidth (spectral range of 0.1 to 30 THz), sensitivity
(heterodyne method), and spectral resolution (<MHz) which were previously
considered impossible to achieve simultaneously. In addition, this technique
produces THz electric field strengths approaching 1 MV/cm, unlocking the
potential for nonlinear THz spectroscopy previously inaccessible by conventional
optics lab facilities.

Recent advances in the use of air/gases to emit, control, enhance, and measure
broadband THz waves open up a range of research opportunities. Applications
including nondestructive testing, tomographic imaging, label-free genetic
analysis, cellular level imaging, explosives detection, and chemical/biological
sensing have thrust THz research, from relative obscurity, to new heights. The
proposed development of a compact THz ABCD spectrometer will provide a key
enabling technology for interdisciplinary research. In addition it will advance
numerous sensing and imaging concepts in the THz frequency range, with an
immediate impact on non-destructive spectroscopic analysis (eg: pharmaceutical
R&D, materials research), a near-term application (3 to 5 years) for homeland
security and a longer-term interest (5 to 10 years) in the biomedical sector. If
successful the outcome of this project will make significant contributions to
academic and governmental laboratory collaboration, student education, and
instrumentation development.