* 0848624
* Correlation of Molecular Architecture and Fluid Dynamic Properties within Solid-Fluid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Jeanne Pemberton, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2013
* USD 605,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program supports the research program of
Prof. Jeanne Pemberton at the University of Arizona. Prof. Pemberton and her
students aim to determine the interfacial molecular structure in solid-fluid
interfaces formed with simple and complex fluids and elucidate the dependence of
interfacial fluid dynamic properties on that molecular structure. Control of
solid-fluid interfaces necessitates development of an understanding of molecular
structure-function relationships that govern the static and dynamic properties
of these interfaces. Although the theoretical framework for interfacial fluid
dynamics is in hand and recent computational and theoretical efforts have
predicted interfacial fluid dynamic behavior in considerable detail,
experimental investigations in which interfacial molecular structure is defined
and correlated with interfacial dynamic properties are sparse. In this work, the
role of surface chemistry and morphology, and interfacial molecular organization
and structure in templating, unique interfacial fluid structure will be studied
using optical spectroscopies and correlated with interfacial dynamics. These
studies will also be extended to complex fluids, including polymers. Effects of
altered dynamic properties within the interface in both the lateral and vertical
directions will also be studied as will effects related to the entanglement of
molecules within the interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly
interdisciplinary effort serves as a fertile training ground for students who
will see the direct relevance of their chemical research in areas as diverse as
fluid physics, mechanical engineering, bioanalysis and biotechnology, and
environmental science. Results of this work will be broadly disseminated, both
orally and in writing, in venues frequented by these diverse communities. Since
this work lays the foundation for a deeper molecular understanding of fluid
properties, postdoctoral researchers and graduate students on this project will
spend at least one semester working with local high school chemistry teachers to
develop introductory modules on the molecular structure and dynamic properties
of fluids appropriate for the regular high school chemistry and high school
Advanced Placement chemistry levels.