* 0848256
* Collaborative Research: New Communication Infrastructures For Networked Coordinated Control
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Anna Scaglione, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2011
* USD 197,924.00

The focus of this project is integrated design and analysis of communication
networks in service of coordinated control of multi-vehicle systems. Consider a
set of vehicles, equipped with local controllers and wireless radios, that is
set to arrange itself, to stabilize, and to control its collective motion. To
achieve globally desirable formation behavior, the controller on a given vehicle
must respond to the motion and state of others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In fact,
there exists a complicated coupling among system components: network
architecture, communications protocols, and controller design. The integrated
design of these components is the objective of this project. The fundamental
challenge in designing networked control systems is that the tasks of
communication and control, in general, cannot be considered decoupled from each
other without loss of optimality. However, modular solutions can potentially
provide significant insights into the nature of efficient solutions. This
project addresses the problem of integrated communications and control from a
practically viable perspective by decomposing the problem into modular tasks.
The introduced degree of modularity, despite its sub-optimality, enables
practical and efficient solutions as well as insights into the inherent trade-
offs. Because the questions that arise lie at the intersection between
communications and controls research, the components of the project bring
together expertise in decentralized control, networking, and signal processing
through the following specific tasks: 1) Nonlinear coordinated control over
dynamic graphs, 2) Crosslayer optimization of wireless networks in service of
coordinated control, 3) Physical layer solutions to decentralized communication
and control, and 4) Experimental performance evaluation on a 3D autonomous
underwater vehicle test-bed at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;