* 0848511
* Resonance Raman Spectroscopy and Scanning Probe Microscopy of Light-Harvesting Chromophore Aggregates
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jeanne McHale, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2012
* USD 641,998.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program,
Professors Jeanne McHale and Ursula Mazur will perform spectroscopic and
scanning probe measurements to investigate the link between excited state
properties of light harvesting aggregates (LHAs) and their supramolecular
structures. Resonance Raman spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, and scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) will address the following questions: (1) How do
details of molecular structure (nonplanarity, presence of metal ions, charge,
etc.) influence LHA morphology (nanorods, nanorings, helices, etc.) on nano- and
meso-scopic length scales? (2) How do optical and electronic properties depend
on molecular and supramolecular structure? (3) For fractal aggregates, how are
the sub-units assembled and what is the nature of the electronic communication
between them? (4) What is the extent of structural heterogeneity in the ensemble
of LHAs and how is it reflected in the optical spectra? In this collaborative
research, the McHale lab will measure and analyze Raman excitation profiles of
LHAs to reveal excitonic coupling. The surface-enhanced resonance Raman signal
of LHAs on noble metals will be optimized in order to obtain Raman spectra of
individual LHAs. The Mazur lab will obtain high-resolution STM images of self-
assembled aggregates composed of molecules with varying degrees of nonplanarity
to probe its role in directing the formation of closed rings similar to those
found in photosynthetic organisms. In addition, they will use orbital mediated
tunneling spectroscopy to image the delocalized orbitals associated with
electron transport at molecular and submolecular resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The LHAs of interest in this work have
applications in molecular electronics, as sensors, and in solar energy
conversion. Fundamental studies of the link between aggregate morphology,
molecular structure, and optical and electronic properties of the assembly will
enable these properties to be tuned for a particular application, borrowing
ideas from nature where the structures of LHAs are optimized to collect and
funnel solar energy to the reaction center. In addition to training diverse
graduate and undergraduate students as they have in the past, the PI and co-PI
will use the proposed research as a vehicle for outreach to area Native American
and Hispanic students by participating in WSU's "Pumping up the Math and Science
Pipeline". This program engages high-risk high school students in research
projects in plant science and alternative energy.