* 0848560
* New Catalysts for Cis-Selective Metathesis: Agostic Interaction and Meso-N-Heterocyclic Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Steven Diver, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2012
* USD 405,000.00

This project will synthesize new catalysts for cis-selectivity in olefin
metathesis. Two new, unexplored approaches will be taken in this project: (1)
Use of agostic interactions in early transition metal Fischer carbene complexes
to guide selectivity in enyne cross metathesis. In particular, we intend to
improve the catalyst stability building upon what we have learned previously in
the Diver group while studying enyne metathesis. (2) Building on N-heterocyclic
carbene design we will construct an aromatic 'wall' on one side of meso-N-
heterocyclic carbenes to control catalyst selectivity in ruthenium carbenes.
Currently, the olefin metathesis provides one of the most effective methods for
catalytic carbon-carbon double bond construction, and has been widely used by
chemists in many fields. Despite the huge success of metathesis chemistry, the
major limitation is control of double bond geometry: cis-double bonds cannot be
made selectively. This project is focused on this cis-selectivity problem
through catalyst development.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Steven T. Diver of the Department of Chemistry at the
State University of New York-Buffalo. Professor Steven Diver's research efforts
center on the development of new metathesis methods for the synthesis of rings,
the study of the catalytic mechanism of enyne metathesis and the development of
new carbene catalysts. This three-pronged effort has impacted our understanding
of fundamental aspects of metal carbene reactivity and led to improvements in
selectivity in certain synthetic applications. Development of new carbene
catalysts is expected to enhance cis-selectivity and lead to a better
understanding of which factors are critical to selectivity. Metathesis methods
are highly efficient, using small amounts of ruthenium carbene catalysts (known
as the Grubbs carbenes) and are widely applicable to the synthesis of small
molecules (such as pharmaceuticals) and polymeric structures (such as
nanomaterials). Successful development of new catalysts will have an impact on
synthesis in the pharmaceutical sector, leading to improved efficiency in drug
production.