* 0848574
* Local molecular field simulations and theory for ions, polyelectrolytes, and water
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John Weeks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2013
* USD 370,104.00

John Weeks of the University of Maryland is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Program to extend the Local Molecular Field (LMF)
method in new directions and to apply the existing LMF theory to help resolve
important conceptual issues involving water and polyelectrolytes. Weeks is 1)
using LMF theory to develop a new and very general theory of hydrophobic and
hydrophilic interactions in water; 2) developing new and efficient ways of
solving the self-consistent LMF equations; and 3) connecting the LMF picture to
other important new theoretical developments with suggestive common features. In
addition, Weeks and coworkers are extending LMF theory in fundamentally new
directions involving dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because LMF is simple,
physically motivated, and widely applicable, it has an impact on how scientists
working in many different areas think qualitatively about charged (ionic)
systems. Longer term, there are significant biological and technological
implications of this research that benefit society as a whole. Nonuniform ion
distributions around solutes and in membranes and ion channels play a key role
in the stability of colloidal suspensions and in many fundamental biological
processes. Ions and ion channels are essential for cellular metabolism. Ionic
liquids are being used as alternative nonvolatile and nonflammable solvents with
tunable properties for use in manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;