* 0848116
* EAR-PF: Experimental Investigation of the kinetics and mechanics of reaction-induced strain localization
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Eric Goergen, Goergen                 Eric           T
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2011
* USD 160,000.00

Dr. Eric Goergen is awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to
develop an integrated program of research and education at Brown University. The
goal of this project is focused on exploring the kinetic driving forces and
mechanistic interactions fundamental to the development of reaction-induced
strain localization in rocks. This project aims to investigate simultaneous
reaction and deformation processes through a series of deformation experiments
carried out on rocks of lherzolite bulk composition. These experiments are
designed to explore strain localization through three approaches: 1)
investigating the known positive correlation between reaction rate and strain
rate; 2) characterizing the time dependent evolution of microstructures
associated with reaction-induced strain localization through a series of
experiments carried out to increasing amounts of finite strain; and 3)
investigating the effect of bulk composition on the progress of reaction and
localization by varying modal amounts of phases present in starting materials.
Experiments will be analyzed by focusing on the microstructural evolution
through chemical and crystallographic analysis to develop models of the kinetic
and mechanic history within and between experiments. In addition, the choice of
the lherzolite chemical system and pressure-temperatures for these experiments
will also provide fundamental rheologic data on the upper mantle in the context
of evolving bulk composition and phase assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project also aims to incorporate a strong educational component through the
integration of undergraduate research. Dr. Goergen has developed two independent
projects that are appropriate for the undergraduate level and will also
contribute strongly to the research objectives stated above. These projects will
both further the intellectual development of young geoscientists by laying a
strong foundation in sound research as well as, further the professional
development of Dr. Goergen by gaining necessary experience in the integration
research and teaching through the advising of undergraduate theses.