* 0848106
* Contextual effects in primary visual cortex: pathways and mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Alessandra Angelucci, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Cropper
* 02/29/2012
* USD 360,040.00

An important issue in visual neuroscience is to understand how neural networks
(or circuits of neurons, i.e. brain cells) in the visual cerebral cortex
determine neuronal responses to visual objects and visual
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to identify the
circuitry and mechanisms for surround modulation in visual cortex. Surround
modulation is the ability of visual cortical neurons to adjust their responses
to an object (e.g. a vertically-oriented bar) depending on the visual context
within which it is presented (e.g. a background of many vertical or horizontal
bars). This phenomenon is thought to underlie ability to perceive objects in
cluttered scenes. For example, a background of vertical bars suppresses the
response to the single vertical bar, making it perceptually invisible. Instead,
a background of horizontal bars increases the response to the vertical bar,
making it perceptually to stand out from the background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
combination of computational modeling and experimental studies will be used to
identify the circuitry and mechanisms for surround modulation. Specifically, to
gain insights into the underlying circuitry, the spatial, temporal and tuning
properties of surround modulation will be studied using visual stimuli designed
to probe the underlying pathways. These data will be used to generate
computational models of visual cortical circuitry and function. Modeling will be
used to understand the mechanisms generating surround modulation and its role in
visual perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will uncover the neural
substrates for higher visual cortical processing and perception. The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed work will create novel training
opportunities for graduate students at the University of Utah. This project will
support the training of several graduate students, and expose to the field of
neuroscience undergraduate students from the field of bioengineering.