* 0848962
* SBIR Phase II:  Scalable Game Design: Broadening Computer Science Participation with Low-Threshold, High-Ceiling Design Environments
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Alexander Repenning, AGENTSHEETS INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 637,015.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build a
Scalable Game Design tool and curriculum, with the goal of increasing the
participation of students in Computer Science (CS). K-12 computer education
fails to attract the necessary number of students to CS - especially at the
middle school level, where students make critical career decisions by judging
their own aptitudes towards math and science. This is a serious problem because,
despite the growing need for IT workers, enrollment in undergraduate CS programs
is dropping at alarming rates. Scalable Game Design provides an ideal balance
between motivational and academic concerns of CS. This approach is based on the
existing Fluency with Information Technology framework recommended by the
National Academies of Sciences and will be aligned with the emerging National IT
education standards (ISTE NETS). This project will explore Scalable Game Design
by building a low-threshold, high-ceiling design tool, called AgentCubes,
featuring Incremental 3D modeling, animation, programming, and visualization.
The project will incorporate the tool into a 3D Gamelet Design curriculum to
provide an attractive route to the effective design, development, and deployment
of an exceptionally large spectrum of games - ranging from simple 2D Frogger-
like games to 3D Sims-type games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology
has a high potential to increase the number of K-12 students interested in
Computer Science (CS), which in turn should result in larger enrollments at the
university level. Without stronger CS enrollments the US cannot maintain an
internationally competitive IT workforce. A less programming-focused, more
design-based IT curriculum is likely to increase the participation of women and
minorities. Initial results from our feasibility study indicate that Incremental
3D approaches work across ethnicity and gender. The proposed 3-stage classroom
integration strategy is based on a pipeline of required, elective, and
transitional modules that introduce students to making simple games, move to
more advanced games and computational science applications, and transition to
traditional programming models. This strategy maximizes the exposure of public
schools students in general, and women and minorities in particular, to computer
science because all students will at least take the required one-week module.
Furthermore, as a general end-user tool to create interactive 3D applications,
the proposed technology will be useful beyond educational game design. Potential
applications include computational science simulations, computational thinking
tools and serious games with potential users such as university students,
scientists, and engineers.