* 0848911
* Professional Development Fellowship: Ethics and Values of Ecosystem Restoration
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Alan Rabideau, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 90,072.00

This project funded by the Science, Technology & Society program supports a
professional development fellowship for an environmental engineer to study with
an environmental ethicist. Modern environmental problems are fundamentally
different from the historical concerns of environmental engineers, including the
ubiquity of "wicked" problems that defy the application of traditional
engineering tools. This reality is evident in the difficulty experienced by
engineers in applying cost-benefit analysis and risk analysis to problems with
ecological components, a difficulty that will only intensify with the emergence
of global climate change as the defining environmental problem that shapes and
influences a range of other environmental problems. These trends require that
engineers engage in interdisciplinary collaborations with scholars from other
disciplines. This fellowship provides an opportunity for an engineer to become
immersed in philosophical literature relevant to the topics of environmental and
ecological restoration.

The fellowship provides for 1-year of leave from the University at Buffalo to
relocate to the Washington DC area to study and conduct research under the
direction of Dr. Andrew Light at George Mason University. Light, a recognized
leader in the field of environmental ethics, has written extensively on the
ethics of ecological restoration. Specific fellowship objectives include: (1)
Develop a deeper appreciation for and understanding of the field of
environmental ethics with a focus on how this form of applied philosophy can
contribute to the resolution of modern environmental problems, particularly the
restoration of the Great Lakes ecosystems. (2) Utilize the fellowship experience
to enhance contributions to the development and management of interdisciplinary
environmental programs at the University at Buffalo. (3) Contribute to the
fields of environmental ethics and environmental engineering by developing two
collaborative research papers. (4) Develop a meaningful contribution to the
public discourse surrounding national efforts to restore the Great Lakes.