* 0848914
* Student Travel Support to Sensys 2008
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2008,09/30/2009
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 09/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

To support the funding for travel of eligible graduate students from US
institutions of higher learning to the 6th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked
Sensor Systems (SenSys 2008). Grant recipients will be required to attend the
conference and participate in a bird-of-a-feather session to discuss their
experience. The goal of the grants is to encourage research interest and
involvement of students who are not well-funded, under-represented, or otherwise
not likely to be able to attend high-profile conferences in the field. By
financially facilitating attendance and generating discussion the grant will
encourage such students to become active in the latest research directions in
this important field. The Sensys conference will take place in Raleigh, NC, in
November 2008. Sensys is a highly selective, single-track forum for the
presentation of research results on systems issues in the area of embedded,
networked sensors. It provides an ideal venue to address the resear ch
challenges facing the design, deployment, use, and fundamental limits of these
systems. Sensor networks require contributions from many fields, from wireless
communication and networking, embedded systems and hardware, distributed
systems, data management, and applications, so we welcome cross-disciplinary
work. The author of this proposal is the General Chair of the conference.

To interest young researches in the field of networking technology and systems,
this proposal is to create a number of travel grants for student travel to
Sensys. Grant recipients will be required to attend the conference and discuss
this experience in a special session. The purpose is to encourage under-
represented and under-funded students to become more actively engaged in
research of interest to networking technology. An announcement to that effect
will be made at the conference web page with an acknowledgement to NSF as the
sponsor of the student travel grants. The proposal is to create 25 NSF-sponsored
student travel grants of approximately $600 each, for a total of $15,000. This
amount is payable as registration fees to cover participation cost. Eligibility
criteria, listed in the project description, will be announced and a procedure
will be put in place to select the most appropriate applicants in accordance
with these criteria.