* 0848155
* EAR-PF: Investigating the Role of Changing Substrates in the Ordovician Radiation: Great Basin, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Katherine Marenco, Marenco                 Katherine      N
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2012
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Katherine Marenco is awarded an NSF
Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and
education at Bryn Mawr College in collaboration with scientists from the
University of California - Riverside. The focus of this project will be
exploring the relationship that development of hard marine substrates had in the
evolution and distribution of hard-substrate-attaching fauna. The hard
substrates consist of sediment trapped in shell beds, sponge-algal mud mounds,
and patch reefs. Ordovician (490-443 Ma) marine deposits in California, Utah,
and Nevada will be measured and sampled to: (1) describe physical
characteristics of the sedimentary units at each locality and determine their
relative age based on fossil content; (2) quantify the environmental
distribution and abundance of hard substrates; (3) examine spatial and temporal
distribution of different hard-substrate-attaching species to correlate with
paleoecological indicators and sediment composition; (4) build diagrams that
combine distribution of hard-attaching fauna and hard substrates in different
environments and through time. Data from this project will be made available to
the scientific community via the Paleobiology Database. The education plan
consists of developing of museum exhibits on fundamental concepts of
paleontology and reconstructions of the Ordovician world. In addition,
undergraduate students will have the opportunity of being engage in field and
laboratory aspects of the research.