* 0848285
* SBIR Phase II:   A New Class of Fast Fourier Transforms
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* J Greg Nash, Centar
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 599,184.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is directed at
development of a high performance, programmable fast Fourier transform (FFT)
circuit for use in embedded signal processing integrated circuits. Over the last
40 years the technology for executing parallel FFT implementations has remained
relatively unchanged, being based essentially on different permutations of the
signal flow graph and mappings thereof. Performance improvements are now largely
achieved by shrinking circuit geometries according to Moore's Law. Because of
the limits imposed by physics of integrated circuit fabrication, it is expected
that continued improvement in signal processing will only be achieved with more
efficient algorithmic implementations in combination with advanced integrated
circuit technologies. This proposal focusses on a radically different
architecture for parallel FFT circuits based on a new matrix formulation of the
discrete Fourier transform (DFT) to achieve exactly this goal. The specific
advantages of this new formulation include: 1) logic and memory resource
requirements are reduced; 2) less power is consumed; 3) significant added
functionality is accrued; and 4) design, test, and maintenance efforts are
diminished because the circuits are simple, locally connected and structured.
The outcomes of this project is a commercial quality FFT circuit based on the
feasibility prototypes developed during SBIR Phase I.

The DFT sub-system is a critical and important component of large number of
real-time communications, radar, medical, acoustics, navigation, surveillance,
remote sensing, and robotic inspection applications and is arguably the most
prominent of all signal processing algorithms. Consequently, the availability of
more functional, efficient, and higher performance FFTs will significantly
improve the efficacy of a host of electronic products. The benefits of this new
FFT technology would be best suited to mobile wireless devices, the largest and
fastest growing market for electronic products, because future 4G wireless
protocols will be based on orthogonal frequency division multiplexing, which is
a scheme that makes use of the FFT. Consequently, most wireless devices of the
future will use embedded FFT circuitry. However, the computational demands to
support 4G communication requirements will increase by a factor of ~10 compared
to today's wireless mobile devices. Therefore, more efficient integrated circuit
implementations of FFTs will be required to continue to keep the cost and power
usage of mobile appliances low.