* 0848016
* SGER:  A Short-term Site Investigation of the 2008 Midwest Floods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* James Dietz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract A Short-term Site Investigation of the 2008 Midwest Floods Recent
floods in the Midwest have caused widespread damage in cities and towns in Iowa,
Illinois, Missouri, and Indiana. This disaster has killed 24 people and injured
another 150. Experts say that the fundamental reason for the widespread damage
was infrastructure failures. Collapse of a critical infrastructure severely
affects the associated industries and communities that rely on it. Therefore,
disaster impact data should be collected and analyzed to determine vulnerable
infrastructure and its impact on industries and communities. Such analysis would
lead to better protection and support for associated communities and industrial
services during the occurrence of disasters such as floods, hurricanes,
tornadoes, and earthquakes. Since such data is ephemeral and vanishes with time,
it is important to collect the data as soon as possible after the occurrence of
disasters. Therefore, the objective of this short-term exploratory research is
to conduct in-depth case studies in the flood-affected regions in the Midwest to
obtain the ephemeral data with respect to the affected infrastructure and
related industries and communities. Personal interviews and questionnaire
surveys would be conducted to obtain such data from affected communities,
industries, and responsible public agencies. Data would include accurate
locations and circumstances of damaged infrastructure, the level of damage, and
duration of service failure right after the occurrence of a natural disaster and
its impact on the functions of affected industries and communities. This data
would be analyzed in terms of social, economic, and technical impacts of floods
on the affected industries and communities. The analysis of the data would
enhance understanding of inter-relationship between infrastructure, industries,
and communities in the event of natural disasters. Through this research, the
methodology of disaster impact analysis and mitigation will be improved and the
disaster-related preparedness of governmental and industrial agencies will be
enhanced. This research will have significant impact on the industries and
communities that are prone to the impact of natural disasters by improving the
understanding of their vulnerability under such calamities with respect to their
critical infrastructure. The case studies conducted through this research would
be an effective tool for graduate as well as undergraduate students to
understand the role played by infrastructure in supporting our industries and
communities. The results of this research will help public agencies, industries,
and communities to better prepare natural disaster mitigation strategies as well
as provide an effective tool to handle the disaster-related resources.