* 0848943
* STTR Phase II:  Monolithic Multiwavelength Blue-to-IR LED for Biomedical Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Robert Kolbas, Valencell Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 1,031,972.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project, in
collaboration with North Carolina State University, will develop and validate an
innovative, mobile, multiwavelength pulse oximetry module for noninvasive health
monitoring of various blood metabolites simultaneously in real time. At the
heart of this pulse oximetry module will be a novel multiwavelength emitter
having independent control of up to nine spectrally narrow wavelengths, ranging
from blue to mid-IR, emitting from a single 1 mm2 LED die. In contrast with
traditional dual-wavelength pulse oximetry, which measures oxygen saturation in
the blood, the proposed multiwavelength LED will enable real-time analysis
several additional metabolites critical to health monitoring via the same
noninvasive paradigm. Furthermore, the individually controlled self-aligned
wavelengths enable superior motion artifact cancellation, which is essential for
eHealth and mobile fitness applications. The key objectives of this feasibility
study are to: Demonstrate luminescent films with peak emissions from 400-1100 nm
Integrate these films into a compact multiwavelength pulse oximetry module
Optimize novel pulsing algorithms for multiwavelength pulse oximetry Validate
the mobile multiwavelength pulse oximetry module in a lab
setting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The medical impact of dual-wavelength
pulse oximetry, in both saving lives and reducing healthcare costs, has
encouraged the development of broader platforms using additional optical
wavelengths. Incorporating 3 or more independently controlled wavelengths has
been shown to enable the real-time monitoring of multiple health factors while
further reducing readout errors ? thus saving more lives. Beyond blood oxygen
monitoring, a real-time noninvasive assessment of renal and hepatic health can
be realized by integrating several wavelengths in the same clinically accepted
pulse oximetry paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;Though multispectral pulse oximetry systems
incorporating several optical sources have been successfully demonstrated by
physicians and industry leaders, incorporating multiple LEDs (made from
dissimilar semiconductors) has led to costly reliability errors and even product
recalls. If successful the proposed mobile, multiwavelength single-die approach
surmounts these limitations by providing independent control of several
wavelengths from a single, self-aligned, compact LED. Integrating these
advanced, cost-effective optical sources into traditional pulse oximetry opens
up new markets in noninvasive metabolic monitoring for clinical research,
paramedics, physical therapists, drug discovery, consumer eHealth markets, and
home healthcare. As a spectroscopic source, other applications include air-
quality/pollution monitoring and agricultural/industrial controls. &lt;br/&gt;