* 0848913
* SBIR Phase II:   Wireless Healthcare Disposables
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Surendar Magar, HMicro, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
further validate a groundbreaking wireless semiconductor platform that enables
disposable, body-worn, physiological monitoring wireless sensors (wireless
disposables) for a wide range of applications in healthcare and other
industries. The company's chips are combined with today's body sensors such as
electrocardiogram (ECG), Saturation of Peripheral Oxygen (SpO2), and blood
pressure, to produce wireless disposables for continuous monitoring. For mass
deployment, wireless disposables must displace today's wired sensors, therefore
must have equally low cost, similar reliability, and days of operating life for
a single use. Conventional radios are too unreliable, too power hungry and cause
high interference to meet this challenge. The company is creating a single chip
solution by combining radio with sensor functions providing a gain of 50X over
conventional radio based solutions in terms of low power, low cost and wire-like
reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eliminating the wires connecting a
person's body to a patient monitor long held as impossible to replace could be
possible with the proposed solution. Healthcare markets, the initial focus of
the company (dominated by hospital use), represent more than a $2B market in
disposables. The wireless disposables will have a broad global impact by
contributing to cost effective, high quality care in hospitals and other care
settings. In hospitals, wireless disposables can eliminate reusable monitoring
wires, products which have been demonstrated to carry drug resistant pathogens
in up to 75% of cases. Wireless disposables are also aligned with a future
vision of highly automated institutions that support a more natural workflow.
Outside the hospital, wireless disposables allow remote and mobile monitoring of
people with chronic diseases, enabling early interventions, an important goal in
maintaining health and lowering costs. Wireless disposables will help solve the
global healthcare crisis, with US costs over $1.5 trillion and rising rapidly as
78 million baby boomers near retirement.