* 0848703
* Extracellular enzymes in aggregates and contributions of free enzymes to hydrolytic activities: Consequences for organic mater remineralizations in marine systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Carol Arnosti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2013
* USD 571,035.00

Aggregates play a central role in organic matter dynamics in the ocean,
harboring diverse communities of microorganisms that mediate the transformations
and transport of colloidal, particulate, and dissolved organic matter. Because
these aggregates can be hot spots of carbon remineralization, microbial dynamics
in aggregates have been a focus of intense investigation. High rates of
enzymatic activities have been measured in aggregates, but only a limited range
of substrate proxies have been used to assess these activities. The structural
specificities of microbial extracellular enzymes are critical, however, since
they determine the nature of organic macromolecules that can be metabolized by
heterotrophic communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will probe the enzymatic
capabilities of aggregate-associated microbial communities and compare them with
non-aggregate associated communities using phytoplankton extracts, dissolved
organic carbon, and polysaccharides as substrates. The composition of the
microbial communities will be compared in parallel to determine whether
differences in the spectrum of enzyme activities are related to compositional
differences in the active microbial communities. Since organic aggregates
particularly as components of sinking organic matter, in the nepheloid layer, or
resuspended from surface sediments often include mineral particles with
associated organic matter, they will investigate the extent to which surface-
associated organic matter can be hydrolyzed by aggregate-associated microbial
communities. Preliminary investigations further suggest that specific enzymes
are released into the water column while other enzymes remain associated with
cells and/or aggregates, so they will measure the activities as well as the
structural specificities of free enzymes in aggregate-free samples. Models
suggest that active release of free enzymes should occur when microorganisms
receive a reasonable return. The investigators will assess factors affecting
enzyme lifetimes, critical experimental data that could be used to test
conflicting model predictions about microbial extracellular enzymes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will contribute to teaching
and learning, with two undergraduates, a graduate student, and a postdoc as
integral members of the research team. Results of the project will be presented
at national meetings and will be published in the scientific literature. Results
of this project will be incorporated into classes the PI teaches at both
graduate and undergraduate levels. Two of the current undergraduate research
assistants are women.