* 0848093
* Workshop on Energy Sustainability
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Brad McMillan, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2009
* USD 5,000.00

The Institute for Principled Leadership in Public Service at Bradley University,
in collaboration with Peoria NEXT, the Dirksen Congressional Center, and the
Bipartisan Public Center sponsored a national Workshop on Energy Sustainablity.
This workshop involved both natural and social scientists.

The workshop has one goal and two objectives. The goal is to significantly
diminish the United States' dependency on foreign oil through the recommendation
of a more throughtful, comprehensive national energy strategy that takes into
account solutions developed by both natural and social scientists. The first
objective focuses on the research and development of existing and emerging
energy resources and technologies. This includes a consideration of the use of
biofuels and the impact these have food production. The second objective focuses
on public policy changes needed at the national level to expeditiously advance
these energy resources and technologies.

These objectives were accomplished through presentations, panel discussions, and
question and answer sessions involving local, national, and international
speakers and presenters in the fields of energy, agriculture, and public policy.

NSF support has enabled 50 Bradley undergraduates to attend this workshop. These
students have seen first hand how natural scientists and social scientists are
needed to addressed these complicated problems.