* 0848157
* Dissecting Recruitment of Actin into the Contractile Ring
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Dahong Zhang, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 03/31/2013
* USD 220,000.00

Scientific Research: Cytokinesis in animal cells is brought about by assembly of
an actomyosin contractile ring that constricts the cell around the spindle
equator. The molecular basis underlying the organization and constriction of the
contractile ring is well documented, yet the mechanics of how actin filaments
redistribute and assemble into the ring remain poorly understood. This project
aims to elucidate the mechanics of contractile ring assembly by learning how
microtubules interact with actin filaments and how the filaments incorporate
into the ring. Knowledge gained from this project can be applied to analogous
cellular processes, such as polarized growth and wound healing of a single cell.
The working model is as follows. During early anaphase, dynamic astral
microtubules exclude actin filaments from the poles, ultimately resulting in
actin accumulation at the equatorial cortex. Meanwhile, at the plus ends of the
relatively stable central-spindle microtubules, actin filaments are assembled de
novo, and delivered to the equatorial cortex by laterally splaying microtubule
bundles. There they coalesce with the actin excluded from the polar cortex to
assemble the contractile ring. Based on this Microtubule Induction model, the
project aims to dissect the mechanics of microtubule-mediated transport of
preexisting actin filaments. Exclusion of these filaments from the poles by
microtubules may occur via two distinct mechanisms. If actin filaments are
driven towards the equatorial cortex by elongating microtubules, mechanical
interactions between microtubules and actin filaments will be demonstrated and
perturbed in living cytokinetic cells. In cells deprived of the spindle
apparatus, a microneedle will be used as a surrogate for microtubules to recruit
actin filaments, in order to rescue furrow positioning. Alternatively, if actin
filaments are transported by motor proteins along spindle microtubules that are
contiguous to the cortex, direct observations of their movement on microtubules
will be made in living cytokinetic cells. The project will use a newly-developed
approach that employs multimode micro-techniques to surgically remodel spindles
and cells so as to mechanically dissect microtubule-mediated assembly of the
contractile ring. This unique approach combines classic micromanipulation and
microinjection with modern laser microbeam surgery - on a microscope equipped
with both digital-enhanced polarization and spinning disc confocal microscopy.
Thus, the approach permits direct micromanipulation of both unlabeled and
fluorescently labeled cytoskeletal components in living cells and in vitro.

Broader Impacts: The general impact of this research project will be increased
in multiple ways. Concomitant with achieving the specific aim, one to two
graduate students and one postdoctoral fellow will be trained in designing and
conducting experiments, presenting data at scientific conferences, and
publishing papers in respected journals. The research will also be used as an
effective teaching tool for science education in a variety of contexts - in
undergraduate and graduate Cell Biology courses, the HHMI-supported
undergraduate summer research program, the NSF-supported OSU outreach programs
to GK-12 students and teachers, the HHMI-supported Science & Math Investigative
and Learning Experiences (SMILE) program, and in communicating with the general
public. This research generates striking, aesthetically compelling data via
cutting edge technology, making it ideally suited for educational outreach.
Furthermore, because this basic research uses grasshopper spermatocytes as a
model for understanding cell division, it may steer applied research toward
novel ways of suppressing reproduction in agriculturally destructive insects.