* 0848649
* STTR Phase II:  High Performance Single Frequency Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Gary Evans, PHOTODIGM, INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 997,289.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Program (STTR) Phase II project will
enable a new generation of single-frequency semiconductor lasers to enable
applications in displays, precision instruments and defense. Under the Phase I
project the team developed industry-leading first generation lasers up to 200
mW. The initial customer feedback from a variety of applications has converged
around the need for higher power under CW operating conditions and spectral
stability under arbitrary modulation. Further feedback points to the need to
address these requirements in a cost effective manner to ensure a competitive
solution. The proposal outlines an innovative combination of materials
engineering and monolithic device features to address these issues. The team
proposes to fabricate and deliver for customer evaluation single frequency
lasers operating (1) &gt;500 mW under CW conditions or (2) meeting specified
levels of spectral stability at pulse widths below 100 nsec with various duty
cycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this STTR Phase II
project will enable a new generation of low cost single-frequency semiconductor
lasers to enable applications in displays, precision instruments and defense.
This work has a strong educational component with students in device and
fabrication classes at SMU been exposed to and benefit from the proposed
research. The devices, software and concepts developed on this STTR will educate
students and visitors to the SMU photonics website, impact the world economy
with laser instrumentation for medical and scientific applications, provide
laser displays, and have a humanitarian contribution since these lasers are used
in magnetometers to find mines and improvised explosive devices in war torn
regions of the world. &lt;br/&gt;