* 0848071
* Evolution of the Land Plant Cell Wall: Functional Significance of Land Plant Polymers within the Charophycean Green Algae
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* William Willats, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 131,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Michael R. Gretz and David S.
Domozych&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0848071 Evolution of the Land Plant Cell Wall:
Functional Significance of Land Plant Polymers within the Charophycean Green
Algae&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The cell wall of land plants is an intricate
network, constructed primarily of polysaccharides and proteins, that is
intimately involved in the development of shape and form, and in essential
functions such as maintenance of structural integrity, cell-cell communication,
signal transduction, adhesion and physical/chemical defense. Land plants evolved
approximately 470 million years ago from an ancestral pool of freshwater green
algae known as the charophycean green algae (CGA). The overall goal of the
project is to understand the function of CGA cell wall (CW) polymers critical to
success of land plants, and to determine the evolutionary sequence that led to
this result. The project will employ modern high-throughput glycomics methods,
carbohydrate biochemistry, microscopy-based mapping of specific polymers, and
examination of genetic data to determine commonalities between the CW of land
plants and the CGA. The project will yield critical insight into the evolution
of land plants from green algal ancestors, the evolution of CW polymers, and the
role of specific CW polymers in the development of specific plant tissues.
Delineation of the structure and function of CGA CW components will provide
pivotal information necessary for understanding, and potentially modifying, land
plant cell walls to facilitate biofuel production. The project will also
contribute to identification of unique compounds and our overall understanding
of the importance of CW components in agricultural crops, pharmaceuticals, food
additives and other products. Student participants in this research will be
afforded a unique perspective on international, cooperative, team-based
scientific endeavors through interactions with the University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. A dedicated outreach program to middle and elementary school students
from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and Northeastern New York will attract a
new generation of young people to careers in biology and educate the public as
to the everyday significance of products derived from cell walls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;