* 0848040
* Magnetohydrodynamic Modeling of Current Sheet Structure and Magnetic Reconnection Using a Realistic Description of Transport Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Michael Goodman, West Virginia High Technology Consortium Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ilia I. Roussev
* 09/30/2012
* USD 475,117.00

This project will use existing Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models describing
collision-dominated, fully ionized electron-proton plasmas to generate
equilibrium solutions for the diffusion region of 1.5D current sheets, and then
determine how these solutions evolve in time when subjected to 3D linear
perturbations. The research will apply the Principal Investigator's (PI) models
to the ranges of density, temperature, and magnetic field strength that
characterize the Sun's transition region and lower corona, where plasma
transport processes are collisionally dominated. The researcher has previously
determined that thermoelectric currents are as important as electric field-
driven currents in determining the current density and heating rate in this
zone. This research will ascertain whether the equilibrium structure of
diffusion regions significantly affects magnetic reconnection rates at the Sun.

The PI will expand the ongoing collaboration with the Department of Physics at
Fairmont State University (FSU) in West Virginia. The PI will advise
undergraduate students at FSU on computational science research projects and
serve as a mentor for FSU undergraduate interns working at his institution, the
West Virginia High Technology Consortium Foundation, as well as at other local
companies. The PI will also assist FSU with the development of computational
components for physics courses and the potential development of a computational
science degree program.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).