* 0848397
* Mechanistic Studies on the Reactions of Cobalamins with the Nitrogen Oxide Species NONOates and Peroxynitrite
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Nicola Brasch, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 02/28/2013
* USD 398,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Nicola Brasch at Kent State University to
carry out studies on the reactions of vitamin B12 derivatives (cobalamins, Cbls)
with NONOates and peroxynitrite. The rates and mechanisms of the reactions
between Cbls and NONOates and the related N-substituted hydroxyamines will be
determined. Determining the mechanisms of these reactions is important, given
the widespread involvement of NONOates in biological systems and the broader
impact extending to (H)NO-releasing pharmaceuticals. The overwhelming focus of
non-clinical B12 research in the past four decades concerns its role in
B12-dependent enzyme reactions, but there is increasing evidence that Cbls may
reduce overproduction of reactive oxygen or nitrogen species such as nitric
oxide and peroxynitrite. Cbls efficiently scavenge nitric oxide; however it is
not yet known whether they react with the much more potent peroxynitrite. Rates
and mechanisms of the reactions between Cbls and peroxynitrite will be
determined. The ability of Cbls to inhibit peroxynitrite-induced tyrosine
nitration is also being explored.

An Immersive Classroom featuring a Virtual Reality Environment Wall for 3-D
stereoscopic visualization was recently installed in the Department of Chemistry
at Kent State University. Teaching modules on B12 coenzymes and vitamin B12
suitable for a senior Inorganic Chemistry class and a graduate class in
Bioinorganic Chemistry are in development and will be made available to others
via the web. This research will improve our understanding of the chemistry of
NONOates, peroxynitrite and vitamin B12, and, in the longer term, will provide
fundamental scientific information potentially useful as a broader impact in the
development of better therapeutics.