* 0848615
* RUI: Spectroscopic Studies of Cyclic Conjugated Molecules in Triplet (n,pi*) Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Stephen Drucker, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2014
* USD 222,318.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Stephen Drucker and his undergraduate students at the
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire will continue their spectroscopic studies of
small organic molecules in triplet excited states. Triplet states (species
having two unpaired electrons) play a central role in many photochemical
reactions. Prof. Drucker and his group have been investigating the lowest
triplet states of a series of cyclic conjugated enone molecules. They have
explored structural and dynamical differences between the triplet states and
their singlet counterparts. Beyond the fundamental insights offered by such
investigation, the experiments provide benchmark spectroscopic information for
testing or refining computational treatments of excited states and the
photochemical processes they mediate. In the proposed research, students will
use sensitive spectroscopic techniques - cavity ringdown absorption and
phosphorescence excitation - to determine frequencies of the C=O and C=C
stretching vibrations in the triplet states. The data will complement
information that the group obtained previously on low-frequency ring vibrations
of the cyclic enones. The researchers will also extend their work to include
lactone and anhydride molecules analogous to the enones. Heretofore, the
information available from the room temperature spectra has been limited by
spectral congestion due to hot bands. To eliminate the hot bands, Prof.
Drucker's group proposes to record the cavity ringdown spectra under jet-cooled
conditions using a slit nozzle source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
undergraduate group members will conduct in-depth research. Such opportunities
add substantial value to the undergraduate education program, and can also
foster rich opportunities for advanced study. Ongoing collaborations (with
investigators at Purdue, Texas A&amp;M, and USC) will enable Prof. Drucker's
undergraduates to participate in a range of activities. In turn, graduate
students in the collaborating research groups will be able to explore faculty
careers at undergraduate institutions as they interact with Prof. Drucker and
his students from UW-Eau Claire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;