* 0848412
* Dissertation Award: Post-Industrial Engineering: Computer Science and the Organization of Work, 1950-1975
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Andrew Mamo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 01/31/2010
* USD 4,040.00

This dissertation research, supported by the Science, Technology, and Society
Program at NSF, investigates the relationship of computer development to
management theory in the United States during the 1950s and 1960s. The goal of
the interview and archival research is to examine how the designs of early
artificial intelligence machines, such as Logic Theorist and the General Problem
Solver at Carnegie Mellon, and of interactive, time-shared computing systems,
such as Project MAC at MIT, were part of contemporary efforts to redefine the
roles of clerical workers and middle management. These research programs
involved major figures who contributed both to management theory and to computer
engineering, such as Herbert Simon, Jay Forrester, and J. C. R. Licklider. This
dissertation therefore seeks out the connections between technical research and
analyses of industrial management in the Cold War years, examining how computer
design was a site for conflict among competing social
ideals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archival work supported by this grant will be
carried out at Carnegie Mellon University, where innovations in computation in
the Graduate School of Industrial Administration were part of a larger project
of creating a scientific basis for management theory; and at the Charles Babbage
Institute in Minneapolis, a major repository for diverse collections from the
information processing industry. Oral history interviews will be carried out
with several prominent computer scientists and social theorists from the
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By considering social thought and technology as
fundamentally intertwined, the research supported by this grant reframes the
development of interactive computing from being primarily a story of
mathematical logic to one of organizational theory. As modern information
technology creates new spaces for economic and political engagement and new
forms of social organization, this project helps create a theoretical framework
and a historical context for understanding how expanding access to technology
can be related to evolving social ideals.