* 0848391
* GOALI:  An Investigation of Depolymerization and Condensation Reactions of Lignin Under Alkaline
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* NamHee Shin, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2011
* USD 188,006.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professor Raymond C. Francis at the SUNY College of Environmental
Science and Forestry. His research will continue to investigate the chemistry of
the non-sulfur sodium hydroxide/anthraquinone process (soda/AQ or SAQ) and more
specifically, why SAQ pulps are more difficult to bleach to a high brightness or
whiteness. It has long been known that SAQ pulping generates 4-5 times as much
coniferyl alcohol (CA) as kraft pulping. Convincing evidence has been obtained
that secondary quinone methides (QMs) from CA and its degradation products
causes condensation in both pulping of chips and reactions of lignin model
compounds (LMCs). Vinylguaiacol (VG), a CA degradation product, condensed with
monomers at its C-5 and alpha-C positions to produce trimers. VG addition to SAQ
pulping increased the unbleached kappa number (lignin content) of the resulting
pulp. Also, oxygen addition to SAQ pulping that would have degraded compounds
such as CA and VG, improved subsequent bleachability. This proposal seeks
additional funding for continued support of a PhD student and a new technician
to obtain indisputable evidence that the higher generation rate of secondary QMs
is responsible for the poorer bleachability of SAQ pulps and to investigate six
different bleaching agents to examine their efficacy at degrading three alpha-5
condensed structures of varying hydrophobicites. Society would benefit if more
energy were produced from wood and other biomass (CO2-neutral sources) and by a
reduction in the emission of reduced sulfur compounds into the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research would
directly and indirectly help to educate and train graduate students in the
critical area of process modifications to increase energy and chemical
production from wood and other biomass that are abundant and renewable
resources. Professor Francis presently supervises three PhD and three MSc
students, two of the six are black and two are female. He also graduated two
females with MSc degrees in May 2008. They both obtained permanent employment,
one with Georgia Pacific and the other with ConsulTech Enterprises. NSF funding
would assist Professor Francis in continuing to disseminate new knowledge
through publications and conferences and to attract industry support.&lt;br/&gt;