* 0848444
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Making Markets for Environmental Governance - the New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Mark Cooper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 12/31/2009
* USD 12,250.00

This dissertation project funded by the Science, Technology & Society Program
examines the development of the New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme (NZ-ETS) as
a case of market-based environmental governance in order to understand the role
of techno-scientific knowledges in environmental policymaking. The New Zealand
government recently announced the establishment of an emissions trading scheme
that constitutes an ambitious attempt to use markets as instruments of climate
change policy. The creation of this regulatory framework for greenhouse gases is
the first national-scale attempt to create economy-wide regulation of greenhouse
gases. The process of regulating greenhouse gases (GHGs) within the NZ-ETS
centers on the creation of a market structure for a previously un-recognized and
un-valued commodity (i.e., a permit for the carbon dioxide equivalent for each
GHG). As such, the implementation of the market-based regulation of GHGs
simultaneously depends upon knowledges from both the meteorological and economic
sciences. This project explains how these scientific and technical knowledges
direct the form and function of environmental policies.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research rests on the integration of
approaches from science studies and political economy to better understand the
role of techno-scientific knowledges in environmental governance. The creation
of an economy-wide regulatory scheme for greenhouse gases and the distinctive
material properties of agricultural greenhouse gases as an object of regulation
pose interesting challenges to existing accounts of how new institutions of
environmental governance develop and an important opportunity to explore the
construction, imaginaries, and effects of new market-based instruments for
environmental governance. The project uses interviews with scientists involved
in the measurement of greenhouse gases, government policy analysts, and economic
advisors and consultants in conjunction with analyses of policy and industry
consultation documents and scientific papers and reports in order to understand
how this policy program mobilizes particular scientific and economic knowledges
in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

The broader impact lies in the capacity to inform the development of future
climate change policies both within New Zealand and in other countries as they
inevitably move to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture. As the New
Zealand case offers one of the first attempts to include agriculture and land
use in a national regime of GHG regulation, this project provides insight into
the challenges and contingencies of creating market-based regulations for
greenhouse gases. In an effort to engage participating interview subjects in a
reflexive manner, a collaborative conference is held for participating policy
analysts in public service departments.