* 0848098
* Sophistication of beta-Peptide Bundle Form and Function
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Alanna Schepartz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2012
* USD 514,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division and
the Biomolecular Systems Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences both at the National Science Foundation, Professor Alanna Schepartz
of the Chemistry Department at Yale University will attempt to better understand
the non-covalent bond in biopolymers. Professor Schepartz reported the first
example of a non-proteinaceous quaternary fold that is both structurally unique
and physically well characterized. This "foldein" consists of eight copies of
the 12-mer beta-peptide Zwit-1F arranged in a helical bundle whose kinetic and
thermodynamic properties are virtually indistinguishable from natural proteins.
The experiments in the proposal build on that discovery to explore the origins
and determinants of beta-peptide bundle stability and assess the potential of
this structure to inform understanding of protein folding and develop
sophisticated materials and catalysts. The expectation is that the insight
gained from the work will allow beta-peptide foldeins to realize their full
potential as tools in biology, nanoscale engineering, and medicine. At the same
time, identification of rules governing Ã¢-peptide higher order assembly will
deepen understanding of folding in natural proteins. Finally, the development of
complex and functional beta-foldeins prompts one to question the evolutionary
fitness of alpha-amino acid proteins and speculate why the 20 common amino acids
have become the building blocks of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Schepartz will provide valuable teaching and
learning opportunities to graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
students, while simultaneously advancing discovery at the very highest level. As
the research described in this proposal is interdisciplinary, the students
involved will master a unique and highly desirable set of disciplines: organic
synthesis, peptide chemistry, bioorganic chemistry/chemical biology, and
biophysics. This combination of skills and breadth of knowledge will ensure that
these students continue to make lasting and valuable contributions to the
national and international scientific enterprise. It is noted that in addition
that a fraction of the experiments outlined in this proposal are collaborative
at multiple levels of the educational ladder. In addition, a subset of the
experiments will be included in Chemical Biology for Sophomores Laboratory, a
course designed by Professor Schepartz for Yale College students. Finally,
Professor Schepartz remains deeply committed to the principles and practices of
diversity, having maintained since 1988 a research group with numerous women
(&gt; 50%) and underrepresented minority students.