* 0848273
* SGER:  A Novel Optimization Scheduling Technique for Sensor Surveillance Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Kami Makki, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 02/28/2010
* USD 49,823.00

Recent advances in wireless and micro-electronics technologies have made these
technologies functionally accessible and available to a wide range of different
applications. One of the fast growing field?s is wireless sensor networks
technologies, whose applications from military, such as monitoring enemy and
military consignments, to traffic surveillance, environment and building
structures monitoring. An important characteristic of sensor networks is the
limited power supply of the sensor nodes. These nodes are usually powered by
batteries, and therefore it may not be possible to recharge or replace the
batteries after their deployment.

This proposed research aims at addressing the maximal lifetime scheduling
problem for sensor surveillance networks in a dynamic environment in which the
positions of the targets are dynamic and each sensor has different surveillance
range. Specifically, the research involves an exploratory investigation of
finding a novel family of efficient scheduling algorithms (that offer a wide
range of tradeoffs among cost, scalability and energy consumption) for a sensor
surveillance network. Its purpose is to monitor a set of moving targets, such
that all the targets are being monitored by the sensors in the network at any
point in time and at the same time the lifetime of the sensor surveillance
network is maximized. In this scheduling algorithm, a sensor can switch off to
save energy when it is not its turn to monitor a target. The proposed project
also develops distributed monitoring mechanisms and scanning methods to obtain a
sensor?s locations information. An analytical framework to theoretically
evaluate the scheduling solution from the point of view of tradeoffs between
cost, scalability and energy consumption is also proposed. The analytical
results will be evaluated by extensive simulations and experimental
measurements.

