* 0848236
* Next Generation Thermoplastics from Biorenewable Carbonyl Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Miller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2013
* USD 382,812.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project objectives include the synthesis and characterization of new crop-
based, biorenewable thermoplastics designed to replace those made from
petroleum. Several synthetic strategies will be developed for polymerizing
organic molecules abundantly available from plants. Critical polymer design
features include environmental degradation pathways or facile chemical
recycling. Formaldehyde is a targeted feedstock that can derive from wood or
agricultural wastes via methanol (wood alcohol). These studies will develop
methods for copolymerizing formaldehyde with carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
and olefins, giving rise to new polyacetal/esters, polyacetal/carbonates, and
polyacetal/olefins with unexplored properties and applications. Additional
synthetic pursuits seek improved thermal properties of polylactic acid,
currently the highest volume biorenewable synthetic thermoplastic. Related crop-
based aromatic/aliphatic polyesters will be targeted as high-volume plastics of
the future, and their suitability as replacements for petroleum-based polyesters
will be assessed.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Stephen A. Miller of the Department of Chemistry at
the University of Florida. Professor Miller's research efforts focus on organic
and organometallic chemistry with areas of specialization including
polymerization chemistry, single-site catalysis, theoretical polymer chemistry,
and polymers synthesized from biorenewable feedstocks. The successful execution
of this research project will result in novel polymeric materials that match or
excel commercial plastics based on petroleum, yet degrade benignly in the
environment.