* 0848080
* EAR-PF: Adjoint Tomography, Seismic Hazard, and Active Tectonics of the San Joaquin Basin, California
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Carl Tape, Tape                    Carl           H
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2011
* USD 160,000.00

Dr. Carl Tape is awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at Harvard University. He will construct
a three-dimensional structure model of the San Joaquin basin and adjacent
regions. The basin will be described in terms of seismic velocity variations,
density variations, and geometries of the major geologic interfaces, such as
basin boundaries and faults. The investigation will consist of three stages.
First, a basin model will be constructed using industry well logs and seismic
reflection data. Second, numerical simulations of previously recorded
earthquakes in the region will be performed using supercomputing clusters.
Third, the basin model will be iteratively improved using the results of the
numerical simulations in a procedure known as adjoint tomography. The resultant
three-dimensional structure will be interpreted in the context of the local
active tectonics, such as the delamination of the adjacent Sierra Nevada.
Results from the earthquake simulations will be used to assess the seismic
hazard in the San Joaquin basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Great Valley lies west
of the Sierra Nevada and east of the Coast Ranges. It is the largest
agricultural producer in the United States, a major oil producer, and home to
more than 6.5 million people. The southern portion of the valley, the San
Joaquin basin, is filled with several kilometers of sediment that makes the
valley prone to enhanced and prolonged shaking during earthquakes. The region is
surrounded by active faults, including the San Andreas fault to the west and the
White Wolf and Garlock faults to the south. The basin is one of the most
prominent tectonic features in southern California, yet its structure and
seismic response are not well known. The findings of both the seismic hazard and
the active tectonics will be conveyed to the communities of the San Joaquin
basin, with emphasis on Bakersfield, which has the largest population and
greatest seismic risk.