* 0848996
* SBIR Phase II:  Fe-nanoparticle Coating of Anisotropic Magnet Powder for Nanocomposite Permanent Magnets with Enhanced (BH)max
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Jinfang Liu, Electron Energy Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2011
* USD 528,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes the
development of an innovative and facile method to synthesize composite magnet
powders coated with Fe and/or Fe-Co nanoparticles and to consolidate them into
high performance anisotropic nanocomposite magnets. It was theoretically
predicted in the 1990s that two phase exchange-coupled nanocomposite magnets
consisting of a hard magnetic phase with high magnetocrystalline anisotropy and
a soft magnetic phase with high saturation magnetization may exhibit a maximum
energy product (BH)max twice the value of the current magnets. In this research
effort, Fe and Fe-Co nanoparticles will be deposited onto hard magnetic powders
by combined chemical and physical methods. Unlike previously employed
techniques, the proposed approach allows the control of the size of soft
magnetic phase to the nanoscale. Moreover, the approach is compatible with mass
production. Subsequent consolidation of these composite powders by pressure and
temperature assisted methods will lead to a new generation of high performance
anisotropic nanocomposite permanent magnets with a (BH)max much higher than that
of the current commercial magnets. The multiple choices for the core powder will
result in new improved magnets for close-to-room-temperature applications
(Nd2Fe14B-based), high temperature applications (SmCo5- and Sm2Fe17Nx-based) and
ultra-high temperature applications (Sm2Co17-based).&lt;br/&gt;The success in
the development of the new (nano)composite magnets will directly result in the
improvement of the functionality of electromagnetic devices and eventually lead
to new applications not possible with the current permanent magnets. The higher
performance magnets will result in even lighter weight, smaller footprint and
lower the total system cost for electromagnetic devices in both commercial and
military applications. The most well known applications are in: hybrid cars
(permanent magnet motors and generators, sensors and actuators), spacecraft
(momentum wheels, reaction wheels, stepper motors, ion propulsion), microwave
sources (traveling wave tube amplifiers, klystrons, magnetrons), microwave
components (isolators, circulators), inertial guidance (accelerometers, gyros),
and other commercial systems (computer disk drives, computer printers, audio
systems, satellite communication, medical imaging, stepper motors, etc). The
proposal is a multidisciplinary enterprise involving physics, chemistry, and
metallurgy. The bottom-up approach to the synthesis of nanocomposite magnets
with uniform and controllable thickness of the soft magnetic shell formed from
the precursor nanoparticle coating, will allow for an in-detail experimental
characterization of magnetic interactions. This will provide valuable
information to understand and substantially diminish the gap between the
theoretical predictions and engineering capabilities.