* 0848596
* Single Molecule Spectroscopy of Chiral Nanosystems: Understanding Heterogeneities in Chiroptical Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Dhandapani Venkataraman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Chirality, or handedness, associated with molecular systems plays important
roles in chemistry, perhaps most notably in biomolecular recognition processes
and pharmacological function. Most chemistry students are introduced to the
concept of chirality through demonstrations of the interaction of chiral
molecules with polarized light manifested as an "optical rotation" (with a well-
defined direction and magnitude) which gives rise to the familiar "R" and "S"
designations of chiral centers in molecular systems. While the intrinsic
molecular parameters that control the dissymmetric light-matter interaction in
chiral systems are well understood, the extrinsic factors (coupling to solvent
or matrix) remain largely unexplored. The fundamental issue is that much of the
detailed information on the influence of local environment on the molecular
chiroptical response is obscured through necessary ensemble averaging inherent
in conventional (bulk) absorption (circular dichroism) or non-resonant
scattering (optical rotatory dispersion) measurements. The principal aim of this
project is to use single-molecule chiroptical spectroscopy as a tool for probing
the "inhomogeneous broadening" of chiroptical dissymmetry in the condensed
phase. This proposed cross-disciplinary research has high fundamental scientific
impact and will have a technological impact in the development of advanced
display technologies, optical storage devices, and in asymmetric synthesis. The
proposed project also serves as an attractive vehicle for broadening the
participation and retention of students. Minority and underrepresented students
will be recruited for this research project. During summer, two middle or high
school students from local area schools will be recruited to participate in this
research, thus creating advanced opportunities for pursuing advanced work in
science and mathematics. THe group will also increase the interaction between
UMass Amherst Chemistry and the middle/high students and science teachers in the
Five College area school districts and to provide opportunities for advanced
work in science. Such opportunities will help enhance interest in science and
mathematics at the middle and high school levels.