* 0848871
* Design and synthesis of new (electro-active) ladder and helical polyphenylene motifs for molecular wires
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Rajendra Rathore, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 387,490.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Rajendra Rathore of Marquette
University in a research project that will integrate the disciplines of
synthetic organic chemistry, molecular recognition, and material science. The
aim is to study and exploit new cofacially-stacked benzenoid structures that can
be potentially utilized to develop various electronic and optoelectronic devices
in the emerging field of nanotechnology. The study of the proposed novel
molecules, using various spectroscopic techniques including time-resolved
spectroscopy, will help to expand the understanding of through-space electronic
coupling between cofacially arrayed phenylenes and eventually lead to functional
materials for practical applications. The design and synthesis of new
cofacially-stacked polyphenylene structures presents an important step that will
lead to the development of a variety of new molecular and supramolecular
nanostructures that will achieve photoinduced charge separation over long
distances with high quantum efficiency and will create exciting challenges for
future research.

The broader impacts of the proposed research will present opportunities for high
quality training for both graduate and undergraduate students in
multidisciplinary research. Professor Rathore has shown a commitment to
broadening participation by the inclusion of women and underrepresented groups
in his group through active recruitment of these students. Marquette University
has established close ties with Alcorn State University, a Historically Black
University (HBCU), from which a number of graduate students have been recruited.
By continuing to publsh his research in high quality journals, Professor Rathore
will significantly impact the field of organic electronics.