* 0848340
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Are Patient People More Cooperative? A Study of the Relationship between Time Preferences and Cooperation in Vietnam
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Robert Boyd, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 02/28/2010
* USD 4,760.00

Patience and cooperativeness play critical roles in determining a society's
level of collective wellbeing, yet scientists do not know what determines these
traits or how exactly they are related to one another. Some preliminary
laboratory research among Western undergraduate students suggests that patience
and cooperativeness are correlated at the individual level. However, this
correlation may be specific to Western university-trained students. Moreover, it
may be an artifact of the methodology used to assess patience and
cooperativeness or the apparent relationship between patience and
cooperativeness may be due to a correlation with a third variable, such as
trust.

In this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant research, the co PI will conduct
studies to explore the generality and origins of the patience / cooperativeness
correlation. To address the "generality" question, the research will involve
studying patience and cooperativeness among a broad sample of northern and
southern Vietnamese (i.e., non-western) adults. More extensive assessment
methodology and collection of demographic data will help address whether the
correlation is real or specious. Findings from this research will be useful to
government and non-government agencies that are involved in development projects
in Vietnam, by examining some of the key ingredients of "social capital" in
Vietnam.