* 0848247
* SGER: Characterizing Power Systems with Tools from Complex Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Seth Blumsack, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 08/31/2009
* USD 84,404.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A network?s vulnerability and the
effectiveness of risk mitigation measures depend highly on its structure. The
goal of this collaborative research is to develop new structural measures for
large-scale electric power networks, based on both topological and electrical
properties, and to find connections between the structure and vulnerability of
electricity networks. The resulting measures will be validated using power-flow
data of two major regional transmission operators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the
area of complex networks and graph theory shows that a network?s topology can
dramatically affect its performance and vulnerability. Previous studies have
attempted to measure the structure of power grids and identify vulnerabilities
using existing tools from the literature on random graphs, small-world and
scale-free networks, but the results have been mixed and inconsistent. Part of
the confusion results from a focus on grid topology, ignoring Kirchoff?s Laws,
which govern flows in electrical circuits. Since vulnerability is largely a
function of flow behavior, a correct set of structural metrics for power
networks needs to incorporate these physical laws. This work will address this
shortcoming in the existing literature through the development of vulnerability
measures that consider both network topology and the physical laws that govern
flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
proposes a fundamentally new way of thinking about measuring and detecting
vulnerability in power networks. If successful, this effort will provide the
intellectual foundation for tools contributing to significant improvement of the
reliability and efficiency of the US electricity infrastructure. Additionally
this work will increase the capacity for education in power systems and complex
networks, across traditional disciplinary lines, at the University of Vermont
and Penn State University. The project will also support the development of a
new cross-disciplinary energy systems laboratory at UVM, which is being designed
to attract a more diverse pool of students to energy systems
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;