* 0848558
* SBIR Phase II:  Use of No-Reference Measurements of Subjective Quality to Enhance Next Generation Systems for Video Distribution
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Pravin Mane, VQlink Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 01/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project concerns the
design, development and commercialization of systems for real-time measurement
and enhancement of the quality of video distributed over emerging networks. The
Phase I project has demonstrated the feasibility of a real-time version of an
automatic video quality meter (AVQ) that has several novel features. By not
requiring a reference to the source video, and by being compute-scalable, the
AVQ meter can reside anywhere in the video distribution chain. In addition, AVQ
scores correlate extremely well with subjective assessments of users, making it
valuable not only as an accurate measurement tool, but also as the starting
point for VQ Enhancement (VQE). This Phase II work will create an industry-ready
suite of AVQ products that can reside in the network (AVQ-N), home (AVQ-H) and
Set Top Box (AVQ-STB). It will also create solutions for video quality
enhancement (VQE) that will reside in several network points. The AVQ and VQE
products will depend on several innovations in design, including the retention
of performance in the leaner versions of AVQ and VQE, and portability of a core
AVQ engine into multiple PC-native, board-level and chip-level platforms.

In rapidly emerging scenarios, video information is generated, gathered and
distributed in real time, using a larger number of communication networks than
ever before. Increasingly, users who are exposed to the notion of high-quality,
high definition television will demand a high quality of video experience in all
circumstances, in both fixed and mobile systems. The solutions proposed in this
research will initially help content providers, aggregators, distributors and
receiver manufacturers in meeting user expectations in emerging systems for
entertainment video. These systems include cable and telco services as well as
mobile and internet video.