* 0848847
* Gamma-amino Acids and Gamma-peptide Foldamers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Samuel Gellman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 656,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Samuel Gellman at the
University of Wisconsin, who will synthesize new, conformationally constrained
-amino acids and derivatives, and evaluate the conformation of oligomers that
contain these new subunits. The present focus of this research involves basic
synthetic and structural chemistry. Specific goals of the proposed research are
to develop efficient synthetic routes to new conformationally constrained
peptide building blocks and to study the conformational behavior of oligomers
that contain constrained residues with the aim of identifying new and stable
foldamer secondary structures. Interest in the development of synthetic
foldamers has been kindled by recognition of the many important and complex
functions carried out by precisely folded oligomers, especially proteins, in
biological systems. The proposed activities will expand the scope of previous
landmark studies by pursuing an emerging family of foldamer compounds, the gamma
peptides and their hybrids.

Detailed understanding and research in synthetic foldamers will not only help to
understand how biofoldamers fold and function but also enable the design of new
materials with useful properties. The proposed foldamer research represents an
excellent way to train young scholars for independent careers. Progress in this
area demands applying a non-traditional combination of tools and concepts to
areas as diverse as asymmetric organic synthesis and biophysical
characterization of higher order molecular structure. Students who participate
in this research, at the graduate or undergraduate levels, will emerge well-
equipped to confront challenges in their independent careers. In addition, the
proposed research offers an excellent basis for conveying to undergraduates in
the classroom the essence, appeal, and significance of modern chemistry
research. Specifically, this topic enables a lecturer to show how classical
topics in organic reactivity and synthesis can be used to address new research
challenges.