* 0848755
* Experimental and Theoretical Analysis of Collective Dynamics in Swarming Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Iain Couzin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2013
* USD 596,322.00

In this project the PI will study swarms experimentally and theoretically from
the perspective of non-equilibrium statistical physics. The project will
implement a fully controlled laboratory setup for interactive swarming
experiments with fish and also use previously collected data on the collective
motion of locusts. The project will contrast both systems using detailed, and
idealized, swarming models to study the specificities and universality of their
dynamics. Statistical physics concepts will be applied to search for generic
characteristics of swarms that stem from common survival constraints. Detailed
digital tracking of all individuals in a swarm will be used to investigate
biologically meaningful swarming states. Comparisons will be made with
equilibrium and non-equilibrium physical systems such as liquid crystals, spin-
systems and granular materials. The project will achieve this by: 1. Building
controlled laboratory experiments where hundreds, or thousands, of fish will be
tracked concurrently and their response to stimuli recorded. 2. Developing
detailed, and idealized, models to capture specific and universal aspects of
swarms, respectively, and to develop new (physics-inspired) analytical tools for
swarms such as correlation lengths, clustering, information flow, defect
dynamics etc. 3. Investigate collective effects that are typical of non
equilibrium dynamical systems such as scaling-laws, pattern formation, or
transitions. 4. Testing if some swarming states follow a generic behavior due to
the system adaptations and, if so, exploiting the consequences of this for
theoretical analysis. The research will improve our understanding of swarming
systems in particular and self-organization in general by combining experimental
and theoretical approaches from biological and physical perspectives. It will
set up new experiments and statistical measurements that can be used beyond the
proposed context. It will explore the interactions between mechanical effects
and behavioral adaptation across scales, furthering our understanding of non-
equilibrium systems. In addition we will pursue a universal description of
certain swarming states by hypothesizing that evolved critical-like behavior may
exist. The interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of this project will be
emphasized through the development of a strong outreach program for the public
understanding of science. Swarming demonstrations capture the imagination and
allow meaningful and creative interactions allowing the fundamental principles
of collective behavior to be explored from a range of complimentary
perspectives.