* 0848708
* RUI: Interdisciplinary Collaboration to Expand Asymmetric Synthesis through Biocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Clifford Padgett, ARMSTRONG STATE UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2013
* USD 195,421.00

The overall goal of this project is to expand asymmetric synthesis techniques
through biocatalysis. It includes three specific aims. Specific aim 1 involves
the screening of a variety of prochiral substrates (ketones and oximes) against
a library of engineered E. coli yeast reductases that have been characterized as
excellent asymmetric reducing agents. Specific aim 2 involves the molecular
modeling studies of 2,5-Diketo-D-gluconic acid reductase. In this reductase, the
enzyme substrate interaction and its correlation with Si or Re face hydride
transfer will be investigated. In specific aim 3, representative yeast
reductases will be systematically mutated and the effects on the asymmetric
reduction on known substrates will be determined. The goal of this aim is to
attain a more accurate understanding of the enzyme-substrate complex and its
role in determining enzyme stereoselectivity with the intention of improving
asymmetric catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Brent
Feske (Department of Chemistry and Physics), Professor Clifford Padgett
(Department of Chemistry and Physics), and Professor Scott Mateer (Department of
Biology) at Armstrong Atlantic State University. The combined research of these
professors will investigate the use of enzymes to synthesize complex molecules
with asymmetric centers. Successful development of this methodology will afford
greener and more efficient routes to these molecules, which are needed in large
numbers in the pharmaceutical industry.