* 0848692
* SGER: The Avatar-Self Relationship: An Exploratory Study of Identity Negotiation in Second Life
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Ulrike Schultze, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2010
* USD 90,067.00

This research addresses the central question with respect to avatars in
computer-generated virtual worlds: How does the user negotiate among the many
possible relationships between the self and the avatar? Virtual worlds form an
integral part of the 3D web and as such play an increasingly important role in
the evolution of our computer-mediated communication infrastructure. Avatars,
which are the representation of the communicator in 3D web applications
including email, chat and virtual worlds, are a cornerstone of these new media.
A key affordance of avatars is embodiment, which not only gives communicators
visible presence in situations and encounters, but also allows them to engage in
practices of the body such as walking, sitting or gesturing. As such, the avatar
serves as a cue for the communicator's identity and as a powerful visual
complement to the more text-based media like instant messaging and email.
However, unlike the non-verbal cues that a communicator's real-world body gives
off, the cues of the virtual body can be intentionally manipulated and
controlled by its owner. Furthermore, the avatar does not only interact with the
intended target of the communication, but with the owner him/herself. This
complexity of the avatar-self relationship raises questions about what type of
relationship to invoke for effective communication in educational, commercial
and organizational settings, where the owner - not the avatar - is typically the
target of communicative action.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study explores the
types of avatar-self relationships that are enacted in virtual worlds, and the
conditions under which different relationships become salient and why. Drawing
on a sample of residents of Second Life, one of the largest virtual worlds, this
research will rely on real-world, face-to-face interviews, as well as a photo-
diary interview method for data collection. Categories of avatar-self
relationships and a framework for understanding when they become salient and why
will be developed using interpretive techniques and an emergent theory building
approach that is informed by Erving Goffman's dramaturgical theory of identity
negotiation. This broad theoretical approach is widely used in research on
avatars and other forms of self-presentation, but the research methods to be
employed in this project are innovative, giving this project the potential of
contributing significantly to the development of a host of new hypotheses and
theoretical advancements.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As synthetic worlds and avatars
are likely to become more prevalent in 3D web applications, we need to develop
frameworks and language to describe and make sense of the increasingly
intertwined nature of online and offline selves. This research on the avatar-
self relationship makes potentially transformative inroads into our
understanding of communicators' negotiation of the increasingly blurred offline-
online and reality-virtuality boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;