* 0848141
* Cell-to-Cell Transfer of Bacterial Lipoproteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Daniel Wall, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2013
* USD 514,277.00

Intellectual Merit Myxobacteria rely on cell-cell signaling and gliding motility
to live as multicellular organisms that build fruiting body structures in
response to starvation. How cell-cell signaling organizes these developmental
processes remains a fundamental biological question. To help understand these
processes Myxococcus xanthus gliding motility mutants were isolated. A
characteristic of the mutants is that they are rescued by extracellular
complementation (stimulation) from cells that contain the corresponding wild
type gene. Two of these known mutants encode lipoproteins and the mechanism for
stimulation involves efficient cell-to-cell transfer of the cognate lipoprotein.
Transfer does not involve extracellular secretion, but instead requires physical
contact between donor and recipient cells. One of these lipoproteins, Tgl, is
polarly localized and when transferred to a recipient cell activates the
assembly of the type IV pili gliding motility motor. Specifically, Tgl transfer
regulates the assembly of the outer membrane PilQ secretin channel for pilus
transport. In general, lipoprotein transfer represents a novel form of cell-cell
interactions that may play a role in coordinating cellular movements, forming
biofilms and/or the recognition of different cell types. This project will use
molecular genetic and fluorescent video microscopy methods to understand the
mechanism and broader biological significance of lipoprotein transfer in
bacteria.

Broader Impacts This project involves the education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students in an EPSCoR state. Elements of this project
will be incorporated into undergraduate microbial genetic lecture and laboratory
classes illustrating current research methods and approaches to students.
Graduate students will be trained in scientific thinking and in molecular
genetic techniques. An outreach component involves introducing and training
Native Americans in microbial genetics. This outreach effort includes trips to a
tribal college to recruit Native American students to conduct a summer research
internship at the University of Wyoming. Student training in the lab is an
interactive process between individuals at all levels. This work will generate
high quality research papers and students supported by the project will present
at national scientific meetings. Society at large will benefit from the training
of young scientists. In addition, the project will provide a broader
understanding of how cells interact in communities such as biofilms or in
primitive developmental tissues.