* 0848869
* Collaborative Research:   Molecular basis of life history evolution in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Jeffery Leips, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2014
* USD 93,999.00

Humans and other organisms are enormously genetically variable, even for traits
like lifespan and fertility. During the past decade, genes affecting longevity
and fertility have been discovered by mutating those genes in laboratory animals
and observing the resulting effects. For example, mutations in genes controlling
insulin signaling can increase the longevity of worms, flies, and mice by 100%
or more. These results beg the question of whether the same genes are
responsible for natural variation among individuals, populations, and species in
longevity and fertility. This project addresses this question by discovering the
genetic basis of life history differences in artificially-selected and in
natural populations of an insect, Drosophila melanogaster, for which powerful
genetic techniques are available. Expression profiling, genetic mapping, and new
statistical techniques will be deployed to identify the genes contributing to
longevity and fertility differences between populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genes causing variation in longevity and fertility have
significant impact on human health and well being. Most of the proposed
candidate genes are shared between insects and mammals (including humans), and
knowing which genes cause variation in non-inbred animals has important
implications for biomedicine. Other significant effects will include training of
undergraduate and graduate researchers in the laboratories of all three
investigators, and at two ?mini-symposia? that will include all participants,
and development of new analytical tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;