* 0848135
* A combined biochemical, molecular and computational approach to understanding the regulation of gibberellin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Valerie Sponsel, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Valerie M. Sponsel (PI),
Jianhua Ruan (Co-PI), Garry Sunter (Co-PI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number
IOS-0848135&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined biochemical, molecular and
computational approach to understanding the regulation of gibberellin
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gibberellin group of plant
hormones regulate many phases of a plant's life cycle from seed germination to
flowering and fruit development. The amount of bioactive gibberellin that is
present in particular cells, or tissues, at specific stages of development is
finely regulated, and will determine whether plant growth and development are
optimal. Defining the factors that regulate gibberellin metabolism and signaling
is necessary in order to understand the molecular mechanisms that establish
gibberellin homeostasis. The project brings together three scientists with
backgrounds in plant physiology, molecular biology and bioinformatics to examine
the transcriptional regulation of genes encoding enzymes in the gibberellin
biosynthetic pathway in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. It focuses on how
2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase enzymes are regulated by internal factors
including gibberellins (metabolic regulation) and other plant hormones, such as
auxin. Transcriptional regulation of some of these enzymes appears to be set in
place in a hierarchical manner, and the premise of this research is that
elucidating the means whereby this regulation is applied will be instrumental in
understanding gibberellin homeostasis. Integrated computational analysis of
promoter sequences and of publicly-available large-scale microarray data will be
performed to determine if particular motifs are shared between 2-oxoglutarate-
dependent dioxygenases that have common regulation (temporal, spatial, feed-
back, auxin etc), and to construct quantitative, predictive models of
transcriptional regulation using those motifs. It is then proposed to test
whether these motifs define cis-regulatory elements that are responsible for
timing, location and hormonal regulation of transcriptional activity in
Arabidopsis seedlings. The interdisciplinary research will be conducted at the
University of Texas at San Antonio, a Hispanic-serving, predominantly
undergraduate institution with 75% first generation students. It brings together
students from the Computer Science and Biology Departments and will train
students from groups traditionally underrepresented in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;