* 0848918
* STTR Phase II:   Superhydrophobic Coatings for Water Repelling and Corrosion Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Patrick Guire, Innovative Surface Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 499,424.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop a
superhydrophobic nanotextured coating that is highly water repelling and anti-
corrosive. The coating will be applied to specific hearing aid surfaces (i.e.,
microphone ports, receiver, joints, battery, and case) to impart a water
resistant barrier that repels moisture and other environmental contaminants.
Penetration of water into hearing aids from such sources as moisture, sweat, and
rain interferes with acoustical performance and causes corrosion, circuitry
malfunction and breakdown of the hearing aid. Openings are required for the
transfer of sound waves. A seam is located around the battery and the Zinc/air
batteries, themselves, cannot be sealed because they require oxygen to function.
With all of the open areas and seams in a hearing aid, it is not surprising that
water often penetrates into the interior of the hearing aid. Individuals are
living longer and healthier lives and they want to be able to hear while they
participate in boating, hiking, running, and golfing and other forms of
exercise. The water repellent anti-corrosive coating will allow hearing aid
manufactures to offer more durable and reliable instruments, that stand up to
the rigors of an active life style for the 2.2 million hearing aid users
nationwide.

The broader/commercial impact project will be more durable hearing aids and that
will potentially reduce the costs associated with hearing aid maintenance.
Hearing aids are not the only electronic instruments that suffer from active
lifestyles and environmental contaminants. Cell phones, earphones, digital
cameras, watches, laptops, and other electronic devices could potentially
benefit from the water repellent anti-corrosive coating technology.