* 0848299
* Application of Acyl Aminals in Target and Function Oriented Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Paul Floreancig, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/29/2012
* USD 360,000.00

This project will exploit the utility of acyclic N-acyl aminals in a range of
important applications. N-Acyl aminals have been prepared through lengthy
standard protocols but their availability from nitriles through a recently
developed multicomponent reaction allows for access to greater structural
diversity than has previously been available. This multicomponent reaction will
be applied to the construction of a library of pederin analogs that would be
difficult to access through previous approaches in an effort to minimize the
toxicity of this potent immunosuppressive and cytotoxic agent. N-Acyl aminals
will be used as precursors to N-acyliminium ions in studies that will validate
the use of a capillary-based microreactor for rapidly screening the efficiency
and mechanism of chiral acid catalyzed reactions. The capacity to design N-acyl
aminals that cleave and release biologically active molecules through
predictable stimuli will be utilized in the design of new drug delivery
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Paul Floreancig of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh. Professor Floreancig's
research efforts revolve around the development and mechanistic analysis of new
chemical reactions and the synthesis of biologically active molecules. This
research will provide new opportunities for efficient syntheses of molecules
that have tunable properties. Successful development of these projects will have
an impact on lead generation and synthesis in the pharmaceutical and
agricultural industries.