* 0848469
* SGER: Collaborative Research: Cognitive Rhythms Collaborative, A Discovery Network
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Nancy Kopell, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2010
* USD 51,391.00

This project focuses on the functional implications of low-frequency rhythms in
the basal ganglia and neocortex. The collaborative effort involves four groups:
Kopell, (Boston University), Moore (Massachusetts Institute of Technology),
Graybiel (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and Boyden (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology). The project is the first collaborative research effort
of the newly formed Cognitive Rhythms Collaborative (CRC), a group of Boston
Area faculty members from Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Massachusetts General Hospital Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, Brandeis University and Tufts University. The aims of the CRC, which
fosters research and training, are to map the spatio-temporal structure of brain
dynamics and connect these dynamics to brain function. This is the first project
to try to understand from basic electrophysiology the growing literature
suggesting that the low frequency brain rhythms are critical for both attention
and learning, and that interactions among brain structures such as the basal
ganglia and neocortex are central for such functions. The project makes use of
the electrophysiology skills of the Graybiel lab, which is focused on the
dynamics of the basal ganglia, and those of the Moore lab, focused on the
neocortex, to understand the flow of information between the cortex and the
basal ganglia during learning and attention. This collaboration is enriched by
new molecular biology technology developed by the Boyden group. This technology,
in which cells can be activated and inactivated by light, provides powerful new
techniques for figuring out circuits by looking at effects of perturbations,
even in behaving animals. The experimental work is guided by modeling ideas from
the Kopell and Moore labs, and the output of the modeling can be tested almost
immediately by the labs for quick feedback and changes. This CRC project
exemplifies a new and transformational way of doing science, bridging the
boundaries of disciplines and institutes to facilitate cutting edge research at
the forefront of interdisciplinary endeavors.