* 0848234
* Stereodynamic Coordination Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* James Canary, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2013
* USD 540,000.00

Over the last several years, the Canary laboratory has discovered bistable
molecules that can be electrically switched between two distinct states. These
substances are complexes of copper with three-armed organic ligands that exhibit
a molecular propeller-like twist, the pitch of which can be modulated or
inverted. Mechanistic investigations revealed that oxidation/reduction of the
central copper ion led to exchange of the atoms bound to the metal which in turn
resulted in dramatic changes in the conformation and shape of the organic
portion of the complex.

In this grant cycle, electron-induced changes in conformation of the organic
ligand will be applied to three problems. First, the reorientation of two of the
arms in the three-arm complexes will be used to study take-up and release of
neurotransmitter-like guest molecules and electrically controlled catalysis of
organic reactions. Such technology could enable electronic control of chemical
signaling, catalysis, or open new strategies for redox-mediated drug delivery.
Second, ligand reorganization will be used to construct a molecule that can be
extended or retracted with an electrical trigger, affording a nanometer-scale
electromechanical transducer whose properties will be probed by atomic force
microscopy (AFM). Such materials could be of interest for valves and
constrictors in nanodevices. Third, the principles used to develop the three-arm
copper complexes will be applied to the design of peptides that reversibly
convert between alpha-helical and beta-sheet secondary structures upon
electronic stimulation. Besides potential materials applications, such peptide
transitions may be relevant to processes associated with redox stress in
biological systems or neurodegenerative disease.

This research project will be undertaken by undergraduate and graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows, including individuals from underrepresented groups,
who will learn valuable synthetic and physical skills that will enable them to
become productive contributors to our nation?s research enterprise. Summers will
include participation by faculty from predominantly undergraduate institutions
as well as New York City high school students. The members of the research team
will participate in annual outreaches at public museums and other K-12
activities. The project leader will serve the scientific community by organizing
and facilitating interdisciplinary conferences and discussion groups.