* 0848303
* Creation of Tools for the Study of Reactive Intermediates in DNA and RNA
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Amanda Bryant-Friedrich, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/28/2013
* USD 336,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation, Professor Amanda Bryant-Friedrich of the
Chemistry Department at the University of Toledo in Toledo OH will develop
highly efficient and novel methods for the generation of modified nucleic acid
oligomers. The successful completion of the work described in the proposal will
provide highly efficient protocols for the synthesis of sugar derivatized DNA
and RNA oligonucleotides using phosphoramidite and H-phosphonate automated
nucleic acid preparation techniques. These chemistries are well established and
have been applied to the synthesis of a large number of modified
olignucleotides. This proposal seeks to diversify this technology and make it
useful for application to an even broader number of substrates. The modified
oligomers that are the target of the proposal will be used for the generation of
nucleic acid sugar radicals in DNA and RNA oligomers to determine the impact of
oxidative damage on nucleic acid structure. The products of oxidative damage to
DNA and RNA have been shown to contribute to several significant diseases. These
substrates will be used for the development of biomarkers for disease initiation
and progression. The systems designed in these studies will be used to develop
new and sensitive analytical methods for the identification and quantification
of nucleic acid damage products. These techniques and experimental outcomes are
highly relevant to the understanding of diseases such as cancer, diabetes and
Alzheimer's. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic Dynamics
Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Bryant-Friedrich will train
students in pharmaceutical, medicinal, and biological chemistry in the
manipulation of synthetic nucleic acids, and these students will become skilled
in many different types of chromatography, electrophoresis and mass spectrometry
techniques. Due to the nature of the proposed investigations, students involved
in these projects will be a part of a highly collaborative research program in
which they will interact with scientists across disciplines, cultures and
institutions. This is a vital part of the training of successful future
generations of scientists. This laboratory has an excellent track record in the
recruitment of minorities and women both at the graduate (10 women) and
undergraduate (12 women and 4 minorities in the past four years) levels. This
trend is ingrained in the culture of the laboratory and is always a significant
focus in the recruitment and retention of qualified individuals.