* 0848298
* Collaborative Research: Studying Language Production in the Field: Accessibility Effects on Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Juergen Bohnemeyer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 06/30/2012
* USD 2,536.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When speakers encode their thoughts
into linguistic utterances, they often can choose between several different ways
of conveying the same message. For example, English speakers may use an active
or a passive. They are more likely to choose a passive over an active if the
patient, but not the agent, is human and hence more accessible ("The girl was
struck by lightning"). Such accessibility effects are well-established for a
small set of (mostly related) languages, and have had a tremendous influence on
linguistic and psycholinguistic theory. Yet, the languages previously studied
psycholinguistically are unsuited for distinguishing competing accounts of
accessibility effects. For example, according to availability accounts, speakers
prefer to mention the more accessible referent earlier in the sentence.
According to certain alignment accounts, on the other hand, speakers prefer to
make the most accessible referent the subject of the sentence. Both accounts
correctly predict English passive vs. active choice. To address these questions,
this study will look at morphosyntactic variations in a language that is
typologically very different from English: Yucatec (Mayan). The studies will
exploit properties of Yucatec to distinguish between accessibility accounts
where previously studied languages fail to do so. The studies will also
contribute to the establishment of an interdisciplinary research program of
field-based psycholinguistics. Since most of the world's languages are spoken
far away from psycholinguistic laboratories, it is crucial to adapt and apply
psycholinguistic methods to the study of variation under field conditions, where
participant recruiting is a non-trivial issue and familiarity with the very
concept of an "experiment" cannot be assumed. The research will employ two types
of production methodologies, recall studies and video description tasks, as well
as grammaticality ratings. Production studies are the primary methodology of
psycholinguists working on choice in language production, providing quantitative
data on what speakers produce. Grammaticality ratings are the primary
methodology of theoretical linguists employed in fieldwork. This method will be
extended to a quantitative level, making it possible to study gradient
preferences in alternations. By using both methods, the relevance and
accessibility of the results will be increased for both research communities. In
addition to their relevance for psycholinguistic research, the studies will
close significant gaps in the scientific record of the grammar of Yucatec, for
which close to no quantitative record of syntactic variation exists. This data
will help to distinguish between competing analyses of Yucatec syntax, and will
contribute to syntactic typology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion
of the research will have a potentially transformative effect on several
disciplines: for psycholinguistics, it will allow theories of production to be
tested against a wider set of language data. For field linguistics, it will
contribute to the methodological repertoire available for future field work,
pushing forward the state-of-the-art in language description. The post-doctoral
researcher, graduate research assistants, and undergraduate students will have
the experience of participating in and becoming specialists in a newly emerging
research paradigm of field-based psycholinguistics. They will be trained in
psycholinguistic theory, as well as psycholinguistic and field work
methodologies (including state-of-the-art statistical data analysis). The native
speaker consultants, who are members of indigenous communities, will receive
valuable linguistic training. The sound files from the research will constitute
the first large scale documentation of syntactic variation in Mayan. All data
will be archived and made freely available, allowing further study of the
material. To facilitate similar investigation on other understudied languages,
all experimental stimuli and scripts will also be made available.