* 0848253
* SBIR Phase II:  Shape Variations in the Development of Miniature Micropumps
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Forrest Payne, SFC Fluidics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2012
* USD 891,010.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project focuses
on the development of a product line of miniature pumping systems for the
controlled delivery of fluids in ultra-low flow rate range (nanoliters to
microliters per minute). This line of micropump systems will provide pulse-free
flow and controlled micro-volume dispensing in this challenging low volume
regime. The non-mechanical nature and operating principles of this pump afford
an unusual degree of freedom in pump design. The ability to tailor the shape and
size of the micropump to specific applications can be very valuable,
particularly in small devices where the available space is significantly
constrained (for example, point-of-care devices, portable chemical and
biological analysis systems, and micro-dosing devices).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing diversity of chemical and biological
analyses that are taking place within small chips, as well as in the rising
demand for ultra-small dosing systems. Such analyses are continuing to shrink in
size and measurements that have conventionally been performed in a laboratory
and are now being adapted to handheld devices. These micro-analysis systems can
provide immediate results without waiting for laboratory analyses. For example,
the analysis of blood samples is being adapted to small devices, so important
results are available at the point-of-care. Likewise, the desire is growing for
small, portable dosing systems for animal studies and for human medications
(like insulin and chronic pain management). All of these applications require
micropumps for the controlled delivery of compounds. Fundamental engineering
constraints mean that conventional mechanical pumps cannot be simply decreased
in size to meet this challenge. These miniature non-mechanical pumps require
very little power, can be controlled to deliver at constant flow rate or
specific dispensing volumes, and offer the pulse-less flow that is not
accessible by other pumps. This provides a significant market opportunity in the
liquid pumping market (roughly $160 million presently), into the animal dosing
(valued at approximately $90 million per year) and human drug delivery (valued
at $80 billion presently) markets.