* 0848704
* New Methods for the Synthesis of Biaryl Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Rich Carter, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2012
* USD 301,000.00

This project will continue work on the development of novel methods for the
construction of biaryl compounds. During the upcoming funding period, research
will be focused in three areas. First, the development of enantioenriched
methods for constructing biaryl compounds using chiral dienes will be studied.
Current methods are limited by substrate scope and scalability. Second, the
synthesis of a series of axially chiral biaryl amino acid compounds and their
coupling within standard polypeptide chains will be explored. Axially-chiral
amino acids are a new class of peptide mimetics and will provide novel tools for
biochemists. Third, the utility of ortho-nitro phenyl alkynes to undergo [3+2]
dipolar cycloadditions will be investigated. Previously, the feasibility of
[4+2] cycloadditions has been demonstrated using this protocol and this new
study will help to expand the scope of this cycloaddition approach to
polyaromatic compounds.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Rich Carter of the Department of Chemistry at Oregon
State University. Professor Carter's research efforts revolve around the
development of novel methods for the construction of complicated polyaromatic
compounds. Such compounds have considerable applications as ligands in the field
of asymmetric catalysis as well as key pharmacophores in the pharmaceutical
industry.