* 0848022
* Physics Without Building Blocks (Scholar's Award)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Richard Healey, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 127,909.00

This project on the foundations of quantum mechanics is supported by the
Science, Technology, and Society program. It is also supported by the joint
initiative with Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate: Research at the
Interface of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences and Society. One goal of the
project is to provide a critical scrutiny of one perspective on fundamental
science so as to make way for an alternative. A widely prevalent image of
science, which has influenced the thinking of many scientists and the general
public, pictures scientific knowledge as hierarchically organized. At the base
of the hierarchy is physics, applicable to objects and processes at all length
and energy scales. The other sciences, which concern themselves with kinds of
system (chemical, biological, psychological, social, economic) that become
manifest only in special circumstances, are regarded as being based on
"fundamental" physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional hierarchy based on
"fundamental" physics is organized in accordance with three principles: (1)
Everything is composed of basic microphysical elements, (2) All properties of
objects are wholly determined by the basic intrinsic properties and relations of
these basic microphysical elements, and (3) All laws and/or theories governing
the behavior of composite objects ultimately reduce to the fundamental
laws/theories governing the behavior of their microphysical constituents. Taken
together, these principles would warrant the belief that the basic laws that
govern the behavior of the ultimate constituents of matter are in fact
responsible for the behavior of everything. They provide an image of the
physical world as constructed out of basic building blocks?basic objects, basic
properties and basic laws. This research subjects each of these organizing
principles of the traditional hierarchy to critical examination and explores
ways of getting along without that hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
project builds on previous research undermining the principle that the
properties of all objects are determined by those of their ultimate
constituents. Physicists commonly talk of elementary particles and their
associated quantum fields. But it turns out that there are strong reasons to
doubt these could play the role of ultimate constituents of matter. Even if such
objects were available to serve as building blocks, they do not compose the
objects of condensed matter physics in any simple way. Though quantum (field)
theories are extremely predictively successful, it has proved extraordinarily
hard to interpret them as offering a self-contained description of the world at
a fundamental level. If this is not possible, then the laws of fundamental
physics as currently conceived cannot be responsible for the behavior of
everything. This suggests a revised image of physics (if not all of science) as
successfully modeling structures in various domains by a network of theories,
loosely connected by diverse and domain-specific logical and ontological
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;