* 0848486
* Microparticles Trapped in Holes of Plasmonic Mesh:  Cataloging IR Absorption Spectra of Individual 1-5 micron Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Jim Coe, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2012
* USD 458,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
(ASC) program of the Division of Chemistry supports the research program of
Prof. James V. Coe of the Ohio State University. The Coe Group has developed a
new method for recording "scatter-free" infrared (IR) absorption spectra of
individual microparticles in the 1-5 micrometer size regime, using a standard
FTIR imaging microspectrometer by placing a microparticle in a hole of plasmonic
metal mesh. Particles of this size are important to human health because they
get past our noses and throats and are efficiently trapped in our lungs - in
fact death rates are known to rise with increases in airborne particulate
matter. The group will employ this new method to analyze the chemical content of
airborne dust particles, which may be important in identifying or quantifying
respiratory health risks. These new techniques will also be applied to
individual yeast cells which are smaller than most of the infrared wavelength
range and subject to large scattering effects. Success would be broadly
applicable in the biological sciences. Finally, in addition to the training of
graduate students in the new field of plasmonics for chemistry, Prof. Coe and
his students will enable the remote use of a cyber-enabled imaging Raman
microspectrometer by students from Oakwood College in Huntsville, Alabama and
California State University Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) in Carson,California.