* 0848686
* NONCOVALENT INTERACTIONS AND HYPERCONJUGATION IN CONTROL OF RADICAL REACTIVITY: APPLICATION TO 5-ENDO-DIG CYCLIZATIONS
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Igor Alabugin, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2013
* USD 366,000.00

This proposal extends studies of unusual aspects of alkyne reactivity into a new
direction. It will concentrate on fundamental factors controlling radical
cyclizations of alkynes and utilize this knowledge for the design of
synthetically useful transformations. Because stereoelectronic patterns are
significantly different for radical cyclizations of alkenes and alkynes,
understanding these fundamental differences is essential for the development of
alkyne chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Alabugin group will utilize
stereoelectronic and thermodynamic factors in search of the apparently favorable
but virtually unexplored radical process: 5-endo-dig radical cyclization and
apply this and related reactions to the synthesis of new carbo- and heterocyclic
systems. Proposed experiments will test earlier computational predictions
regarding the relative efficiency of different cyclization patterns, discover
new cyclization topologies and test the efficiency of cooperative
hyperconjugative interactions in control of radical reactivity. In parallel, the
group will combine efficient radical cyclizations with radical translocations
for the rapid construction of functionalized polycyclic systems. These reactions
take advantage of synthetic potential which is present in alkynes but not in
alkenes by utilizing both pi-bonds of the alkyne moiety in the C-C bond forming
steps.&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this research is in unraveling the
contribution of electronic and structural factors controlling the efficiency and
selectivity of radical processes through a combination of experimental and
theoretical studies. The underlying focus on electronic effects will increase
the general importance of these findings, broaden understanding of these
fundamental factors and lead to the development of new paradigms of radical
reactivity. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact will be the laying of mechanistic,
structural, and kinetic foundations for successful applications of radical
reactions of alkynes in synthesis and materials science. The proposed research
will enhance understanding of the reactivity of the alkyne moiety as well as
radical species. The combination of computations and kinetic studies will be
used to validate theoretical approaches for studies of organic reactions.
&lt;br/&gt; The theoretical and experimental components of this work will allow
training of specialists in each area and will provide researchers at the
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels with an opportunity to integrate
learning and discovery. The results will be disseminated in the PI's
publications and outreach activities, including participation in symposia and
lecturing at undergraduate and graduate institutions. The PI and his students
will also record their research presentations for the Global Educational
Outreach for Science Engineering and Technology (GEOSET), a new initiative to
provide outstanding Science, Engineering and Technology (SET) teaching material
through the new technology. The recorded research presentations will be posted
on the GEOSET website and linked to the the PI's and Departmental websites. This
exposure will also help in the development of further career opportunities for
participating students since these recordings may even take the place of job
interviews, thus reducing carbon footprints and travel costs to prospective
employers.