* 0848623
* Worldwide Patterns and Change in Gender Egalitarianism
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2009,10/31/2011
* Fred Pampel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2011
* USD 82,980.00

Beliefs and attitudes favoring equality of opportunities for women have grown
dramatically over the last decades in the United States and other
industrialized, low-fertility nations. Although not to the same extent, gender
egalitarian views have also grown in many low- and middle-income nations of
South America, Asia, and Africa. What caused these changes? One theory
attributes special importance to new education and work roles for women in
advanced industrial economies. Another theory posits that values of people in
all roles -- traditional as well as modern, male as well as female -- become
more egalitarian with economic and social development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a third, diffusion theory that
combines components of the other two. It posits that economic and social
development first increase gender egalitarianism among those in modern positions
and roles, thus creating a gap between traditionalists and feminists. Later,
however, diffusion of egalitarian values to those in traditional roles occurs,
the gap between innovators and others diminishes, and goals of gender equality
become widely accepted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology for the project
tests these theories using surveys of citizens in 84 nations across the world
from 1983 to 2002. The surveys ask numerous questions on the proper work and
family roles of women. The analysis can thus examine how education, work,
family, and religion affect gender egalitarian views across nations at different
levels of economic development, gender equality, and political
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has important broader social impacts.
Equal opportunity for women has become a widely accepted goal of most nations
and inter-governmental organizations. Gender egalitarian views help empower
women in daily life, improve health of women and children, increase access to
rewarding work, lend more choice in family roles, and encourage political
participation. Understanding how support for gender equality spreads within and
across societies can contribute to improving worldwide equal
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;