* 0848759
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultraviolet Germicidal Optical Flow Cell
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Jennifer Pagan, Dot Metrics Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,094,163.00

This Small Innovation Research (SBIR) project will bring to market a low power,
point of use (PoU) water disinfection system designed to retrofit into existing
passive (non-germicidal) filtration systems. This project will use ultraviolet
light emitting diodes (UV LEDs) along with a novel and proprietary flow cell
design, resulting in PoU water disinfection. Current ultraviolet PoU water
disinfection is accomplished using discharge lamps, which requires high voltage,
ballasts, and a relatively large form factor. The use of UV LEDs instead of
discharge lamps will allow the light sources to reside inside a smaller form
factor, and to function at lower overall electrical power, without line voltage
and ballasts. Furthermore, the proprietary optical design of the flow cell will
improve upon conventional flow cells by maximizing the ultraviolet dose received
by microorganisms in the water, and increasing their residence time in the flow
cell.

Currently, there are no PoU systems employing UV LEDs as the germicidal source.
If successful, the product developed under the phase II program will be the
first of its kind and provide a point of entry for UV LEDs into the large PoU
water sterilization market. The low power aspect and small form factor of the
flow cell will make the system potentially suitable for battery operated field
applications where line voltage is not available. Such applications may include
military or medical field operations. Overall societal impact should be
significant, particularly in markets outside the United States where there is
increasing concern about water sterility.