* 0848048
* Family Policy, Social Movements and the Law
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Mary Bernstein, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2012
* USD 162,017.00

SES-0848048&lt;br/&gt;Nancy Naples&lt;br/&gt;Mary Bernstein&lt;br/&gt;University
of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This comparative study of family policy in
two national contexts will study: (1) the impact of structural, historical, and
cultural factors on the development of and changes in family policy over time,
(2) the influence of social movements on policy change in different legal and
political contexts, and (3) the effect of structural features of the state on
social movement strategies and choice of goals. In this multi-method qualitative
study, the theoretical framework draws on four different, but overlapping
approaches: theories of the welfare state, socio-legal scholarship, studies of
sexual citizenship, and social movement theory to theorize the mechanisms that
explain changes over time in family policies in different social and political
contexts. The research seek to better understand policies that recognize diverse
family relationships through comparing the history, political and legal context,
social movement activities, policy debates, and family policy outcomes in
Australia and the U.S. These two countries are similar in regime type, political
structure, and legal systems but differ in many important aspects including
governmental authority to regulate marriage policy, referendum procedures, and
past policy frameworks. By examining two countries with federated political
structures, the study provides the data to test the theory that cultural
factors, including discursive constructions of family, citizen, gender, and
sexuality coupled with a structural and historical analysis, can explain cross-
national and intra-nation variation in family policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals are to: (1) test the influence of
discursive frames on the timing and substance of family policy changes; (2)
explain the continuity and change in constructions of the relationship between
the market, family, and the state in debates over family policies; (3) analyze
the role of social movements and opposing movements in the timing and substance
of changes in family policies in different national and sub-national contexts;
(4) understand the relationship between structural, medium-term and short-term
features of the state, the law, social movements and changes in family policies;
and (5) analyze the impact of economic and political forces external to the
nation-state on the construction of family policies. The hypotheses are that:
(1) Discursive constructions of the relationship between family, gender,
sexuality, citizen and the state will explain differences in the timing of
policy adoption, the trajectory of change over time, the content of specific
policies, and the consequences for gender and sexuality of the adoption of
specific family policies. (2) Social movement activists adopt strategies and
choose discourse based on their interpretation of political opportunities and
the relative importance they give to attaining mobilization, cultural, and
political goals. (3) Institutional frameworks, the strength of state
bureaucracies, and the content and form of existing social policies influence
the form (strategies used by movement activists) and level (scale of resources)
of social movement mobilization. (4) Structural differences in legal systems
both within and across nations as well as the extent to which international law
or pressure is present and acknowledged as legitimate, influence the pattern of
change in family policies over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this research include: (1) providing a more thorough understanding of the
relationship between state structure and family policy in the context of the
economic restructuring of the welfare state; (2) furthering the academic
training of graduate students in both research and course work; and (3)
disseminating findings to policy-makers and other non-academic
constituencies.&lt;br/&gt;