* 0848166
* SST - Multifunctional Adaptive Piezoelectric Sensory System for Structural Damage Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Kon-Well Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2010
* USD 109,882.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research &lt;br/&gt;0529029 (PI: Kon-Well Wang,
Penn State University) and&lt;br/&gt;0528790 (PI: Jiong Tang, University of
Connecticut)&lt;br/&gt;0528790 (University of
Connecticut)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will fundamentally
advance the state-of-the-art of frequency response based structural health
monitoring by developing a new multifunctional adaptive piezoelectric sensory
system. The efforts are to develop (a) methodology in using tunable
piezoelectric circuits and the associated new algorithms for multiple-FRF based
damage identification; (b) novel eigenstructure assignment technique for the
further enhancement of performance; and (c) innovative power electronics to
create sensory nodes that have integrated self-sensing actuation, parameter
tuning, and energy harvesting functions for realizing the proposed damage
detection methodology. This research is expected to increase the sensory system
sensitivity, robustness, and accuracy; and will eventually deliver a system that
is easy to implement, accurate in prediction, self-contained, and wireless-
ready. The aerospace, civil, mechanical, transportation, and many other
industries would benefit from the damage detection devices and technologies
developed based on the outcomes of this investigation. The proposed educational
efforts will have broad impact on student learning through integrating research
and education at Penn State and University of Connecticut.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These two collaborative projects are supported under
sensor initiative NSF 05-526.&lt;br/&gt;