* 0848654
* A Meeting of the Minds: A Symposium for Community College Teacher Education Colleagues
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Judy Kasabian, El Camino College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2009
* USD 48,361.00

A symposium for community college educators is being held to discuss pertinent
issues facing teacher preparation programs at two-year colleges. Community
college faculty, administrators, and staff from institutions across the country
and educators representing professional organizations are meeting to: (1)
compile highly effective STEM teacher preparation strategies and practices which
can be replicated at other institutions; (2) discuss and report the ways in
which NSF-funded projects [such as those supported by Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) and Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher Preparation (CETP)]
have led to institutional changes; (3) discuss the ways in which future K-12
teachers impacted by these programs have improved their science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) content and pedagogical knowledge and how
these improvements can be systemically documented and reported; and (4) generate
specific recommendations to NSF for teacher preparation initiatives that involve
community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A decade after the
release of the paramount document, "Investing In Tomorrow's Teachers: The
Integral Role of Two-Year Colleges in Science and Mathematics Preparation of
Prospective Teachers" (NSF, 1998), it is now appropriate to examine the impact
the recommendations of this document have had on STEM teacher education efforts
and on community colleges' institutional practices. To this end, the symposium
provides a forum for participants to: (a) discuss best practices and challenges
in STEM teacher preparation in 2008, allowing the participating institutions to
further enhance their knowledge; (b) examine ways in which successful practices
can be adapted or adopted at other institutions; (c) examine ways to increase
the group of colleagues in community colleges who provide high-quality STEM
teacher education at their institutions; (d) develop a document which reports
successful practices, and (e) compile information on how NSF-funded projects in
STEM teacher preparation have impacted institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The diversity of participants who engage
in the symposium is essential for accurately reporting teacher preparation
efforts on a larger scale. The document created as a result of the symposium is
being distributed to participants, their designees, NSF, and national
professional organizations. This document is being used to further discussions
at local institutions, state organizations, as well as on the national level.