* 0848028
* The functional ecology of an adaptive radiation: stable isotopes, niches, phylogenies and kidneys
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Carlos Martinez del Rio, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 02/28/2013
* USD 525,186.00

Despite their status as the most diverse lineage of birds and their occupation
of nearly every terrestrial habitat on the planet, songbirds (passerines, or
perching birds) have rarely adapted to become marine specialists. The paucity of
marine species among passerines is probably due to the absence of functional
salt glands and to the relative inability of bird kidneys to produce highly
concentrated urine, which prevents them from coping with the salt loads that
accompany marine resources. This project will track the evolutionary pathways
that led to a marine niche in an evolutionary radiation of a group of South
American songbirds in which two species have independently become marine
specialists. The group also includes freshwater specialists and species that
occupy both freshwater and marine habitats. We will also investigate the
physiological mechanisms that facilitated the transition from a freshwater to a
marine environment. Achieving these objectives demands three complementary
approaches: 1) using molecular techniques to elucidate the evolutionary
relationship among the species in the group; 2) using stable isotopes to
quantify the relative reliance of each of these species on marine resources, and
3) using physiological and morphological measurements to assess the traits that
allow marine species to cope with the salt loads that accompany the use of
marine resources. This project is fundamentally interdisciplinary and hence its
participants include a physiologist, a phylogenetic systematist, and a
statistician. The project is also an international collaboration that includes
scientists from Chile and Brazil. Expeditionary physiology aims to explore the
planet's functional biodiversity, and this project is an ideal instrument for
communicating biology and inspiring young scholars. This project is a
collaboration with elementary and middle school teachers across Wyoming to
develop classroom exercises and interactive, web-based, virtual expeditions in
order to make the research accessible to their students.