* 0848627
* Frozen Planet
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dan Rees, Discovery Communications, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2012
* USD 84,450.00

Frozen Planet is a landmark multi-media seven-part television series, with
complementary website, whose goal is to inform and inspire audiences about the
environment and ecology of the Polar Regions and the science being carried out
there. The series will highlight multiple disciplines including climatology,
volcanology, geology, glaciology, as well as natural history. Frozen Planet will
be produced in High Definition by the BBC Natural History Unit and Discovery
Communications for broadcast worldwide on Discovery Channel in 2011. The
proposal to NSF is for 1) field support for filming various NSF-supported
research efforts in Antarctica and 2) funding to cover evaluation of the
project?s intended learning impacts in the United States. Goodman Research Group
will conduct the summative evaluation to measure learning impacts centered on
the audience?s understanding of the polar environment, the science being
undertaken there, and the implication of the new scientific findings to their
everyday lives. For scientific and field support, the production team is
collaborating with many organizations in addition to NSF?s Office of Polar
Programs including the British Antarctic Survey, the Canadian Polar Continental
Shelf Project, and NASA. Through repeated broadcast, video-on-demand, the
website, and DVDs, the project will provide a comprehensive, enduring resource.
The project is anticipated to reach more than 65 million people across the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;