* 0848894
* Complex surface structure and locomotion
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Hu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2013
* USD 389,933.00

In this project the PI will investigate, experimentally and theoretically, the
role of complex biological integuments in animal locomotion. Two parallel
research thrusts are planned: one investigation on the terrestrial limbless
locomotion of snakes, and the other on the collective locomotion of semi-aquatic
insects. A series of integrated experimental and theoretical investigations will
be conducted on the propulsion of snakes on horizontal surfaces. Snakes exhibit
four modes of locomotion, including lateral undulation, side winding,
rectilinear progression and an accordion-like concertina motion. The goal of
this research is to rationalize these limbless propulsion mechanisms. An
existing theoretical framework will be adapted for investigation of the snake
gaits. Particular attention will be given to assessing the snake's gains in
efficiency and speed from dynamic lifting of its body during locomotion.
Measurements of the snake's weight distribution during slithering will be
obtained qualitatively using birefringent gelatin techniques and quantitatively
using arrays of pressure transducers. An understanding of dynamic load-bearing
mechanisms will shed insight onto the snake's energy budget and mechanisms for
reducing abrasive wear. For the second part of the project, combined
experimental and theoretical investigations will be made on the locomotion of
insects that live above and below the water surface. An exploratory
investigation will be conducted on the mechanisms by which fire ant colonies,
whose individuals are hydrophilic and cannot swim, collectively form floating
structures, ant balls that allow them to survive floods. Contact angles of the
individuals and frozen ant balls will be measured and the dynamics of ants
within the ball observed. A series of investigations of the locomotion of
aquatic insects and gastropods will also be conducted, focusing on their wetting
properties, propulsion using cilia and the body shapes which give them
underwater stability near the free surface. The PI will develop an
interdisciplinary undergraduate course in animal bio-locomotion in order to draw
together students of biology and engineering and increase the visibility of
integrative research. A bio-inspired walking-on-water theme will be planned for
the school's annual design competition for mechanical engineering juniors. The
PI will mentor two local high school students under the Intel Science Talent
Search, in which he once participated.