* 0848112
* EAR-PF: High resolution paleoclimate reconstruction of 8200 year event from northern Venezuelan speleothem stable isotope records: possible atmospheric-oceanic linkages
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Julie Retrum, Retrum, Julie B
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2012
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Julie Retrum is awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Retrum will study the timing, structure, and mechanism of the 8200 year
event, the largest climate excursion during the Holocene (approximately the last
11 to 12 thousand years). The research goals will be accomplished by performing
high-resolution uranium-series radiometric dating and carbon and oxygen stable
isotope geochemistry on Venezuelan cave stalagmites. The results of this
investigation will aid in our understanding of the mechanisms and global impacts
of rapid climatic excursions and in the calibration of climate models attempting
to forecast future climate.

In addition, Dr. Retrum will be working on two educational activities. The first
activity will develop teaching modules on ocean-atmospheric interactions and the
role of oceans in climate change for undergraduate introductory oceanography
laboratories. The second activity will address undergraduate climate change
misconceptions and make attempts to effectively counter them in a classroom
setting.