* 0848476
* Single Cell Visualization of DNA Repair Using Digital Fluorescent Holography
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Azadeh Samadani, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2013
* USD 371,190.00

In this project, in order to understand the process of the repair of broken
chromosomes the PI will visualize their motion in vivo. The physical properties
of chromosomes such as the end-to-end distance, collision rate and the
cyclization rate will be measured for comparison to the prediction of
theoretical models of biopolymers. The affects of the physical constraints such
as the chromosomal tethering to the nuclear periphery as well as the variation
in homology length will be addressed systematically. A novel fluorescent
holographic microscope will be used to improve current methods of three-
dimensional microscopy and to visualize the dynamics of these biopolymers. The
experiments will be performed in a microfluidic device where a precise control
over the microenvironment of cells is possible. Using a microfluidic progeny
chamber in combination with precise image analysis, the PI will investigate the
repair process at the single cell level and characterize the cell-to-cell
variability of the repair process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has modified an
existing lecture course for freshman in biophysics to include experiments in
modern quantitative biology. The PI has also started a collaborative effort
among the Departments of Physics, Biology and the Education Program at Brandeis
University to launch a summer workshop for high school teachers in the subject
of modern methods of microscopy applied to quantitative biology. The workshop
will familiarize high school teachers with cutting edge techniques in
quantitative biology and give them ideas for new experiments in their
classrooms. The participants will take home all the materials that they had used
during the workshop, including the inexpensive student-grade fluorescent
microscope that the PI has co-developed at Brandeis University and the pre-made
fluorescent slides for use in their schools science program.