* 0848354
* Reactions of Transition Metal Perfluoroalkyl and Perfluoroalkylidene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Russell Hughes, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 402,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program supports work by Professor Russell P. Hughes at
Dartmouth College to carry out fundamental studies on the chemistry of
perfluoroalkyl and perfluoroalkylidene compounds of transition metals.

Fluorocarbons are molecules containing carbon-fluorine (C-F) bonds, and play
significant roles in the lives of human beings: many pharmaceutical drug
molecules and agrochemicals contain these kinds of chemical linkages. New
technologically important materials made from fluorinated chemicals include
automotive hoses and gaskets, materials for reconstructive surgery, and fuel
cell membranes. Positive societal roles of these fluorocarbons are offset by
deleterious environmental effects of others; volatile chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
in the atmosphere have contributed to ozone depletion and global warming, and
are now banned under the Montreal Protocol. Replacement molecules, which contain
no environmentally harmful chlorine atoms, are crucially important for future
applications as refrigerants, aerosols, foaming agents, and semiconductor
cleaning solvents. This project is increasing understanding of how transition
metal centers metal centers accomplish two important fundamental processes:
breaking carbon-fluorine bonds coupled with making new carbon-hydrogen bonds to
give new environmentally benign molecules; and is generating transformational
methodology and new reactions of fluorocarbons that are leading to new organic
transformations and new technologically useful materials.

Broad human impact of this project continues in training of postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate students, many of whom are continuing to advanced
chemistry studies and employment in science. Students at all levels are being
educated in written and oral communication, trained in mentoring their junior
group colleagues, and are being provided with rich opportunities for engaged
learning, which is increasing their interest and knowledge in chemistry.
Students are being trained in communicating scientific concepts to broad
audiences, and are presenting their research and its societal relevance in
Junior Science Cafes held in rural schools in our region (Claremont NH and
Windsor VT) that include many economically disadvantaged students. In outreach
activities, the capacity of secondary school teachers in our rural region to
stay abreast of, and recognize the practical and societal impacts of, new
developments in these and other chemistry research areas is being addressed by
informal and informative talks at annual meetings of the New Hampshire Science
Teachers Association. This basic research will have future benefits to society
by generating new synthetic and catalytic schemes that will provide energy
efficient routes to technologically useful molecules, which do not cause
atmospheric environmental problems such as global warming and ozone depletion.

