* 0849433
* Fluid-Structure Interaction in Arthropod Mechanoreceptors with Application to Bio-Inspired Micro-Fluidic Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* John Miller, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 09/30/2012
* USD 399,943.00

The ability to identify micro-flow characteristics using small sensors (1 mm or
less) is becoming increasingly important in many engineering applications. In
biomedical engineering there is a need to measure local flow properties in blood
vessels because these fluid properties have a potential impact on the structural
integrity of the vessel wall. In aerospace engineering, micro-planes are being
developed for a number of applications, but the performance of these micro-
planes is limited due to the difficulties of preventing flow separation along
the wings and the resulting stall. Measuring these characteristics while the
micro-plane is in flight is proving to be a significant challenge. While
engineers have been grappling with the design of micro-flow-sensors for a few
decades, crickets and other arthropods have used a few million years of
evolution to develop micro-flow-sensors that are essential for threat detection,
predator avoidance, and communication. In the common house cricket the micro-
flow-sensors are two antenna-like appendages, called cerci, at the rear of the
abdomen. Each cercus is covered with approximately 800 filiform mechanosensory
hairs, each of which is connected to a single spike-generating neuron.
Deflection of a hair by air currents changes the spiking activity of the
associated receptor neuron at the base of the hair. It has been shown that the
cercal system is extraordinarily sensitive and capable of detection of air
motion caused by thermal noise. This sensitivity is beyond the capability of
current artificial micro-flow sensors. Our project is based on the hypothesis
that a better understanding of the arthropod micro-flow-sensor can guide the
development and improvement of artificial micro-flow-sensors. We will develop
new modeling and computational tools for the unsteady Stokes equations based on
immersed boundary techniques to study the cercal micro-sensor in crickets. These
models will be directly applicable to artificial micro-flow
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been recognized for many years that
engineering design can greatly benefit from the understanding of biological
structures. Evolution has resulted in very sophisticated solutions for complex
problems related to the detection and analysis of very small air and fluid
movements in an animal's immediate environment, and aspects of those biological
solutions should be directly applicable or generalizable, in principle, for
engineered systems. An interdisciplinary team that combines an engineer,
mathematician and a neurobiologist will develop new modeling and computational
tools to study performance characteristics of the cercal micro-flow sensor in
crickets. Two principal outcomes will be directly applicable to design of
artificial micro-flow sensors. The first outcome will be a collection of
computational techniques and models which explicitly address the effect of fluid
motion on the sensors. The second outcome will be a set of biological principles
that evolved in response to constrains posed by the physics of structure-fluid
interactions, and that can guide the development of artificial flow
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;