* 0849302
* REU Site: Ralph Bunche Summer Institute
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Paula McClain, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2012
* USD 404,521.00

This proposal is designed to continue the Ralph Bunche Summer Institute (RBSI),
a program of the American Political Science Association (APSA) and hosted by the
Department of Political Science at Duke University, as a REU Site in Political
Science. The RBSI is designed to expand opportunities for students-of-color by
preparing black, Latino, and American Indian undergraduates to enroll in
doctoral programs and become political science college and university
professors, and/or researchers in the field and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RBSI
immerses undergraduates in the summer of their junior year in a five-week
intensive program that includes graduate level course work, and the design,
analysis, writing, and presentation of original research papers. The program
simulates the graduate school experience and focuses on scientific analysis by
introducing the students to research methods and statistics, and the research
enterprise that is the lifeline of professional political scientists. Those
students whose empirical papers are judged to be of high quality are invited to
present their papers in a poster session at the annual meeting of the American
Political Science Association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The APSA initiated the Ralph Bunche Summer
Institute in 1986, with the goal of increasing the number of black Americans
pursing advanced degrees in political science. In 2000, RBSI was expanded to
include other students-of-color. The numbers of students-of-color in doctoral
programs in political science has waxed and waned over the years, but appears to
be on an upward trajectory. The RBSI has played a major role in this increase.
Nevertheless, the need for blacks, Latinos/as and American Indians with
doctorates in political science remains. The ultimate goal of the RBSI is to
increase the number of black, Latino, and American Indian political science
faculty in U.S. colleges and universities. Results suggest that the RBSI is
succeeding in increasing the numbers of students-of-color in political science
graduate programs, and the numbers of blacks and Latinos with doctorates in
political science, but the need is so great that more needs to be done. This
project will address those needs.