* 0849109
* Mark(er)ing Race: An Ethnographic Study of Human Difference in Contemporary Genetics
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Duana Fullwiley, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Layne
* 03/31/2012
* USD 176,397.00

This research, supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society program and
the Biology Directorate at NSF under the Biology &amp; Society initiative, notes
that science and society are entering a pivotal moment with regard to
understandings of race, human variation, and individual genetic risk. As genome-
wide analyses are being funded in both the public and private sectors,
scientists and members of the lay public remain unclear about the connections
between social classifications of race and human genetic variation as these bear
on disease risk. Nonetheless, genomic studies that sort DNA and other biological
specimens by US census categories have become one acceptable norm for many in
the genome sciences. How do scientists grapple with questions of "best
practices" on these issues when common health disparities, such as prostate
cancer, disproportionately affect US minorities? How, and under what conditions,
are social categories of identity effective for sifting through biogenetic
differences characteristic of the human genome? Finally, how do members of
minority groups and concerned citizens of the lay public who are targeted for
genetic studies help to shape, revise, or contest genetic uses of racial
ascription? The answers to these questions are of increasing relevance to public
understandings of science. This study employs extensive observational analyses
and interviews with both geneticists and members of the lay public to chronicle
how the societal and scientific expansion of genetic research on human variation
influences key areas of social life. These areas include biomedicine (through
disease risk mapping), law (through forensic DNA database building), and
personhood (through identity markers framed as "ancestry"). One related question
that this ethnographic study will begin to answer is how members of the public
may or may not feel comfortable with the myriad potential uses to which their
DNA can be put. A related major component of this social scientific study will
focus on the ethical practices of research scientists who are mindful of the
importance of diverse medical inclusion for biological and social reasons, while
also having a personal commitment to empower and represent research subjects who
are members of diverse communities. Appeals to advance genetics for conditions
that disproportionately affect African-Americans, in one lab, and injunctions to
support new technological feats of personalized genomics, in another, are
compared as lead geneticists' personal articulations of their goals merge with
perceived societal needs. This research also investigates how such work by
geneticists may pose new concerns and constraints for the research participation
of certain social groups.