* 0849008
* STTR Phase II:   Development of a Remote Climbing Robot for Automating Welding Processes in the Shipbuilding Industry
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Stephen Canfield, Robotic Technologies of Tennessee
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2012
* USD 718,505.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II research project will
advance a Mobile Robotic Welding System (MRWS) to significantly improve
automated ship fabrication techniques in the United States. Providing automation
to the American shipbuilding industry poses significant challenges. Traditional
robotic systems are inadequate in industries such as shipbuilding characterized
by size and scale because of their inherent inability to adhere and maneuver
across uneven and even inverted environments while maintaining a weld. The team
addresses these problems by merging recent climbing robot technology developed
for remote inspection tasks in the electric power industry with automated
welding equipment. This project will advance this technology, moving it from the
laboratory to the field and address the technical challenges posed by real-world
conditions. This will include vehicle and manipulator interaction in a dynamic
environment, sensor systems capable of handling variable conditions, and robust
navigation and control algorithms with self preserving and correcting behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed effort focuses on technology innovation to
significantly advance automation of manufacturing, inspection and maintenance
processes through an autonomous, mobile climbing robot. If successful the
outcome of this project will additionally advance the state of knowledge in
performing robotic tasks remotely in unstructured environments. The general need
for such capability in robotics is immense. Shipbuilding is an extremely labor-
intensive, $15 billion dollar industry in the US, and its success depends on
improvements in productivity. Over $40 trillion will be spent worldwide in
infrastructure spending between 2005 and 2030. The US will spend $6.52 trillion
overall and $1.53 trillion in energy/power segment with includes pipelines,
storage facilities and alternative energy.