* 0849359
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Change in the Climate and Hydrology of the Arctic Land Region: Synthesizing the Results of the ARCSS Fresh Water Initiative Projects
* GEO,OPP
* 06/30/2008,08/31/2010
* Charles Vorosmarty, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 211,628.00

The climate of the Arctic is changing. According to the Arctic Climate Impact
Assessment (ACIA), "Arctic climate is now warming rapidly, and much larger
changes are projected". These changes are of concern because of their possible
implications for global ocean circulation. The ARCSS Freshwater Integration
Study (FWI) was designed to address the scientific basis of many of these
broader issues that are related to the arctic freshwater cycle, especially over
land. In particular, FWI has the objective of addressing "... key, unresolved
issues ... [that are] fundamentally cross-disciplinary and synthetic in nature".
Three of these issues deal directly with the coupled implications of arctic
climate and the water and energy balances of the region. NSF funded a group of
18 FWI projects in 2002, which together with subsequent ARCSS projects were
intended to address the FWI questions outlined above. However there is a need
for synthesis activities to exploit more fully results of the FWI projects. This
work will utilize research results from the FWI projects that have a substantial
land surface activity, and will incorporate the results in a synthesis activity
that will document and attribute observed change in the arctic hydrologic cycle,
both for the climate of the region, and the global climate system. The primary
synthesis mechanism will be a coupled regional land-atmosphere model (either
polar WRF or MM5), and (more limited use) of a global model of medium complexity
of the ocean-land-atmosphere system. The overarching science question to be
addressed is: How do changes in arctic land processes affect the climate of the
region, what are the implications of these changes for the arctic hydrologic
cycle (including coupling and feedbacks with the atmosphere), and what are the
impacts of changes in the arctic freshwater system on global climate?

The research will address two supporting science questions: 1) How can the
results from the FWI studies be used to better understand the hydrologic
processes affecting observed change in the freshwater balance of the pan arctic
land system? and 2) To what extent are the observed changes in Arctic
terrestrial hydrologic cycle due to imported change from other regions (via
atmospheric processes), and to what extent are the observed terrestrial
hydrologic changes exported to the atmosphere and to the global ocean system?
The first question leads to attribution questions regarding which hydrologic
processes have contributed to observed change, and will be addressed using a
strategy of uncoupled, partially coupled, and fully coupled land-atmosphere
modeling at the pan-arctic scale. Addressing the second question will require
documenting the effect of hydrologic change on global climate (via changes in
the oceans). It will be addressed through use of a coupled GLOBAL land-ocean-
atmosphere model of medium complexity (University of Victoria ESCM climate
model).

To date our understanding of change in the Arctic region and its broader role in
global climate has been limited. This research seeks to provide a comprehensive
view of key hydrological processes within the Arctic system and how they
interact regionally and with the global system via oceanic and atmospheric
pathways. It is expected that this will result in a better understanding of how
hydrologic processes have contributed to observed change and the contribution
from extra-Arctic processes. Detailed analysis of these interactions and
feedbacks will provide valuable information to the climate community for
understanding the role of the Arctic in climate variability and change.