* 0849336
* Identification, Estimation, and Applications in Auction and Differentiated Products Markets
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Philip Haile, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2014
* USD 286,950.00

This project involves research on empirical methods and applications in two
broad areas of industrial organization: 1) auctions and 2) demand for
differentiated products. Auctions are important market institutions and provide
a unique window on strategic behavior in markets with asymmetric information.
Demand estimation is fundamental to a wide range of empirical work in
microeconomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work on auctions includes
methodological research on estimation of first-price auctions when unobservables
affect the sample of auctions observed, the set of bidders participating, and
the bids they make. We provide new identification results, a new estimation
approach, and simulation studies to evaluate the methods. The project also
includes an empirical examination of Federal mineral lease auctions on the U.S.
Outer-Continental Shelf. Over the last 25 years there have been several major
changes in technology and policy that are likely to have significant effects on
these sales. We examine the effects of these changes on bidder participation,
bidding, drilling, and production. We study the effects of three-dimensional
imaging technology on the information structure and bidding at these auctions,
and also assess the controversial royalty relief program.&lt;br/&gt; The work on
demand for differentiated products is comprised of three components, each
examining what can be learned under weaker assumptions than those typically
considered previously. The first considers the case in which consumer-level
characteristics and choices are observable (micro data). The model of
preferences is nonparametric and distribution free, nesting random coefficients
discrete choice models widely used in practice with parametric functional form
and distributional assumptions. It incorporates choice-specific unobservables
and a very flexible specification of how preferences vary across products and
individuals. This component of the work provides a deeper understanding of the
data and assumptions required to obtain reliable estimates. The second project
considers the case in which one observes only market level data. This case is
more challenging and requires a different type of argument; however, we again
obtain positive results for less restrictive models than those previously
considered. The third project examines demand estimation allowing for the fact
that when firms choose the products to offer, this leads to correlation between
observable and unobservable characteristics of products. We provide conditions
for identification, then develop, evaluate, and apply new estimation
methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The methodological components of this work
addresses issues of importance to the analysis of economic and policy questions
in fields ranging from anti-trust policy to the economics of education and the
allocation of public resources. Some of the empirical work addresses issues of
direct importance to government policy in the U.S. The work will be disseminated
broadly through research seminars, conference presentations, and publication of
research articles. This work will contribution to the training of graduate
students, who will serve both as research assistants and co-authors. &lt;br/&gt;