* 0849498
* Constraints on Cross-shelf Exchange Imposed by Boundary Layer Buoyancy Arrest
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Kenneth Brink, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2012
* USD 528,673.00

One of the classic problems in coastal oceanography is the question of how flow
on the shelf responds to conditions farther offshore. The most common dynamical
framework for thinking about this issue has been the idea that bottom Ekman
transport allows the geostrophic (Taylor-Proudman) prohibition of cross-isobath
flow to be relaxed. This paradigm needs to be revisited because of our improved
understanding of bottom boundary layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an ocean with
density stratification, bottom friction and a sloping bottom, cross-isobath
buoyancy transport arrests the bottom velocity, and so steady along-isobath flow
experiences no along-isobath bottom friction. Consequently, steady flow over the
shelf, once it adjusts, has to follow isobaths exactly, provided the flow does
not have large inertia in the Rossby number sense. Cross-shelf scales are set by
rotation, bottom slope, stratification and flow volume (but not bottom
friction). This result very much brings into question (during stratified
conditions) the enduring 'diffusive' model that shows that steady flows can
cross isobaths because of the mitigating effects of bottom
friction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is argued that if flow goes onto the shelf
from offshore, the current will be relatively wide as it flows away toward the
left (facing onshore, in the Northern Hemisphere). However, if, at the shelf
edge, flow is drawn offshore, the width of the associated shelf current will be
much less as it flows in from the left as one faces onshore. In this case,
bottom Ekman transport is up-slope. Preliminary numerical results verify these
conclusions with regard to current width and boundary layer properties, at least
qualitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address how
an ocean with a realistic representation of bottom boundary layer arrest behaves
with regard to coupling between the shelf and the open ocean. Within this
broader question, the problem will be broken up to address the shelf-slope
system for 1) onshore flows, 2) offshore flows, 3) inertial effects, and 4) the
possibility that buoyancy arrest physics, in combination with regional onshore
flow, can account for undercurrent systems such as the California
Undercurrent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work is two-fold.
First, the project will have impact over the wide range of ocean sciences where
cross-shelf exchange is an important issue. For example, one specific result of
this project will be to quantify the distance onto the shelf that an oceanic
flow can penetrate (and, the rather different scale over which water from over
the shelf can be drawn offshore). Second, this project will contribute to the
health of the ocean science community by contributing to the education of a PhD
graduate student.