* 0849475
* Measurement and Interpretation of OH, HO2, and OH Reactivity during BEARPEX 09
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 457,061.00

The Biosphere Effects on Aerosol and Photochemistry Experiment (BEARPEX-09)
field study will be held in summer 2009 at Blodgett Forest in the Sierra Nevada
Mountains in California to investigate the impact of gases emitted by forests on
atmospheric chemistry and aerosol formation. This award will support
measurements of hydroxyl radical (OH), OH reactivity, hydroperoxyl radical
(HO2), naphthalene, nitric oxide (NO), ozone, UV flux, temperature, and wind at
different heights below, in, and above the canopy on a movable lift. Research
questions include: How do OH and HO2 vary with season and can models capture the
observed differences? Are there temperature-dependent disagreements between
measured and calculated OH reactivity and, if so, do they indicate biogenic
emissions that are not being measured? How do models with and without isoprene
chemistry compare? Are height profiles of OH, HO2, and OH reactivity similar to
those measured during BEARPEX-07 and what is the nature of nighttime profiles?
Which models best simulate OH and HO2 in this forested
environment?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information from this study will be used to
test and improve the chemical mechanisms in air quality models. Laboratory
demonstrations of atmospheric chemistry in forests will be developed for an
exhibition at Penn State. Broader impacts also include education of
undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral associates through this
project. Three to four high school students from under-represented groups will
be sponsored each year in Penn State's six-week Summer Experience in Earth and
Mineral Sciences (SEEMS). They will test different hypotheses using data from
BEARPEX. This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).