* 0849895
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant.  Establishing Democracy:  Venezuelan Grass Roots Political Participation in State Formation.
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Alejandro Lugo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

University of Illinois PhD candidate, Christopher A. Valencia, with guidance
from Dr. Alejandro Lugo, will undertake research on the role of grass-roots
political participation in processes of state formation and in creating and
maintaining democracy. This key research questions concern: 1) how the state and
democracy are understood and experienced from the vantage point of grass-roots
organizations and their participants; 2) if race, class, and gender inequalities
affect participation in grass-roots organizations and thus state formation and
establishing democracy; and, 3) what kinds of social relations link grass-roots
organizations and their participants to the state.

The research will be conducted in Venezuela, which, after a decade of radical
political change, is a useful case study of these more general processes.
Through fieldwork methods such as participant-observation and structured and
semi-structured interviews, Valencia will conduct ethnographic research in two
southwest Caracas parishes and surrounding settlements. Special attention will
be paid to the perspectives of participants in social, political, economic, and
cultural organizations that identify with post-1998 politcal movements.
Additional attention will be given to the interactions and differentiated
relationships between government supporters, local and regional government
officials, and opposition groups. Finally, local and regional government
officials and opposition groups will be interviewed regarding their
interpretations of the new government policies and their own political
practices.

This research contributes theoretically and empirically to understandings of the
relationship between the state, social movements, and democracy. It responds to
appeals made within the social sciences to broaden understandings of political
participation through the observation of both bottom-up and top-down processes
of state formation and in establishing democracy.