* 0849826
* Collaborative Research:  Urban-Environmental Restructuring in the U.S. Cities
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* James Elliott, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2013
* USD 110,618.00

Shifts from manufacturing to services in older U.S. cities have brought
important changes--well known to social scientists--in the ways that urban
society is organized, but these shifts have also left behind industrial hazards
that have slipped from view in ways underappreciated by scholars, policymakers,
and residents. To the widely recognized social and economic consequences of
post-World War II urban restructuring--rising income inequality, hyper-
segregation, gentrification, and uneven redevelopment--this study adds
environmental consequences, which require a new method of longitudinal data
collection and analysis. The study's goal is to develop, demonstrate, and refine
such a methodology in order to bring environmental changes in urban lands center
stage and, in the process, improve understanding of urbanization as a critical
and ongoing link between society, nature, and the human condition. This new
methodology will extend beyond traditional concerns with political economic and
socio-spatial processes to incorporate environmental concerns of known
scientific importance: the accumulation and distribution of "relict industrial
waste," that is, environmental hazards produced in earlier eras that have become
hidden with time and may still pose significant health risks. Examining these
dynamics requires a new approach?one that begins in the past, with parcels
formerly occupied by hazardous industry, and proceeds to the present to examine
what these sites have become, when, and where. Three propositions frame this
effort, each subject to empirical investigation and refinement: 1) Prior to
increasing environmental awareness and regulation of the 1980s, hundreds of
thousands of manufacturers came and went in U.S. cities, dumping hazardous waste
on site; 2) Many of these sites have now converted to other uses, effectively
hiding relict waste from public view, government regulation, and scholarly
inquiry; 3) How and where these changes in urban lands have occurred--first
through manufacturing and onsite waste disposal, then through site conversion--
depend greatly on social and economic processes happening around them, over
time.

Regarding broader impacts, results from the study have the potential to
transform how sociologists study cities in ways that not only enrich sociology
but build bridges to related fields of environmental history, geography and
regional sciences, science and technology studies, and public health. These
contributions can offer important theoretical advances for understanding urban-
environmental change, inform regulatory mandates involving environmental
justice, and offer comparative insights that can help scholars and policymakers
distinguish general from place-specific processes of industrial production, land
use conversion, and environmental inequality.