* 0849358
* SGER: Molecular Communication Using Epithelial Cells
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Tadashi Nakano, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2009
* USD 106,556.00

Unlike current telecommunications based on electrical or optical signals, the
biological communications technology uses chemical signals as carriers of
information. This technology exhibits various distinct features such as
biocompatibility and energy-efficiency, potentially enabling new Bio-ICT
(Information and Communications Technology) applications that are not likely
achieved by current silicon-based technology. For example, molecular
communication can be applied to biocompatible information systems in which
implanted biological devices chemically interact with tissues and organs in the
human body. It is also applicable to unconventional information systems in which
biological cells chemically coordinate to grow into a three dimensional
structure that functions as information processing and storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator is exploring
biological cells and cell-to-cell communication mechanisms. The specific
objectives in this project are fourfold; (1) design and engineering of system
components - designing, engineering and characterizing necessary building blocks
of molecular communication systems (e.g., repeaters and switches), (2) system
integration - developing a microplatform that can integrate independent
components into a working system, (3) application designs - demonstrating novel
applications using an integrated molecular communication system, and (4)
establishment of information theory - addressing the theoretical basis such as
channel capacity and coding mechanisms of molecular communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to provide new insights and
findings into science and engineering. It examines how information is
communicated, processed and stored in biological systems from a communication
and engineering view point, which may help enhance current engineering
principles as well as advance bio-inspired information technology. It is also
expected to address a number of unanswered questions on design principles of
biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;