* 0849590
* Collaborative Research: Asymmetric Power in Paired Common Pool and Public Good Games: Experiments, Institutions, and Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* James Cox, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2013
* USD 329,511.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social dilemmas characterize
environments in which individuals' exclusive pursuit of their own material self-
interest can produce inefficient aggregate outcomes. Two such environments are
those characterized by public goods and common pool resources, in which the
social dilemmas can be manifested in free riding and tragedy of the commons
outcomes. In public goods games, individuals decide how much of their endowments
to contribute to the public good. In common-pool resource games, individuals
decide how much to withdraw from the common-pool. In both settings, group
resources are undermined if decision makers act non-cooperatively. Much field
and laboratory research has focused on the effectiveness of alternative
political-economic institutions in counteracting individuals' tendencies to
under-provide public goods and over-exploit common pool resources. Previous
research, however, has not focused on the implications of power asymmetries in
these settings. The research proposed here begins with settings in which agents
move simultaneously, without knowledge of other agents' actions. The settings
are designed for pair-wise comparisons in which payoff consequences of
alternative strategies are held constant across treatments. This initial
analysis allows us to examine behavioral differences across public good and
common pool settings that are linked to asymmetries in norms of behavior, as
opposed to differences in payoff consequences of strategies. The research then
moves to experiments with pairs of sequential move games in which second movers
with asymmetric power make their decisions after first movers. The opportunities
for these "bosses and kings" to exploit cooperative choices of first movers is
systematically varied across design settings. The central questions are whether
the powers associated with these bosses and kings lead to exploitation, and to
what extent this power has significant effects on the willingness of first
movers to behave cooperatively. We examine whether these effects differ across
the paired public good and common pool resource settings. This research provides
important insights into how community collective action depends critically on
the design of institutions that allows for transparency, as well as control over
the exploitive powers associated with agents with administrative control. It
will also yield important insights into how decision makers' norms of behavior
may be importantly linked to the structure of the social dilemma and how such
norms interact with institutions designed to facilitate cooperation.