* 0849122
* Neuroscience and Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joan Fujimura, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 381,472.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5). The project funds a Small Grant for Training and
Research in Neuroscience and Public Policy at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison (UW-Madison). Three graduate students are supported annually who are
engaged in integrated training and research in neuroscience and public policy in
the recently established Neuroscience and Public Policy graduate program (N&PP)
at UW-Madison. The N&PP is a dual-degree graduate program that leads to a Ph.D.
degree in neuroscience, granted by the Neuroscience Training Program (NTP) and a
Master of Public Affairs degree (M.P.A.), with an emphasis on Science and
Technology Policy, awarded by the La Follette School of Public Affairs. The
Program is based on two strongly held beliefs: (1) that sound science and
technology policy is essential for the well being of society; and (2) that a
step toward ensuring such policy is to train future scientists who are informed
about the making of public policy and are prepared to participate in doing so.

The N&PP brings together faculty from the NTP and the La Follette School to
train students for a Ph.D. degree in neuroscience and a Masters degree in public
affairs (public policy). The training is accomplished in a program that
integrates classroom and laboratory research training in neuroscience with a
classroom-based education in public policy. In addition to fulfilling all of the
requirements that have been established by the NTP and the La Follette School
for the Ph.D. degree in neuroscience and the M.P.A. degree, respectively, N&PP
students also are required to take the Neuroscience and Public Policy Seminar,
which meets monthly, during each of the years that they are enrolled in the
N&PP. Thus even after students have completed the requirements for the M.P.A.
degree, typically by the end of the third summer, and are working full-time in
the last two years of the Program on their doctoral research they maintain an
involvement with issues related to public policy. N&PP students also are
required to write a critical paper on a topic that bridges neuroscience and
public policy as part of the Preliminary Examination for the Ph.D. degree, and
complete a summer internship in an agency or organization that is directly
involved in science policy.

The N&PP trains future neuroscientists who will have strong research and public
policy skills. Currently, there is no other integrated graduate program in the
country with goals comparable to those of the N&PP. It is anticipated that one
of the major impacts of the N&PP nationwide will be to serve as a model for
other institutions who decide to develop similar graduate programs that will
integrate training in public policy with neuroscience, genetics or other
appropriate biological or physical sciences.