* 0849174
* US- Malaysia Workshop:   High-capacity Optical-networks Test &amp; Monitoring (HOTM)
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2008,08/31/2011
* M. Yasin Raja, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 08/31/2011
* USD 32,340.00

0849174&lt;br/&gt;Raja&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Malaysia Workshop on
High-capacity Optical-networks Test and Monitoring
(HOTM)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the participation of American
researchers, postdocs, and graduate students in a U.S.- Malaysian workshop to be
held in Penang, Malaysia in November 2008. The co-organizers are Professor Yasin
Raja of the Department of Physics and Optical Science at the University of North
Carolina in Charlotte and Professor Rosni Abdullah in the School of Computer
Sciences at the Universiti Sains Malaysia in Penang. The workshop will address a
very crucial area that is very much needed in response to the growth of ICT
(Information and Communication Technology) Networks at national and global
levels. They will discuss the aspects of test and monitoring of high-capacity,
high-throughput and high-speed communications networks with heterogeneous
traffic. Such test and monitoring has several objectives, including reliability,
security capacity and bandwidth utilization, etc. The growth and proliferation
of high-capacity optical networks has skyrocketed over the past decade and
continues even at a higher pace. The technical community is facing enormous
challenges regarding Next Generation Internet. While the amount of data being
generated on a daily basis continues to rise at alarming rates, the need for
more efficient and deterministic network architecture and protocols is becoming
more than ever evident. The topics to be discussed are in pertinent areas
relating to the development and utilization of high-speed Internet, Network
Security, e-education, and e-Governance infrastructure. This includes optical
core and metro networks, optical access technologies, passive optical networks
(PON), hybrid optical/wireless internetworking, network security issues, sensor
networks, and e-applications using high-speed communication networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests between the
University of North Carolina and the Universiti Sains Malaysia to indicate that
they can successfully pursue the activities proposed and that the interaction
will benefit both sides. This workshop will provide the participating US
postdocs and graduate students an excellent opportunity to receive a global
research experience. It is anticipated that they will maintain contacts and
collaborations with the Malaysian researchers and students throughout their
careers. Information about the workshop and its findings will be made available
via the website; www.honet-ict.org