* 0849496
* Rare Disasters, Macroeconomic Fluctuations, and Asset Markets
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Robert Barro, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2015
* USD 287,700.00

Rare economic disasters, such as the Great Depression and World War II, play a
central role in assessing the uncertain macroeconomic future and in
understanding the pricing of assets. The PI's previous cross-country research
back to 1870 used existing and new macroeconomic data to quantify the role of
rare disasters in explaining major asset-pricing puzzles, including the high
equity premium and low risk-free rate of return. The current project plans a
substantial expansion of the long-term national-accounts data for up to 40
countries. These data are integral to the current project but will also be of
great value for studies carried out by many economists. The current application
will use the new data to study further the interplay between rare macroeconomic
disasters and asset markets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; One part of the research
considers asset pricing at the super-national level, such as the OECD or various
regional aggregates. This application requires the construction of measures of
per capita consumer expenditure and GDP at super-national levels. Another part
fits the distribution of disaster sizes to a power-law density function, thereby
allowing for potential disasters that exceed any observed within the large
cross-country sample back to 1870. This extension makes it possible to explain
the observed equity premium with a lower degree of risk aversion. Further work
will use the full cross-country time series of per capita consumer spending and
GDP to estimate the probability of disaster, the evolution of macroeconomic
aggregates during disasters, the probability of returning from disaster to
normalcy, and the extent to which disasters have only temporary effects on GDP
and consumption (because of strong post-disaster recoveries). This analysis will
show how asset pricing depends on the likely duration of disasters and on the
partly temporary nature of disaster effects. Further work will use stock-index
options prices and quality spreads in interest rates to derive measures of time-
varying disaster probabilities. This analysis can explain the volatility of
asset prices and also allow for time-varying equity premia. A final extension
will study in detail the Great Influenza Epidemic of 1917-20 as a shock that led
to a widespread macroeconomic contraction with troughs typically in
1920-21.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts. The recent international turmoil
in housing, financial, and commodity markets and the strong responses of the
Federal Reserve and other policymakers reflect fears of a new Great Depression.
Further study using long-term, cross-country national-accounts data is needed to
understand the frequencies, sizes, and macroeconomic role of these kinds of rare
economic disasters. This study seeks to clarify the significance of these events
for asset markets, economic fluctuations, welfare, and optimal government
policies. The first research need, critical for understanding rare events, is
the construction of more long-term data. This need has been addressed in
research to date and in planned future efforts for several countries, including
the United States. These data are central for the present study but will also
have numerous uses for other macroeconomists. The second research need, a
central part of the proposal, involves further progress in the underlying
theoretical and empirical analysis of rare disasters, economic fluctuations, and
asset pricing.