* 0849985
* REU Site:  Land Change and Vulnerability Studies in New England:  The Human-Environment Regional Observatory (HERO)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Colin Polsky, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 04/30/2013
* USD 354,147.00

Human alterations of the earth's surface represent one of the planet's most
significant cumulative global environmental changes. In countries such as the US
this process manifests principally as suburbanization. Our understanding of the
specific causes and consequences of suburbanization -- an under-studied form of
landscape change -- is limited because we also lack a systematic baseline
description of the location, extent, timing, and rates of the changes where the
process is suspected to be important. These knowledge gaps are increasingly
being filled by "land change" and "vulnerability" assessments, or the integrated
studies of the process, and why it matters to stakeholders. This REU Site
project will build on 9 years of success engaging undergraduate researchers
through the Human-Environment Regional Observatory (HERO) program, which
operates on the REU Site approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Two
research streams are proposed. The Forest Change Monitoring stream will produce
validated measures of spatial &amp; temporal forest composition changes in a
landscape (Massachusetts) dominated by heterogeneous species assemblages and
ownership groups. This stream will also contribute to the ?best-practices?
literature for remote sensing applications, by articulating challenges and
opportunities associated with constructing and maintaining a long-term, semi-
automated satellite imagery-based forest monitoring program. The Vulnerability
Assessment stream will examine the social causes and consequences of, and
responses to, land-cover changes in the suburban Boston area, using remote
sensing, statistical, and survey analytical techniques. Research products from
both research streams will contribute to both substantive and methodological
literatures on land use-environment, suburban studies, landscape ecology, and
geographic information science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
research proposed here will produce salient results that provide resources for
practitioners and suburban communities experiencing rapid changes associated
with their development patterns; publications will be produced for both
scholarly and stakeholder (e.g., USFS, NASA, federal/state/municipal/community
groups, elected officials) audiences. Undergraduate students will be integrally
involved in the implementation of established research design and in the design
of future research. These students will benefit from interacting with HERO MA
&amp; PhD students serving as research mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A rigorous
two-part assessment will be conducted. The PIs are committed to furthering their
successes engaging students from underrepresented groups by testing new methods
for recruiting to enhance diversity. HERO will be closely integrated with K-12
communities and science journalists through existing efforts under separate but
related NSF-CNH funding.