* 0849010
* STTR Phase II:   Chiral Long Period Grating Fiber Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Dan Neugroschl, CHIRAL PHOTONICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,099,988.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop a
novel optical fiber sensor of temperature, pressure, extension, axial twist and
various environmental factors, including liquid level, in harsh environments.
The optical fiber sensor will be free of electromagnetic interference and of the
hazard of igniting combustible fuels and will be capable of remotely monitoring
temperatures up to and beyond 750 Â°C and of tolerating high-radiation levels.
Conventional long period gratings fiber (LPGs) formed by exposing photosensitive
doped optical fibers to patterned ultraviolet illumination cannot operate in
harsh environments because of the fragility of the imprinted periodic structure.
In contrast, the glass fiber in the dual-twist chiral fiber sensor (CFS) need
not be photosensitive and will be chosen for its robustness. The chiral long-
period grating (CLPG) structure of the CFS will be created in a glass-forming
process in which signal and scaffolding optical fibers are twisted together to
form a helix in the signal fiber as the fibers pass through a miniature oven.
Transmission dips due to coupling of the light between the core and surrounding
glass cladding by the chiral grating and their shift with environmental factors
will be measured and calculated using an increasingly sophisticated sequence of
perturbation theories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CFS based on the
dual-twist CLPG structure overcomes the disadvantages of the LPG and of the CFS
based on twisting single birefringent fibers. If successful it is ideally suited
for demanding applications such as found in nuclear reactors, outer space, and
oil wells, as well as in medical diagnostics and treatment and in the automotive
and aerospace industries. The CFS may therefore become a pervasive part of
modern technology and everyday life which relies increasingly on sensing and
automated decision making. By substantially raising the operation temperature of
optical fiber sensors, substantial savings can be realized. Conventional power
generators could run at higher temperatures where they are substantially more
efficient and the recovery rate in oil reservoirs can be increased considerably.
The use of high-temperature and radiation-resistant CFSs in nuclear power plants
can make these facilities more efficient and safe. The enhanced range of
conditions in which the CFS can function relative to conventional electrical and
optical sensors will have an impact across the economy and will make the CFS a
rapidly growing segment of the multi-billion dollar sensor market. The novel
glass forming fabrication methods and computational approaches may find use in
diverse fields including photonics, microfluidics and medical diagnostics.
&lt;br/&gt;