* 0849308
* SGER: Biomixing - a controversial mechanism influencing dynamics of marine ecosystems?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Michael Dawson, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2011
* USD 75,373.00

The investigators will study the phenomenon of "biomixing" - the process by
which the movement of organisms cause the mixing of the water column - by bring
together two novel approaches - a developing technology, Self-Contained
Underwater Velocimetry Apparatus (SCUVA), and a developing study system (marine
lakes). Typical instrumentation that study particle velocity and turbulence at
small scales - digital particle image velocimetry (DPIV) - are typically limited
by large size, physical connections to the surface, and inability to actively
track moving animals. SCUVA is a less cumbersome, autonomous, portable DPIV
equipment able to quantify the flow field surrounding individual animals in
real-time. Using SCUVA, it is possible to measure aquatic animal-fluid
interactions from 0.002 m to 0.25 m size and thus to integrate turbulence
created by individual animals or swarms of medusae with mesoscale eddy mixing of
the entire water-column measured synchronously with established Acoustic Doppler
Current meter Profiler technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine lakes are bodies
of seawater entirely surrounded by land. They are easily accessible, small-to-
medium sized ecosystems that can be studied comprehensively on a modest scale
and budget. Lakes with tidal exchange limited to discrete submarine tunnels also
contain billions of copepods and tens of millions of fist-to-plate sized
jellyfish. Thus tidal mixing, biomixing (by micro- and macro-zooplankton), and
wind-mixing can each be quantified, and marine lakes may provide simpler
microcosms of more widespread, complex systems. The investigators will quantify
the relative impact of physical and biological mixing by swarms of medusae using
the General Ocean Turbulence Model (GOTM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The project will contribute to increased diversity in the oceanography
by continuing training of a female Palauan research assistant in marine science,
and facilitating the research of two female graduate students. The simulation
using GOTM will be employed by resource managers in Palau to explore possible
impacts of changing climate, mediated directly by weather or indirectly by
jellyfish population dynamics, on the "Jellyfish Lake" ecosystem which is an
important biodiversity and economic resource in Palau. The GOTM model will be
adaptable to explore diverse coastal situations, promoting thorough exploration
of the potential of biomixing in the ocean.