* 0849391
* STEM-Students Expanding Possibilities Undergraduate Program (STEP UP)
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Gail Mason, San Jacinto College District
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 02/28/2013
* USD 344,976.00

The STEP UP project provides 30 full scholarships total over two years to
academically talented, low-income students to obtain associate degrees in a STEM
discipline and/or transfer to a STEM baccalaureate degree program at a
university. It builds and expands on current and previous San Jacinto-National
Science Foundation projects including a successful CSEMS. Results from this
previous grant include 55 successful students known as Scholars, and improved
student support systems. Of these 55 recipients 71% are from underrepresented
populations. As validated in the previous CSEMS, the project continues to
provide academic and mentoring so that a minimum of 70% of scholarship
recipients maintain or exceed a 2.5 grade point average, and persist until
associate degree attainment or transfer to a 4-year program. Once selected,
Scholars are supported by pairing each one with a faculty member, an industry
mentor, and an upper class student in the same major. Scholars can take
advantage of several other successful projects at this institution; for example,
the Partnership for Innovation in Biotechnology and Life Sciences, the Upward
Bound Program, The Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation program, and
the Gaining Early Awareness and Readiness for Undergraduate Programs. Scholars
interested in transferring to a 4-year school are helped with an updated
transfer guidebook, and with their applications to the schools. Scholars
finishing an associate's degree and who want to find a job, are connected to the
Career Planning and Placement Office for help with resumes and also linked with
area employers. Features specific to this project, and not part of the original
CSEMS, are the student recruitment corps, where students in the program help
with recruitment; shared counselors, who act as a link between high school
seniors and this project; the expanded cohort approach, where STEP Up Scholars
participate in a start of semester orientation that will provide information on
the program; and expanded business/industry involvement resulting in more job
shadowing and internship opportunities.