* 0849842
* STEM Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Carla Shaw, Ranken Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 06/30/2013
* USD 581,636.00

This project is a scholarship program for students wishing to pursue degrees in
Information Technology, Architectural Technology, Precision Machining Technology
or Industrial Technology. This project awards sufficient scholarship support to
academically promising, financially disadvantaged students to allow these
students to devote a large part of their time to their academic studies by
eliminating the need to work more than half-time. Emphasis is placed on
recruiting minority/under-represented populations to create a diverse student
scholar population. A project team provides an array of specialized student
support activities. These include mentoring, individual academic and career
advising. Scholarship recipients are able to participate in activities that
create a special learning community and contribute to early professional
development for the scholars. Special outside the classroom learning
opportunities that include site visits to businesses, networking opportunities
and service based learning projects enhance each scholar's knowledge and skills.
These experiences help enhance job placement opportunities or acceptance into
higher degree programs in these technology sectors upon graduation.

The intellectual merit of the project is grounded in an established, tested, and
rigorous curriculum, longstanding partnerships with industry leaders, and
continuous student/faculty collaborative engagement including individualized
faculty advising and continuous monitoring of academic progress. The project's
evaluation includes its impact on student recruitment and retention practices
and efforts.

The project broadens its impact by identifying and disseminating lessons learned
and successful strategies employed to improve student retention and success.
This includes use of learning communities, successful recruitment techniques to
attract minority and under-represented students and the frequent and continuous
interaction of students with faculty and industry advisors/mentors. The lessons
learned and strategies developed are shared with others to help improve their
recruitment, retention, persistence and career placement efforts through
presentation at an academic symposium.