* 0849577
* SGER: Near-Infrared Spectroscopic Survey of Massive Young Stars in the Central Molecular Zone of the Galactic Center
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Takeshi Oka, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Lodders
* 11/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Dr. Oka will identify young stellar objects within 200pc of the Galactic center
as probes of the dense interstellar gas of the inner Milky Way. These young
stars have almost featureless near-infrared spectra, so that the absorption
lines of the molecules H3+ and CO can be measured cleanly. The rather simple
chemistry of H3+ then allows both the ionization rate and the temperature in the
dense interstellar gas to be estimated directly. Dr. Oka's preliminary work on a
few stars has shown a surprisingly large amount of H3+, indicating that warm,
diffuse molecular gas fills much of the volume near the Galactic center, and
implying an unexpectedly high density of cosmic rays. Dr Oka will select about
100 candidate stars using newly-available catalogs in the near-infrared at 1.2
microns, 2.2 microns and 3.6 microns. Many of these will be red giant stars,
which are unsuitable because their atmospheres produce strong absorption bands
in the stellar spectra. Dr. Oka will use the UK Infrared Telescope (UKIRT) in
Hawaii for medium-resolution spectroscopy of his candidate stars; in red giants,
the 2-micron overtone bands of CO is strong, and easily detected in short
observations of 5 or 10 minutes. The young stellar objects, which lack such
absorption, will then be observed at high resolution near 3.6 microns, with
UKIRT and the larger Subaru and Gemini telescopes. Spectra of stars near the
Galactic center will show narrow absorption lines of CO, from cold gas in the 3
spiral arms that lie between us and the center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this
work yields a sufficient sample of young stars near the center of the Milky Way,
it will enable a larger project of deeper observations to probe the distribution
of H3+ and the physical state of the interstellar gas there. The H3+ molecule is
of interest both to astrophysicists and to physical chemists, because it is
crucial in the ion-molecule chemistry of the molecular clouds from which new
stars are born. The larger project would involve mentoring graduate students, in
which Dr. Oka has an outstanding record.