* 0849224
* International Financial Crises in Long-Term Historical Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Kenneth Rogoff, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2015
* USD 470,220.00

This proposal involves applications and further development of a
recently&lt;br/&gt;compiled historical data set for the study of international
financial crises. The data set covers 66 countries since their time of
independence or dating back as far as eight centuries. It includes, among many
other things, data on government domestic and foreign debt and defaults,
inflation, banking crises, exchange rates, trade, government expenditures and
revenues, conflict and trade. While the data set builds on the research of many
previous scholars, it is considerably more extensive in many dimensions,
encompassing for example, data on Asia including colonial India and pre-
communist China, as well as Africa and all of Europe. One novel feature is cross
county historical data on domestic debt covering most of the world going back to
the early twentieth century. Previously, domestic debt data had been thought
relatively small and&lt;br/&gt;unimportant for most emerging market countries
until the very recent period. The authors intend to make the entire data set and
documentation easily available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three goals. First, the authors wish to explore the extent to which high debt
levels are the main fundamental driver of defaults, inflation, and financial
crises, as opposed to factors such as the currency composition and maturity
structure of debt. The hypothesis is that, in fact, the latter phenomenon are
more a manifestation of vulnerability to debt crises rather than proximate
drivers (as conjectured by Diamond and Rajan, 2001). The second project looks at
the phenomenon of "graduation" from serial default. Why does it seem to take
more than a century for most countries, and what are key factors that separate
successful graduates from recidivists. The final project explores exchange rate
regimes and serial default, building also on related work on exchange rate
classification. A central aspect of the proposal is the maintenance, updating
and improvement of data sets on financial crises and exchange rates, which are
widely used by other researchers. These data sets involve not only collecting
and sorting data, but training students to implement (and improve) a wide
variety of sorting and classification algorithms (for example, on measuring
exchange rate flexibility and developing metrics to gauge whether a country has
graduated (from serial default.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The question of how to deal with international financial crises
remains one of the central international macroeconomic policy challenges of
recent time. The bulk of existing work is based on relatively short or narrow
data sets, obscuring important longer term historical patterns. The results of
this project should be of great interest to academics, policymakers at central
banks and international lending institutions, as well as to
private&lt;br/&gt;financial market practitioners.