* 0849861
* Bayesian Phylogenetic Diagnostics (BPD): Tools and Analyses for the Diagnosis of  Convergence in Bayesian Inference of Phylogeny
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* James Wilgenbusch, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 07/31/2012
* USD 360,462.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida State University has received
an award to develop software to conduct phylogenetic analysis. Phylogenetic
software helps researchers to understand the evolutionary relationship among
species. Phylogeny estimation forms the foundation to most modern biological
studies and helps frame researchers? and policy makers? understanding of the
distribution, diversity, and conservation of life on this planet. The system
will integrate existing and new algorithms of convergence and help researchers
analyze and visualize phylogenies. The convergence study and software will be
developed over modern high performance computing platforms. The team will take a
two-tiered approach, i.e., prototype analyses and software on local computing
resources and then scale up to large national computing resources, such as,
TeraGrid. It is critical to demonstrate this approach now if members of the life
sciences community are to effectively utilize the petascale computing resources
being brought on-line in the next three years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Bayesian Phylogenetics Diagnostics package will be available as a downloadable
application, as a web application, as a web service and will be integrated with
other services such as the TeraGrid, CIPRES and iPlant. This package will
integrate in real-time with phylogenetic packages to give users direct insight
into potential problems with the analysis. A large number of input and output
formats will allow the package to exchange data with additional phylogenetic
packages, statistical analysis and visualization software. Additional
information about the project can be found at
http://ceb.sc.fsu.edu/bpd.&lt;br/&gt;