* 0849005
* SBIR Phase II:  Biocidal Textiles for Active Infection Control
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Nina Lamba, CCL BIOMEDICAL, INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 02/29/2012
* USD 463,713.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on the
development of patented antimicrobial compounds to provide superior infection
control to textiles. 5-10% of patients admitted to hospitals in the US acquire
an infection while in hospital. Consequences of hospital-acquired infections
(HAIs) include prolonged hospital stays, increased treatment costs, and cause
more than 100,000 deaths each year. The financial costs of these infections run
into billions of dollars annually. Laboratory and clinical studies have shown
that bacteria can survive for weeks on items found in patient rooms, which are
suspected of playing a role in the transmission of pathogens. This program
continues the development an innovative fabric finish to create textiles that
will kill microbes on contact. The performance of these compounds has been shown
to be superior to current non-leaching antimicrobial technologies. The biocide
is chemically attached to fabric using a water-based solution. Chemical
immobilization of the antimicrobial agent minimizes migration into the
environment. During Phase II, the efficacy of treated fabrics will be assessed
against pathogens, including strains associated with HAIs. Physical
characterization of the fabrics will be performed to determine the effects of
laundering. Finally, the effectiveness of treated fabrics in the clinic will be
demonstrated.

The number of hospital acquired infections (HAIs) is increasing, with a larger
proportion being caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Policy changes of cost
reimbursement related to HAIs have already been implemented, placing the burden
on hospitals to prevent such infections. Inevitably, infection control policies
within hospitals will be expanded in order to reduce rates of infection.
Creating actively biocidal surfaces will provide a new method of infection
control, augmenting current practices without significantly adding to the
workload of staff. In this program, novel antimicrobial technology is being
developed for use on fabrics. Ultimately, it is expected that strategic
deployment of this technology as a complement to hand-hygiene (the most
important component of infection control) will reduce the number of HAIs,
improve patient outcomes and reduce the costs of healthcare. Other commercial
textile applications of this technology include protective garments for military
personnel, emergency responders, and fabrics for sports apparel. The
antimicrobial product may also be applied to non-textile items, such as computer
keyboards and bedrails.