* 0849102
* RUI:   Rapid Effects of Sex Steroids on Visual Processes Related to Social Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Richmond Thompson, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 05/31/2013
* USD 340,398.00

Steroid hormones exert profound effects on social behavior, but those effects
are typically slow because steroids activate molecules that turn genes on and
off, and changes in gene activity take a long time to produce effects on
behavior. However, it has recently been shown that steroids can also affect
behavior through more rapid mechanisms that do not depend on interactions with
genes. Thompson will test the hypothesis that two sex steroids, testosterone and
estradiol, affect reproductive behavior in male goldfish by rapidly changing how
goldfish see the world, particularly female sexual stimuli. The proposal
outlines a series of behavioral, electrophysiological, and neuroanatomical
experiments that will also determine the kinds of molecules in the brain that
these steroid hormones act upon to produce behavioral effects. Additionally, the
project will identify where within the brain hormones produce those effects.
Together, these experiments will increase our understanding of the fundamental
cellular mechanisms through which steroid hormones affect behavior, particularly
those related to reproduction. The principal investigator will perform many
experiments related to this grant in an upper level laboratory course at Bowdoin
College, providing meaningful research experiences to undergraduate students.
Dr. Thompson will also teach a summer neuroscience outreach program at Bowdoin
College for teams of high school teachers and their students. This will be
followed by his students setting up presentations in the classes of teachers who
have participated.