* 0849683
* MMS Mid-Career Research Fellowship Program: The Spatial Context of Political Phenomena.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Elisabeth Gerber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 81,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Political, social and economic
phenomena take place within a spatial context: the actions and interactions of
decision-makers are conditioned by characteristics of the places in which they
occur. Various methods have been developed to model and measure spatial context.
There are many phenomena, however, for which existing measurement and modeling
approaches are inadequate and for which more complex characterizations of
context are necessary. Specifically, this research considers a class of problems
with two important characteristics: decisions, behavior and outcomes are shaped
by the effects of context at multiple levels, and the relevant spatial context
is dynamic rather than static. An important substantive example of a problem
with these characteristics is regional governance, that is, coordinated policy-
making between two or more governments within a given geographic area. In
regional governance, decisions by regional actors are affected by spatial
context at both the local and regional levels, and by the dynamic
interconnectedness of people within their regions. This research will involve
developing of new measures of spatial context and applying these measures to
problems of regional governance. Using geographic information systems (GIS) and
spatial analysis tools, the research will involve constructing flexible measures
of multi-level spatial context from Census and other data, characterizing the
mobility and dynamic interconnectedness of actors within regions, conducting
counterfactual analyses of the impact of alternative regional boundaries, and
testing hypotheses about how dynamic and multi-level context affects various
political phenomena, including but not limited to regional governance. Improved
measures of spatial context, and a better understanding of how such context
shapes social, economic and political outcomes, will help policymakers develop
public policies that are more attuned to their unique local and regional spatial
context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;