* 0849473
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Effects of Disturbance and Fragmentation on Wild Primates in Tanzania - Individual and Evolutionary Implications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Matthew Preston, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 14,940.00

Individuals and populations may fail to survive and reproduce in habitats
disturbed or fragmented above some critical point, whereas those in less
severely disturbed and fragmented habitats may persist. Although the critical
point of disturbance and fragmentation for individuals and populations is often
unknown, differential extinction and persistence of first individuals, then
populations, and finally of species is vital to understanding evolutionary
processes and successful conservation efforts. This study of black-and-white
colobus monkeys (Colobus angolensis palliatus) in twelve forests with various
levels of disturbance and fragmentation in West Usambara, Tanzania, contributes
to the understanding of evolutionary process and conservation management. It's
goal is to assess at what point of habitat alteration do some individuals and
populations fail to survive. It also examines the underlying causes of either
persistence or failure to survive. Data from randomly-placed plots in each
forest provide evidence of the level of disturbance. Forest fragmentation scores
are gleaned from published literature. Food availability is estimated from tree
density and phenology in plots in each forest. Observations of feeding and
foraging behavior inform on individuals' diet breadth, energy balance, protein
intake, and mineral intake. Ratios of immature individuals-to-adult females
provide evidence of survival and reproduction rates. Monitoring how disturbance
and fragmentation affect food availability and how food availability affects
individuals' feeding and foraging behaviors provide insight into how
individuals' behavior affect survival and reproduction. The pattern that emerges
from the twelve sites provides insights into the broader effects of disturbance
and fragmentation on survival and reproduction. The results contribute to
understanding of the behavioral biology of a primate's reactions to an altered
environment and ultimately contribute to understanding of the process of
evolution. Monitoring animal's reactions to extinction threats also contributes
to the success of conservation efforts. Training local villagers as field
biologists and establishment of a conservation education program for local
students expands the contribution of this study to conservation efforts.