* 0849998
* Undergraduate Scholarships in Biomolecular Engineering, Science and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Marie Mons, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 02/28/2015
* USD 597,988.00

This project, administered through a chemistry and biochemistry department,
provides a scholarship program for annual cohorts of up to 20 academically
talented undergraduates who are pursuing baccalaureate degrees in closely allied
biology, chemistry, and engineering disciplines. Program functions are to: 1)
increase the number of STEM graduates from underrepresented groups, 2) decrease
time-to-degree, and 3) provide support services that improve retention of
students to degree achievement and placement in STEM careers. The program
addresses the first two years of the college curriculum as a foundation for
retention of students in STEM disciplines and for further academic success by
providing enhanced mentoring, a coherent suite of student support services based
around a Living Learning Community, and multiple opportunities for interactions
with research active faculty and alumni. In addition, it fosters enhanced
involvement of scholars in experiential learning programs (such as undergraduate
research and internships) that provide them with the skills, experiences, and
motivations needed to succeed in college and to enter productive, sustainable
and rewarding careers in STEM disciplines. A broader goal of the program is to
create and document the effectiveness of a scalable and transferable paradigm
for the education of tomorrow's leaders in science and technology.