* 0849797
* CAREER: Search for the Higgs Boson in the H-&amp;gt;(tau)+(tau)- Mode at Hadron Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Anna Goussiou, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 09/30/2012
* USD 506,426.00

In the Standard Model as well as in its Supersymmetric extension, the mechanism
proposed to explain electroweak symmetry breaking presents signature
particle(s), the Higgs boson(s). This program will cover searches for the Higgs
boson(s) at both the Tevatron Collider at Fermilab and the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) at CERN. In particular, the search will be focused on a Higgs decaying
into a pair of tau-leptons. The tau -channels offer a clean signature with
reduced backgrounds, and are central to the search for all types of Higgs
particles such as those deriving from Standard Model, light neutral
Supersymmetric, heavy neutral Supersymmetric, charged Supersymmetric theories.
Transfer of the expertise from the Tevatron to the LHC will be critical for the
success of the Higgs research program of the CMS experiment at the LHC. This
proposal will help start a tau -lepton effort within the US part of the CMS
Collaboration. Discovering the mechanism responsible for electroweak symmetry
breaking and the origin of mass constitutes one of the most important open
questions and highest priorities in particle physics today. Fermilab Tevatron
and the CERN LHC hadron colliders offer unique discovery opportunities in that
front. The PI's research in the last several years has been focused on the quest
for the Higgs boson; the signature particle for the prevailing mechanism
proposed to explain electroweak symmetry breaking and therefore, brings
extensive expertise to the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational and
outreach goals are to engage non-traditional participants, namely female high
school teachers and students in particle physics research at the scientific
frontier, in the hope to infuse these very young women with a love for physics
and science in general. The program will build on the strength of the existing
QuarkNet project at the University of Notre Dame, but will extend the project in
two new directions: putting the emphasis on young women in science; and
extending the participation of high school students and teachers from building
hardware to physics analysis of Tevatron data aimed at the discovery of the
Higgs boson. &lt;br/&gt;