* 0849941
* Connecting Community College Transfers for STEM Success (C3)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Pamela Lockwood, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 04/30/2013
* USD 572,670.00

The Connecting Community College Transfers for STEM Success (C3) project of the
West Texas A&amp;M University (WTAMU) provides twenty-two scholarships per year
to community college transfer students who major in science, technology,
engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The goal of C3 is to increase the quantity,
quality, and diversity of students completing degrees in all STEM fields by
providing academic, social, and financial support. Community college transfer
students majoring in Biology, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Environmental Science,
Plant and Soil Science, Animal Science, Physics, Mathematics, Engineering, and
Computer Science receive C3 scholarship support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives and related tasks of C3 are to:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Retain community college STEM students by recruiting
them to transfer to WTAMU after completing their associate's degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 1.1: Provide financial assistance in the form of
scholarships to STEM community college transfer students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 1.2: Travel to regional community colleges to recruit
STEM transfer students through advertisement of C3 and other opportunities at
WTAMU including NSF-funded STEP and REU projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Increase the academic achievement of STEM community college transfers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 2.1: Enroll C3 scholars in appropriate STEM courses
to integrate them into STEM cohorts of previous community college transfers and
native WTAMU STEM students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 2.2: Offer a STEM
transfer orientation course designed to alleviate "transfer shock."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 2.3: Integrate C3 scholars into established student
communities through participation in research, internships and career awareness
opportunities provided by student professional organizations such as American
Association of Mechanical Engineers, Society of Women Engineers, Mathematics
Honorary Society, Wildlife Biology Club, Biology Honorary Society, and
Association of Computing Machinery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 2.4: Build
quality faculty-student relationships through STEM faculty community college
recruiting visits, faculty advising and mentoring, undergraduate research
opportunities, and campus professional organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3
partners with six regional community colleges, four of which have student
populations that are over 25% Hispanic and over 50% female. The diversity
resident in the PI/Co-PI C3 leadership team provides role models for all
students, including women and minorities, in all STEM disciplines. This group
leads the C3 research efforts targeting community college transfer student
retention and graduation in a rural, low-income, first-generation population and
develops a model for increasing participation of women and minorities in all
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3 increases the quantity, quality, and
diversity of graduates in all STEM fields by providing financial and academic
support to STEM community college transfer students facing financial, social,
and academic barriers. C3 assists a population of largely first-generation, low-
income students in a region with a rapidly growing Hispanic population. The
majority of WTAMU graduates decide to stay in the region, so increasing the
diversity of STEM graduates also increases the diversity of the region's
workforce.