* 0849728
* Access to the Science Education of a Four-Year Liberal Arts College for Economically Disadvantaged Students
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2016
* Louis Liotta, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 04/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

The college seeks to attract a larger and more diverse student population to its
science community, increase enrollment and graduation rates in the sciences,
and, in collaboration with Massasoit Community College, grow the community
college science transfer track. The program requires increased financial aid in
order to attract more underrepresented science majors. The project allows
expansion of an existing Science Talent Expansion Program (STEP) grant by
offering science scholarships to deserving, financially disadvantaged students
with an emphasis on minorities. The project is funding 14 four-year scholarships
for first-year students and ten two-year scholarships for Massasoit transfers.
These scholarships average $7,500 annually, depending on the recipients'
financial needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Using best practices
to promote increased participation in the sciences, the college is working with
disadvantaged area high schools and with Massasoit to provide a student-centered
approach to science learning and to improve science advising that helps students
transfer to four-year undergraduate institutions. With a sound foundation on
which to build, the scholarship program provides an additional incentive--
increasing access to a high-quality, interdisciplinary and experiential science
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project serves as a model
illustrating how a private liberal arts college can collaborate with a community
college to improve transfer access and illustrating how high school students can
benefit from pre-college educational opportunities and college scholarship
funding. The broader impact of this project is a larger and more diverse science
workforce for the region. In the northeastern United States, where the
scientific and biotechnology sectors are particularly strong, increasing the
number of biology, chemistry, physics, neuroscience, and biochemistry graduates
at the two institutions is having a significant impact on workforce development.