* 0849064
* DDDAS-TMRP (Collaborative Research): An Adaptive Cyberinfrastructure for Threat Management in Urban Water Distribution Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Ranji Ranjithan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 12/31/2009
* USD 39,075.00

DDDAS-TMRP (COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH): AN ADAPTIVE CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE FOR THREAT
MANAGEMENT IN URBAN WATER DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contamination threat management in
drinking water distribution systems involves real-time characterization of the
contaminant source and plume, identification of control strategies, and design
of incremental data sampling schedules. This requires dynamic integration of
time-varying measurements of flow, pressure and contaminant concentration with
analytical modules including models to simulate the state of the system,
statistical methods for adaptive sampling, and optimization methods to search
for efficient control strategies. For realistic distribution systems, the
analytical modules are highly compute-intensive, requiring multi-level parallel
processing via computer clusters. While data often drive the analytical modules,
data needs for improving the accuracy and certainty of the solutions generated
by these modules dynamically change when a contamination event unfolds. Since
such time-sensitive threat events require real-time responses, the computational
needs must also be adaptively matched with available resources. Thus, a software
system is needed to facilitate this integration via a high-performance computing
architecture (e.g., the TeraGrid) such that the measurement system, the
analytical modules and the computing resources can mutually adapt and steer each
other. The goal of this multi-disciplinary research is to develop a
cyberinfrastructure system that will both adapt to and control changing needs in
data, models, computer resources and management choices facilitated by a dynamic
workflow design. Using virtual simulation and a field study, this
cyberinfrastructure will be tested on illustrative scenarios for adaptive
management of contamination events in water distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban water distribution systems are vulnerable to
accidental and intentional contamination incidents that could result in adverse
human health and safety impacts. The pipe network in a typical municipal
distribution system includes redundant flow paths to ensure service when parts
of the network are unavailable, and is designed with significant storage to
deliver water during daily peak demand periods. Thus, a typical network is
highly interconnected and experiences significant and frequent fluctuations in
flows and transport paths. These design features unintentionally enable
contamination at a single point in the system to spread rapidly via different
pathways through the network, unbeknown to consumers and operators. When a
contamination event is detected via the first line of defense, e.g., data from a
water quality surveillance sensor network and reports from consumers, the
municipal authorities are faced with several critical questions as the
contamination event unfolds: Where is the source of contamination? When and for
how long did this contamination occur? Where additional hydraulic or water
quality measurements should be taken to pinpoint the source more accurately?
What is the current and near future extent of contamination? What response
action, such as shutting down portions of the network, implementing hydraulic
control strategies, or introducing decontaminants, should be taken to minimize
the impact of the contamination event? What would be the impact on consumers by
these actions? Real-time answers to such complex questions will present
significant computational challenges. This project will address these challenges
by developing an adaptive cyberinfrastucture that will enable real-time
processing and control through dynamic integration of computational components
and real-time sensor data. This system will be evaluated using contamination
scenarios based on field-scale data from a large metropolitan area.&lt;br/&gt;