* 0849139
* Special Session on Robotics and Cyber-Physical Systems at the International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2009
* Jeffrey Trinkle, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Branicky
* 01/31/2009
* USD 25,499.00

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) is a new class of system characterized by embedded
computation and communication integrated deeply and seamlessly with the physical
world in ways that support new capabilities in physical systems. Examples of
such systems and applications include future transportation systems, the
intelligent power grid, and nano-scale precision manufacturing systems. The
goals of research in CPS are to understand the fundamental science and to
develop rapid, reliable design and integration techniques applicable to a wide
variety of cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic systems are a
class of CPS. The ability of robots to interact intelligently with the world
rests upon embedded computation and communication, real-time control, and
perception of the world. Future robotic systems that will realize the vision of
CPS include increasingly intelligent surgery systems, robots for assisted
living, and robot teams for exploration and emergency response. The goal of this
workshop will be to identify research themes in robotics that generalize to the
larger CPS domain and general themes from CPS that could advance robotics
research. We expect the proposed workshop to be fruitful, because the robotics
community has great collective experience in combining physical and
computational thinking, and because there has not previously been a workshop
that focused on the connections between robotics and
CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will encourage robotics
researchers to participate in NSF?s CPS Initiative and to seek out opportunities
for collaboration with researchers in other domains to develop fundamental CPS
principles that will be broadly applicable.