* 0849940
* ETBC: Cyanobacterial hopanoids: Function, Natural Distribution and Significance in the Marine Geologic Record
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Roger Summons, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2012
* USD 502,413.00

Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) will measure hopanoid lipid compounds to evaluate
their utility as tracers of biogeochemical processes occurring in the ocean.
These compounds are created by a group of bacteria that are an important class
of organisms that fix atmospheric nitrogen, thus making nitrogen available to a
wide array of marine organisms. The researchers will measure these compounds on
samples collected from a range of modern marine environments as well as in
laboratory cultures. The research is focused on a pair of hypotheses and four
adjoining questions that are aimed at addressing the possibility that certain
compounds within this compound class are produced under specific chemical or
biological conditions. If such molecular specificity can be identified then
these compounds maintain the potential to trace biological and chemical
evolutionary information through the course of time. The potential for this work
to broadly impact a number of fields in marine geology is partly realized
because these compounds appear to occur widely throughout the geologic record.
The broader impacts of this research will include support for a graduate student
within the MIT-WHOI Joint Program and will involve undergraduate students in the
research. In addition the research will foster and strengthen relationships
between the two institutions.