* 0849407
* Archaeological, Geomorphological, and Ethno-ecological Investigations of Tokelau: Origins, Migrations, Adaptations, and Ecological Dynamics of an Atoll People
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* David Addison, American Samoa Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 259,380.00

National Science Foundation support will be used by Dr. David Addison and an
international team of scientists to investigate the long-term history of
resource management in the Tokelau Atolls. The fragile environment of these
atolls has been successfully used by humans for a millennium, a process that has
necessitated the development of mechanisms for sustainable resource management.
In some ways, these atolls can be seen as a microcosm of the sustainability
issues only recently facing the entire planet. Perhaps global lessons can be
learned from Tokelau's millennium of experience in this area. Tokelau is a group
of three atolls located in the equatorial Pacific 300 miles north of the US
Territory of American Samoa. Global Climate Change (GCC) and rising sea level
will have a disproportionate effect on these atolls because of their tiny
landmass (~2000 acres), most of which is less than 8 feet above sea level.

This project offers the opportunity to study a whole atoll archipelago with an
approach that integrates modern baseline data on resource management with an
archaeological understanding of resource use over the past millennium. It will
address topics that are currently hotly debated in Pacific archaeology
regarding: the timing and routes of colonization to East Polynesia; culture
change and ethnogenesis; and isolation vs. interaction. Integral to these topics
will be research on sea-level change, providing much-needed data points in the
south-central equatorial Pacific. The project will also provide the first case
study of temporal and spatial variation in ancient resource management across
the fragile environments of a whole atoll archipelago.

This project encourages multidisciplinary research, bringing together
researchers from a wide variety of scientific fields. International
collaboration is fostered through the involvement of participants from Tokelau,
Samoa, American Samoa, New Zealand, Japan, Hawaii, France and the USA. The
scientific team has been chosen with care to provide a combination of junior and
senior academics, men and women, who come from both well-represented and under-
represented groups. www-based results will permit distribution to both popular
and scientific audiences. The research will also serve to increase indigenous
science capacity through a community awareness program during project fieldwork.
Native American Samoan college students will play a key role as peer mentors and
partner researchers, thus inculcating in them both an appreciation for
scientific research and an interest in international outreach and cooperation
(US Pacific Islanders are underrepresented in the sciences).