* 0849858
* Collaborative Research: The Measurement and Identification of Media Priming Effects in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Nicholas Valentino, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 251,905.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Media priming has been established as
one of the most important ways in which the information environment of electoral
campaigns affects public opinion. By changing the criteria citizens use to
evaluate policies and politicians, the media conditionally affect mass
preferences. Over the past two decades, dozens of studies have demonstrated
media priming effects via a wide variety of media content. Recently, however,
concerns have been raised about the measurement and identification strategies
used to demonstrate media priming effects. A critical decision for researchers
involves the timing of the measurement of the primed dimension relative to
exposure to media messages. Two alternative strategies are used in the
literature: pre-test versus post-test designs. Under the pre-test design the
primed attitude is measured before the administration of stimuli, while under
the post-test design the measurement is taken after the treatment is given. The
importance of this design choice is highlighted in a recent debate about the
effects of implicit racial cues, where some find no significant priming effects
under the pre-test design, contradicting the empirical evidence previously
obtained under the post-test design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed research is to shed light on this general measurement issue as well as
related substantive findings of media priming studies. The PIs demonstrate
mathematically that neither pre-test nor post-test design alone is sufficient to
identify media priming effects. Existing studies that employ the post-test
design risk overestimating media priming effects, while recent studies employing
the pre-test design may find no effects even when priming has occurred. To
overcome this identification problem, this project combines the two designs in a
creative way. This strategy produces more powerful inferences about the media
priming effect and offers a new set of research methods that can be used to make
stronger inferences about media priming. Experimental tests investigate the
consequences of different measurement strategies and their implications for the
substantive literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project are twofold. First, the findings will refine the field?s knowledge about
the nature and extent of media priming effects in modern campaigns. In
particular, results will bear on how, when, and why campaigns affect candidate
evaluations and policy opinion. Second, the proposed methods will have a wide
array of applications in other areas of political science and psychology where
researchers face a similar dilemma about alternative measurement strategies and
experimental designs.