* 0849976
* Collaborative Research:  SHINE:  The Geometrical and Kinematic Evolution of Interplanetary Coronal Mass Ejections
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Alysha Reinard, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2012
* USD 99,621.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative team plans to
investigate the evolution of interplanetary coronal mass ejections (ICMEs) at
large distances from the Sun. They expect to identify the reasons that existing
models do not accurately describe this ICME evolution. With this knowledge, the
principal investigators (PI) will either be able to improve these models with
corrected boundary conditions, or develop a new model describing the geometrical
and kinematic evolution of ICMEs. The team then will evaluate their resulting
model as a tool for space weather forecasting. This work involves the detailed
analysis of coronagraph and interplanetary data, EUV images, and in situ
observations from instruments on a variety of spacecraft, including SOHO,
STEREO, ACE, Coriolis, WIND, and Ulysses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborators have already devised a new data-driven model with the ability to
extract parameters related to CME origins (such as relative geometry and Thomson
scattered intensity) from those responsible for CME evolution (such as
interactions with surrounding interplanetary medium, expansion of the CME, and
MHD physics). The PIs thus expect to complete the first survey of the 3D
properties of CMEs and allow the classification and comparison of the parameters
responsible for CME appearance and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead PI
is an NRC Fellow while the secondary PI is a female scientist and recent SHINE
postdoc. This project is important for the career development of these two
promising young scientists at the beginning of their careers. Their joint
project offers an opportunity to improve our general understanding of CME
evolution in the interplanetary medium, as well as space weather prediction
capabilities. The team's new ICME model will address SHINE science goals and
improve the accuracy of space weather forecasts.