* 0849717
* ATE-CON 2009
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Marilyn Barger, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 08/31/2010
* USD 95,684.00

The first national conference on Advanced Technological Education (ATE) called
ATE-CON is being held in the summer of 2009. With support from NSF, this project
is catalyzing this joint ATE center effort and significantly broadening the
impact of the ATE program. The vision for the conference is to position ATE
centers and projects, in collaboration with education partners and industry, as
the guiding force for the new American workforce. ATE-CON is designed to become
a self-sustaining conference where both faculty who teach technicians and
technicians themselves go to update skills and knowledge. This conference is a
major dissemination vehicle for ATE centers and projects where others (outside
of the ATE community) become more aware of the ATE program, its funded centers
and projects, the program's goals, and funding opportunities. Industry is
providing support through focused content workshops, sponsorships, speakers, and
cross-disciplinary technical presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seventeen
existing ATE centers are collaborating on the conference program development,
which consists of two days of pre-conference technical and educational
workshops, short courses, and tours, followed by two days of conference
sessions. The second workshop day and the first conference day are technician
focused. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The conference design ensures
significant intellectual merit though an emphasis on the converging technologies
and cross-cutting disciplines. The conference provides a unique opportunity for
faculty to gain knowledge and technical experience in their own and related
fields. Additionally, the conference is a unique venue for education and
industry collaboration to define and identify the knowledge, skills, and
abilities needed to ensure workforce competitiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The conference has the strong potential to
attract participants from outside of the ATE constituency and, in particular,
from industry. This unique collaboration among existing ATE centers directly
expands the audience for ATE produced materials and services and importantly
open new venues for collaborative efforts, as well as attracting potential new
grantees to the program.