* 0849210
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Diode Laser Cavity-Ringdown Spectrometer for Shipboard Measurements of the Stable Isotopes on Oceanic Methane
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Kevin Lehmann, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2011
* USD 173,856.00

The PIs propose to develop a Cavity-Ringdown Spectrometer (CRDS) capable of
measuring methane concentration and stable isotopes (채2H-CH4 and 채13C-CH4) on a
research vessel with a precision comparable to standard laboratory techniques. A
portable prototype has been developed that has achieved a measurement
reproducibility of 0.01 % standard error. This translates to a sensitivity of 4
ppb and an isotopic precision similar to what is achieved using Isotope. This
"bare-bones" prototype will be advanced to make it more robust for ship-based
research. The principal design modifications include: 1) increased thermal and
vibrational isolation with caging and insulation, 2) increased sampling rates by
incorporating acousto-optic modulators, semiconductor optical amplifiers, and
multiple lasers, 3) the ability to lock onto an absorption peak using FM
spectroscopy, and 4) minimized susceptibility to misalignment by purchasing
components that can be fiber optically coupled together. A front-end sampler
will be developed to automatically extract CH4 from an array of serum vials
filled with seawater, sediment, or free gas and inject it into the analysis
cavity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having a field-portable instrument that can make
high-precision measurements of 채2H-CH4 and 채13C-CH4 will be useful in many areas
of oceanographic research (e.g. life in extreme environments, climate change,
petroleum research, carbon cycling A DL-CRDS will allow a nearly limitless
number of analyses to be conducted, greatly enhancing the understanding of any
CH4 system under investigation and since these measurements are ship-based, can
also be used to guide subsequent sampling during the same
expedition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is aimed at developing a revolutionary new measurement system for the
stable isotopes of methane. If the system can be successfully developed to work
on ocean-going vessels, then there will be a potential explosion in the amount
of methane data that will be produced and, hopefully, a corresponding increase
in the understanding of methane budgets sinks and sources worldwide. The
realization of a user-friendly and compact device based on optical spectroscopy
(several diode laser sources coupled to a high finesse cavity for a high
sensitivity and fast CRDS measurement scheme) for methane isotopic ratios
measurement will present a high interest for research laboratories in
environmental sciences. This Project will train post-docs, graduated and
undergraduate students and it will enhance cross disciplinary partnerships. The
results will be disseminated to a wider scientific audience and a better
understanding of geographical problems will be achieved.