* 0849400
* RosettaInterface : Advanced Methods and Resources for Characterization and Redesign of Protein-Protein Interactions
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Tanja Kortemme, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 507,718.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The University of California at San Francisco is awarded a grant to create,
improve and disseminate advanced molecular modeling and prediction methods for
the characterization and redesign of interactions between proteins. Protein
interactions and the complex networks that they form are critical to essentially
all biological processes. Tools to characterize and alter individual
interactions are important to determine protein function within these
interaction networks. This project will create such methods to advance
biological research on protein functions. The project extends previous
computational methods co-developed by the PI (Rosetta and RosettaInterface) that
have been used to determine crucial interactions in the interfaces between
proteins and to create new and modified protein interactions, in collaborations
with biologist. This research will produce: (i) improved and easily accessible
tools for non-specialists to characterize proteins and protein interfaces by
predicting the effects of amino acid mutations, (ii) new and improved protocols
for changing the properties of protein interactions by reengineering them and
(iii) advanced tools to facilitate difficult protein engineering problems by
designing libraries of candidate proteins to generate hypotheses for
experimental testing.

New, improved and automated computational methods generated and integrated by
this project will be available to researchers as a RosettaInterface web resource
(at http://kortemmelab.ucsf.edu/). The source code will be freely available
(http://www.rosettacommons.org/) for applications in computational biology,
bioinformatics, structural biology and synthetic and cellular biology. Graduate,
undergraduate and high-school students will utilize the RosettaInterface
resource in group ?team challenges?, summer internships and research projects in
biological engineering.

