* 0849803
* DisProt Database:   A Central Repository of Information on Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Vladimir Uversky, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,425,995.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University is awarded a grant
to expand and improve a publicly accessible Database of Protein
(http://www.DisProt.org). This database now contains sequence and functional
information for ~ 500 protein entries that have more than 1000 experimentally
characterized regions of intrinsic disorder. The work to be funded will greatly
expand the number of proteins in this database, will enlarge the array of
information for the various proteins, will improve the features and usability of
this database, will discover new functions associated with disordered proteins
and regions, and will begin the development of an ontology for intrinsically
disordered protein. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intrinsically disordered proteins
carry out a wide variety of functions. A recent bioinformatics study suggests
that, at a minimum, ~ 1/3 of protein-associated functions depend on protein
disorder. These disorder-dependent functions underlie critical cellular
processes such as gene regulation, cell division, organization of protein-
protein interaction networks, formation and regulation of function-determining
signaling pathways, and so on. Development of the DisProt Database will confirm
that many particular biological functions suspected to depend on protein
disorder actually do depend on disorder, will show the generality of many
particular disorder examples, will lead to the discovery of new examples of
disorder-dependent biological functions, and will provide for the first time a
comprehensive evaluation of the roles of disorder in the cell. A central
repository of information on intrinsically disordered proteins has the potential
of transforming the entire fields of cellular, molecular, chemical, and systems
biology; biochemistry; and biophysics by revealing the common and critical
dependence on protein disorder for a wide variety of fundamentally important
biological processes.