* 0849086
* SGER:  Whole Air Sampling with Advanced Whole Air Sampler (AWAS) during HIAPER Pole-to-Pole Observation (HIPPO) Global
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Elliot Atlas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 11/30/2009
* USD 49,963.00

The investigators will collect whole air samples and measure trace gas
composition during the first year of the HIAPER Pole-to-Pole Observation (HIPPO)
project. The measurements proposed here promise to provide an unprecedented data
set of the vertical and latitudinal distributions of a wide range of trace gases
that are relevant to atmospheric chemistry and climate. The measurements will
include a wide range of anthropogenic and naturally-occurring trace gases with a
range of chemical lifetimes and emission source patterns. The measurements
during the first year of the HIPPO project will cover the northern hemisphere
winter (January) and autumn (Oct/Nov) time periods, when there is maximum
contrast in photochemical lifetimes of reactive trace gases between the
hemispheres. The trace gas distributions and correlations from these samples
(and from the NOAA flask samples) will enhance the interpretation of the major
carbon cycle gases by adding insight into source regions and chemical processing
of the air masses sampled in the HIPPO transects. Further, the measurement of
trace gases from the whole air samplers will add additional and significant
constraints to the global chemical transport models that will be used in the
HIPPO analyses and will add measurements relevant to understanding changes in
air quality in the remote atmosphere. Finally, the proposed research will
compare the newly-constructed HAIS Advanced Whole Air Sampler (AWAS) canister
modules with NOAA glass flasks for selected halocarbons, CFCs, HCFCs, and HFCs,
will enhance the geographic resolution of the HIPPO whole air data set for these
gases, and will extend the range of compounds to additional natural and
anthropogenic trace gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurement of the suite of
trace gases planned here, as a complement to the major carbon cycle gases
measured during HIPPO, will add to the understanding of the relationships
between greenhouse and carbon cycle gases and other significant trace gases in
the atmosphere. These relationships and distributions, for example
characterizing the hemispheric distribution of organic bromine compounds, will
link ground based measurements as selected sites to the full atmosphere over the
Pacific Ocean. This link will enhance the development of global atmospheric
chemistry models to better predict atmospheric chemical distributions in the
future. The project also supports the development of a HAIS instrument as a
community resource by direct comparison to NOAA flasks commonly used throughout
the NOAA global network. Finally, the HIPPO project, and out proposed
measurements, will involve training of students and post-doctoral scientists,
and the project will add to the development of graduate and undergraduate
courses in atmospheric chemistry and environmental science.