* 0849959
* Collaborative Research: A GIScience Approach for Assessing the Quality, Potential Applications, and Impact of Volunteered Geographic Information
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Daniel Sui, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 10/31/2010
* USD 192,951.00

This project is motivated by the rapid expansion in the number and size of
websites devoted to gathering geographic information supplied on a voluntary
basis by users. This phenomenon of volunteered geographic information (VGI) is
part of a more general trend of user-generated content facilitated by a suite of
technologies loosely known as Web 2.0. VGI presents significant new challenges
for GIScience research, where existing theory and practices are geared almost
exclusively toward more conventional forms of spatial data. Yet to date there
exist no rigorous studies investigating the scientific and societal questions
raised by this phenomenon. Little is known about why people contribute
information, the accuracy or quality of what they produce, appropriate methods
for synthesizing or analyzing these data, how the so-called "digital divide" may
operate to inhibit some people from contributing VGI, or how this phenomenon may
impact privacy and confidentiality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Goodchild
(UC Santa Barbara), Elwood (University of Washington) and Sui (Texas A&amp;M)
will conduct a 3-year study that will expand basic knowledge about VGI via three
overarching objectives. First, the PIs will conduct a comprehensive inventory of
existing VGI efforts, and will assess the quality and accuracy of VGI using a
sample of these websites. Second, the PIs will evaluate the methodological
requirements of VGI with this same subset of VGI sources, evaluating the
appropriateness of existing techniques such as spatial data mining and other
approaches for analyzing large volumes of spatial data. Third, the PIs will
study the social dimensions and impacts of VGI using a qualitative and case-
based approach, collecting survey and interview data from applications in
emergency management and community development, two important arenas in which
VGI is predicted to be beneficial. Finally, to complement these basic and
applied research activities, the PIs will establish and facilitate a network of
scholars conducting research on VGI, to support compilation and exchange of
their research activities, findings, methods, and curricular innovations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study makes several important contributions to
science and society. It will identify factors that motivate and constrain people
from contributing VGI, develop and evaluate techniques for synthesizing and
assessing the quality and accuracy of VGI, and investigate the implications of
VGI for privacy, confidentiality, and unequal access to digital information and
technologies. VGI is thought to have tremendous societal benefits, for example
by providing timely information from citizens about the impacts of a natural
disaster or early warning of disease outbreaks. This research initiative will
make a pivotal contribution toward realizing this potential, by developing basic
and applied knowledge about how this new form of geographic information may be
acquired, synthesized, and redistributed, and about how its quality may be
assessed and assured. Geographic information is a substantial part of the
infrastructure of sciences ranging from geophysics to anthropology, so VGI will
impact science in novel and important ways. More broadly, VGI entails public
participation in the production of geographic information and knowledge at an
unprecedented level in human history - potentially six billion or more people
could serve as information producers. VGI represents a radical departure from
the top-down paradigm that has dominated the production of geographic
information for the past few centuries. This project generates theoretical,
methodological, and applied knowledge necessary for scientists, educators,
policy makers, and citizens to engage this profound transition in productive
ways.