* 0849040
* The Messy Politics of Clean Coal: Contested Energy Alternatives in the Appalachian Coalfields
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Dwight Billings, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 116,047.00

This project examines the processes by which "clean coal" technologies are being
institutionalized, supported, debated, and contested at the local level in
economically marginalized communities in Appalachia. A range of conflicting
arguments, stories, policy perspectives, and knowledge claims of different
stakeholders in these debates are documented and compared. Contemporary proposed
coal-to-liquid production, coal gasification, and carbon capture and storage
(CCS) projects in five Appalachian communities are analyzed alongside coal
gasification and related projects dating back to the 1970s in the region.
Struggles over contemporary projects are placed in historical context through
both the analysis of the successes and failures of past alternative energy
projects and an extensive examination of the social, political, environmental
and economic forces that have shaped the changing tides of support for (and
resistance to) these technologies over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
increases understanding of the social, historical, political, and environmental
implications of clean coal technologies, as viewed by a range of stakeholders in
coal-producing communities. It deepens understanding of the ways in which
dominant and marginalized groups engage in debates over controversial
technologies, and how different stakeholders use data, expert knowledge claims,
communications technologies, and other resources to advocate for their
positions. This research contributes to literatures in the fields of Sociology,
History, Appalachian Studies, and Science and Technology Studies, integrating
key concepts from these fields into a multi-disciplinary approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project promotes broader public understanding of and
participation in debates about clean coal and other energy alternatives in the
Appalachian region. The comparative analysis of alternative energy projects is
written for a general audience as well as an academic audience, and made
available through the Appalachian Center at the University of Kentucky. Findings
are circulated widely among community groups, researchers, and other
constituents of the Appalachian Center in an effort to encourage public dialogue
about energy alternatives in the region.