* 0849138
* Dissertation Improvement Grant:
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Erik Peterson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2010
* USD 14,351.00

This doctoral dissertation project is supported by the Science, Technology, and
Society Program. The project focuses on the intellectual careers and
relationships of Gregory Bateson (1904-1980) and C. H. Waddington (1905-1975),
individuals who traversed disparate fields (including anthropology, psychology,
and information science from the 1920s through 1970s) and strived against what
they perceived as tendencies toward hyper-specialization and reductionism in the
social as well as life sciences. The dissertation will also consider the
influence of evolutionary biology on these fields by way of Bateson and
Waddington. The grant will support research and travel to three archives in the
US and UK.

This study is relevant to the history, philosophy, and sociology of the life and
social sciences for two reasons. It surveys the history of the Modern Synthesis,
the integration of evolutionary theory with "reductionist" genetics achieved in
the 1930s and its extension into the social sciences, against the evolutionary
"organicism" advocated by Bateson and Waddington. by examining the formation of
journals, institutes, etc., alongside unpublished correspondence, it contributes
to our understanding both of interdisciplinarity and of the sociological process
of marginalization that proponents of the organicist alternative experienced.

Bateson and Waddington aimed their theoretical worries about biological
reductionism toward social and ecological problems including overpopulation,
resource degradation, and sociobiology. The anti-reductionism endorsed by them,
and their closest correspondents including Needham, Woodger, Mead, Erikson
contributed to the retreat of scientific racism after World War II.