* 0849982
* Fine-Grained Semantic Markup of Descriptive Data for Knowledge Applications in Biodiversity Domains
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Hong Cui, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 700,452.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arizona is awarded a
grant to develop and evaluate a set of algorithms/software to help computers to
read and ?understand? taxonomic descriptions of plants, animals, and other
living or fossil organisms. The major functions of the algorithms/software
include 1) annotate large sets of text descriptions in a machine-readable way to
support various knowledge applications, including producing character matrices
and identification keys for various taxon groups. The algorithms do not need
large sets of training examples or hand-crafted regular expression or grammar
rules; this makes the algorithms easy to use with different document types
and/or subjects; 2) generate interactive identification keys for various taxon
groups with minimal human intervention; 3) discover and verify the use of
ontological concepts and relationships as represented in the descriptions to
improve coverage and literary warrant of domain ontologies; and 4) produce high
quality, reusability resources (e.g. lexicons, benchmarks, etc.) for future
bioinformatics research. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work include:
support community-based informatics activities (e.g. ontology development,
document annotation and retrieval); all software produced by the project will be
made open source, along with documentation and training materials; reusable
knowledge entities (glossaries, lexicons etc.) generated by the project will be
conveniently accessible via Web services; annotated document collections will be
accessible for research, education, and the public. In addition, Web-based
education modules will be developed to spark interests of K-12 students in
taxonomy and introduce them to scientific ways of collecting, observing,
describing, and identifying ant specimens, and lastly, training opportunities
and a mentoring program for graduate level students interested in digital
information management will be created, using the software and document
collections provided by the project. Further information about this project may
be found at the PI's website at http://sirls.arizona.edu/cui.