* 0849369
* Collaborative Research: Mixture synergy in Piper imides, iridoid glycosides, and furanocoumarins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2010
* USD 176,234.00

Examples of plant secondary metabolites acting in a synergistic fashion as
insect deterrents are not common, and many studies focus on the pharmaceutical
applications of natural products where activity is serendipitous and not an
evolved response. This project will test for synergy between plant products in
the deterrence of insects, the activity for which they have ostensibly evolved.
Synergy between compounds in a mixture produced by a single plant species
(intraclass synergy) will be tested in three systems: the imides of Piper
species (Piperaceae, Piperales), the iridoid glycosides of Plantago lanceolata
(Plantaginaceae, Lamiales), and the furanocoumarins of Pastinaca sativa
(Apiaceae, Apiales). The imides of P. imperiale and P. melanocladum are
structurally very similar to imides and amides from Piper cenocladum and P.
tuberculatum which have recently been shown to act synergistically against a
broad array of insects. This proposed work tests the generality of intraclass
synergy for imides and amides of the genus Piper. To test if intraclass synergy
is general to other classes of natural products, the iridoid glycosides
(monoterpene glycosides) and furanocoumarins will be examined, since they are
structurally unrelated to the Piper amides/imides and to each other, and both
classes of compounds have a well documented central role in plant insect
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this linked collaborative
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
collaborative work of two chemists and an ecologist, Professors Craig D. Dodson
and Joseph L. Richards, of the Department of Physical and Environmental Sciences
at Mesa State College, and Professor Lee A. Dyer, of the Department of Ecology
and Evolutionary Biology at Tulane University. The approach outlined in this
proposal will provide novel methods for chemical ecology, bioassays, and
statistical analyses. It will provide rigorous tests of important hypotheses on
how intraclass compounds act synergistically to deter insects. The work will
contribute to a long term goal to determine if antiherbivore synergy is
widespread among plant secondary metabolites. If synergy is found to be general
and widespread when testing for activity against ecologically relevant insect
herbivores, then it is consistent with a general hypothesis that plants evolved
multiple compounds as synergists for defense against herbivores and pathogens.
These results are also directly relevant to the way insects are controlled on
crops. The proposed work will continue a decade-long, successful collaboration
between two chemists and an ecologist. The collaboration involves an
undergraduate institution and a research university and has successfully trained
a large number of graduate and undergraduate students. The current proposal
includes funding for one graduate student and 12 undergraduates. Students will
be broadly trained in both biology and chemistry, and the collaborators will
continue to be involved with important training programs for these students at
Tulane, such as Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU), the Ecological
Society of America's SEEDS program for minorities, the Louisiana Alliance for
Minority Participation, and Fulbright's LASPAU program for training faculty from
other countries.