* 0849101
* STIR:  Socio-Technical Integration Research
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* David Guston, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 543,030.00

Science and technology policies in many nations are placing new pressures on
laboratories to address broader societal dimensions of their work in ways that
have the potential to influence the content of science and engineering
activities. Despite longstanding calls for collaborations between natural and
human scientists to achieve this goal, neither the capacity of laboratories to
respond to such pressures nor the role that interdisciplinary collaborations may
play in enhancing responsiveness is well understood or empirically supported. It
is crucial to overcome these limitations in order to design, implement, and
assess effective programs aimed at responsible
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project co-funded by Science, Technology
&amp; Society; Biology and Society; Mathematical and Physical Sciences and
Society; Science of Science and Innovation Policy; and Office of International
Science and Engineering involves a coordinated set of twenty laboratory
engagement studies to assess and compare the varying pressures on and capacities
for laboratories to integrate broader societal considerations into their work.
Ten doctoral students each conduct two paired laboratory studies that extend
more traditional ethnographies by engaging researchers in semi-structured
interactions designed to enhance reflection upon research decisions in light of
broader considerations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the STIR project
as a whole, as well as each paired study, are: to identify and compare external
expectations and demands for laboratories to engage in responsible innovation;
assess and compare the current responsiveness of laboratory practices to these
pressures; and investigate and compare how interdisciplinary collaborations may
assist in elucidating, enhancing, or stimulating
responsiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students base their studies on a protocol
developed by PI Fisher during a previous thirty-three month laboratory
engagement study. This study provides preliminary evidence that such activities
as proposed here enable laboratory work to become more sensitive to its
potential societal implications, without compromising laboratory research,
education, or strategic goals. The STIR project investigates whether these
results are applicable across a diverse and globally distributed range of labs
and in a less time and labor-intensive manner.