* 0849472
* NetSE Workshop; September2008; Arlington, VA
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2009
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen L. Fisher
* 02/28/2009
* USD 78,936.00

Project summary

The workshop proposed here is intended to bring together the relevant NSF
research communities to discuss NetSE activities undertaken by the computing
research community and the recently announced NetSE program, and to facilitate
future collaboration by providing a workshop environment for researchers from
different communities to meet.

The Community Computing Council (CCC) created the NetSE Council. In addition to
this workshop, the NetSE Council will hold five topical, invitational workshops
on aspects of NetSE. One of the goals of this workshop is to allow the open
community of potential proposers to hear about the research agenda and results
of these different workshops. This meeting will tie together the external
planning process of the NetSE Council with the internal planning process within
NSF in a timely manner consistent with the schedule imposed by the NetSE
solicitation deadlines.

The NetSE solicitation describes a new structure for research related to the
future of networking, and calls for new concepts, new approaches, and new ways
of doing research. Because of the novelty of this solicitation, it is important
that potential proposers have the opportunity to hear about the program from the
relevant NSF program officers, learn about the preliminary work that has been
done to frame and define this initiative, to talk to potential collaborators,
and to ask questions that will help them better position their own research
interests.

Intellectual merit

While the main objective of the workshop is informational, we anticipate that
the integrated presentations concerning the various NetSE Council workshops and
the following breakout sessions can lead to fresh insights and research ideas.
It is the goal of this workshop to excite the relevant research communities
about the new approaches to research that are embodied in NetSE.

Broader impact

The primary goal of this workshop is broad impact?outreach across a broad set of
research communities, broader than would normally respond to a solicitation
concerning network design. The goal of NetSE is to engage research across
multiple disciplines within CISE, and to reach out even beyond CISE to the
social sciences, law and humanities to get their points of view about the future
of our global networks. This workshop, with broad outreach, is a central
component of that objective.