* 0849977
* Text Mining Infrastructure for the Entire Biological Literature
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lawrence Hunter, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,063,773.00

The University of Southern California is awarded a grant for the construction of
SciKnowMine, a shared computational framework that scales up processing large
datasets across different communities through the automated mining of text,
images, and other amenable media at the scale of the entire literature
http://www.sciknowmine.org/). This system will be tailored specifically to
support the actions of bio-curators through a generic set of web-services that
may be specialized within specific curation workflows from different databases.
This project is a multi-community collaboration requiring contribution from
computer scientists, bioinformatics specialists, and bio-curators. SciKnowMine
will be a prototype to process one million documents for a well-defined bio-
curation task: document triage. This involves being able to determine
automatically whether a given article is of interest to a bio-curator in the
context of a specific bioinformatics database. The product will be an open
informatics infrastructure for text mining that is (a) available to the computer
science NLP community, (b) serves the immediate needs of bio-curators and (c)
scales to accommodate millions of documents requires a deep understanding of
biology, knowledge engineering, NLP and high performance computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Academic publishing is increasingly undergoing a radical
transformation. This project, if successful, will serve as an exemplar of the
kinds of cyber-infrastructure that might be applied in other scientific
subjects: from Physics to Engineering to, eventually Political Science and
certain parts of Sociology and Anthropology. Papers and data are increasingly
made publicly available on the web (either by authors, open-access publishers or
by governmental decree), exponentially increasing the quantity of text required
for scientists to read to stay current in their subject and calling into
question the value added by traditional commercial publishers. This project
provides an opportunity to develop this infrastructure within an open-source
environment that directly leverages the work of cutting-edge computer
scientists. How exactly the eventual cyber-infrastructure solution is shaped,
which aspects are freely available to all, and which require commercial
presence, is a question of particular interest in this work.