* 0849126
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Miscegenation Nation: Race Crossing and the Human Sciences in Hawaii, 1889-1945
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Sally Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 01/31/2010
* USD 7,320.00

This doctoral dissertation project, supported by the Science, Technology &amp;
Society (STS) program at NSF, examines how American ethnologists, physical
anthropologists, and sociologists studied race crossing in Hawaii between 1880
and 1945. It investigates how the following projects shaped local and
disciplinary knowledge about race mixing and its consequences: the establishment
of the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum of Anthropology and Ethnology (1889);
physical anthropologists' photographic and physical measurement surveys of mixed
race people; mixed race family studies by sociologists at the University of
Hawaii; and race relations research at the University's War Research Lab during
World War II. Combining archival research in Hawaii and the continental United
States, this historical study explains the importance of research in Hawaii to
the development of theory and practice in the human sciences. It also
illustrates how government agencies and local businesses applied knowledge about
racialized territorial subjects. The history of the scientific study of race in
the U.S. has focused primarily on scientists' concerns with race relations and
mixing between black and white people. Incorporating Asian and indigenous people
into studies of race mixing made research in Hawaii more representative of human
diversity, as it made results more ambiguous and challenging to contemporary
definitions of race. This dissertation research brings together the history of
racial science, the history of biology, the history of the social sciences, and
the history of scientific activism. Hence, this project enhances historical
understandings of the role of territories in the development of ideas about the
nature of race itself; and demonstrates how the territory of Hawaii served as a
disciplinary laboratory where social scientists worked out how biology should
influence their disciplines. The project stands to expand and deepen STS
understanding of the role of race crossing knowledge in scientists' debates
about scientific racism.