* 0849650
* Dissertation Research: Dengue in the Landscape: Waste Management and Infectious Disease Ecologies in Urban Nicaragua
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Alex Nading, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,318.00

Both Nicaraguan and international policymakers view local participation in
mosquito control as the best way to stop the spread of dengue fever, a mosquito-
borne illness that primarily strikes poor urban areas in the tropics and for
which there is no vaccine. Often, participation entails making changes in waste
management practices. This dissertation project funded by the Science,
Technology &amp; Society Program is the second in a two-part ethnographic study
of waste management and dengue fever prevention. It extends the Co-PI's current
research in Ciudad Sandino, Nicaragua to the Nicaraguan Ministry of Health and
the U.S. Centers of Disease Control (CDC). The objective is to find out how
local ecological knowledge about dengue fever works its way into the practices
of national and international experts on dengue, including epidemiologists,
entomologists, physicians, and public health marketers in Nicaragua's Health
Ministry and at the CDC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through research on policy
development at CDC Health Marketing offices in the USA and CDC laboratories in
Puerto Rico, policy adoption at the Ministry of Health in Managua, and
application in Ciudad Sandino, the project addresses a problem that continues to
vex medical and ecological anthropologists. Even when experts recognize the role
of translocal forces (e.g. climate change, structural adjustment, urbanization)
in environmental health crises, media and policymakers often dispense with
macro-level explanations, circulating blame among the vulnerable people whom
participatory strategies are meant to empower. The project treats urban public
health as a set of social practices that links people in Ciudad Sandino to
scientists and marketers, among whom consensus about etiology, diagnosis, and
prevention remains elusive. Anthropologists of science and technology have
helped place the struggle for consensus among medical experts in wider
historical and social contexts. This project follows such debates as they ramify
outside the laboratory, into clinical and preventative settings in urban
Nicaragua, exposing underlying ambiguities that have placed the internationally
developed dengue initiatives at odds with local efforts to improve
infrastructure and create sustainable urban livelihoods. The question before
scholars interested in the social and cultural connections between ecology,
disease, urban dwellers, scientists, and policymakers, is whether increased
participation in health and infrastructure leads to a meaningful change in the
production of knowledge about either. By taking a place-based approach to a
health crisis, this research uncovers some of the material and discursive
mechanisms by which citizens, experts, and the non-human actors who link them
communicate, conflict, and possibly conciliate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has broader impacts in that it helps facilitate understanding of how urban
dwellers generate knowledge that is potentially beneficial for public health
policymakers. By following this knowledge through to centers for disease
control, the PI is able to identify processes related to the deployment of
knowledge and suggest means for improvement.