* 0849036
* Unexamined Consequences:  Analyzing the Impact of Early Exposure to Proprietary Science on Careers and Knowledge Production
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Jeannette Colyvas, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2012
* USD 91,527.00

This project jointly funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society; Biology
and Society; Mathematical and Physical Sciences and Society, and Research and
Evaluation on Education in Science and Engineering programs addresses the impact
of early exposure to commercial activity on careers in the physical and life
sciences. The spread of commercial activity among university faculty is now
widely accepted, and even encouraged on some campuses. But should such activity
extend to graduate students? Moreover, what is the effect on graduate students
of early career exposure to commercial involvement by their mentors -- does it
shape their career choice or the focus of their science? This project addresses
the less examined area of graduate students and the effects of exposure to
commerce on careers and research programs. A core argument is that exposure to
commercial science influences career choices, which in turn shapes the content
of post-graduate research programs, the distribution of talent, and the
trajectory of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a novel approach
by blending empirical and qualitative analysis with agent-based simulations to
analyze the impact of commercial science on academic careers and scientific
production. The study covers 35 years of graduates and the faculty who trained
them in the physical and life sciences from Stanford University and then draws
on these findings to develop predictive models. Specifically, the project
addresses: how different forms of exposure to commercial science during graduate
training influence careers and shape research programs; how the form and content
of science differs depending on employment setting and relative to the
laboratories where a scientist trained; and what the potential consequences are
for the distribution of talent and the trajectory of science.