* 0849747
* Dynamics of the descending branch of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Ryo Furue, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2013
* USD 443,595.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC) is a key component of the global climate system. Paleo-
evidence suggests that this circulation has experienced rapid reorganizations,
particularly during the last glacial period. Understanding the driving
mechanisms of this climate engine and its sensitivity to past and future
perturbations requires an in-depth understanding of the dynamical processes that
maintain the AMOC. Here, we focus on the processes that establish its sinking
branch.&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a comprehensive study of the
dynamics of thermally-driven circulation in the subpolar North Atlantic. The
overall goal is to understand the fundamental, 3-dimensional dynamics of the
AMOC?s large-scale descending branch, including its dependence on horizontal and
vertical mixing, buoyancy fluxes, winds, bottom topography and basin geometry,
and southern-hemisphere forcing. To address this goal, we will develop a
hierarchy of solutions to an ocean general circulation model (OGCM) and, when
useful, obtain corresponding solutions to layer models. At the base of our
hierarchy is a thermally forced, inviscid, OGCM solution that develops no
diapycnal overturning. A first task in our study, then, is to understand in
detail the processes (horizontal vs. vertical mixing, diffusion vs. viscosity,
strength of surface heating) that breakdown this null state. Further tasks will
sequentially consider the impacts of the other processes listed in our
goal.&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome is an improved understanding of the
processes that determine the strength and location of deep subpolar downwelling
and its relationship to the large-scale AMOC.&lt;br/&gt;Through our focus on the
physics of the AMOC sinking branch, this research will provide important
dynamical insights that will help to assess the stability of the AMOC with
respect to density perturbations. It will also help in the interpretation of
paleo-proxy data that show evidence of rapid AMOC transitions in the North
Atlantic region and in the evaluation of non-eddy resolving future climate
change model simulations.