* 0849491
* North Atlantic Tropical Cyclone Genesis Pathways
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 548,106.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will use the opportunity afforded by the PRE-Depression
Investigation of Cloud-systems in the Tropics (PREDICT) field experiment,
currently planned for August and September 2010, to investigate the pre-genesis
and genesis of North Atlantic tropical cyclones (TCs). The proposed work is
motivated by previous research that identified six distinct objectively defined
North Atlantic TC genesis pathways. A distinctive aspect of the proposed
research is that TC genesis/null events will be stratified by the six previously
identified genesis pathways and analyzed over several complete TC seasons to
facilitate uncovering distinctive pathway-dependent dynamical signatures.

The project tasks will be:

(i) construct a TC climatology over recent North Atlantic TC seasons (not just
TC cases since null events are important and will outnumber TC developments) for
each of the identified six genesis pathways;

(ii) develop a diagnostic parameter indicating the preferred genesis pathway in
a region from analysis of recent North Atlantic TC seasons for use during
PREDICT and establish which genesis parameters are important for TC development
depending on genesis path;

(iii) perform detailed diagnostic analyses of TC genesis/null events prior to
and during PREDICT to identify genesis pathway-dependent governing physical
relationships;

(iv) create genesis pathway composite analysis ensembles using ensemble Kalman
filter (EnKF) techniques to highlight pathway-dependent environmental signatures
and dynamically important features and relationships; and

(v) conduct high-resolution modeling studies of archetype TC events during
PREDICT to evaluate pathway-dependent model sensitivity.

With respect to the intellectual-merit criterion, the research will advance
scientific understanding by isolating the various environmental and dynamical
factors that control TC development along individual genesis pathways;
establishing the governing dynamical and thermodynamical processes applicable to
the individual TC genesis pathways; and increasing our understanding of the
physical mechanisms that control TC predictability and error growth along
different genesis pathways.

With respect to the broader impact criterion, the anticipated advances in
scientific understanding will translate into improved medium- and short-range
forecasts of TC genesis over the North; contribute to the specialized research
training and advanced education of the two graduate students to be supported by
this project; and enrich and enhance the teaching and scholarship of the PI and
his colleagues in the areas of synoptic-dynamic and tropical meteorology.