* 0849616
* History of Physics Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* R. Joseph Anderson, American Institute of Physics
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2013
* USD 406,394.00

This project funded by NSF's Science, Technology, and Society Program is a study
of physics-based entrepreneurship, meaning the development of research-based
startup companies by groups including PhD physicists. The proposed study builds
on previous work by the PI, the successful History of Physicists in Industry
project, which was completed in 2007 with support from NSF. In the earlier study
identification was made of the increased use of corporate laboratories to assess
technologies brought to the market by small startups, rather than to develop new
technologies internally. The role of large corporations is now relatively well
understood; this study seeks to further develop an understanding of
entrepreneurial physics-based startups. It represents an effort to explore and
develop documentation strategies that allow companies to identify and preserve
historically valuable records and make them accessible to researchers in the
future.

Physics entrepreneurship includes not just an organization founded by a PhD
physicist, but also knowledge or intellectual property about the physical world
and skills in working with manipulating the physical world that creates
commercial value in the marketplace. The project seeks to uncover historical
trends as well as current developments by interviewing physicists who founded or
shared in the founding of some thirty-plus startups and other staff involved in
the founding and/or research of these companies. Our interviews will include
five startups prior to the 1990s that have since become established companies,
five startups that failed during the dot-com boom, five startups subsequently
acquired by larger corporations, and about fifteen currently developing startups
founded since about 1990. Some physicists have brought their understanding of
the physical nature of the world to the creation and manufacture of new
technologies. Others have focused on the creation and evaluation of intellectual
property and its application across a broad spectrum of businesses, serving as
consultants and licensors of intellectual property. And some physicist
entrepreneurs develop high tech companies where the company itself is the
product to be acquired by larger companies needing its intellectual property and
skill sets. Interviews with PhD physicists who have founded or partnered in the
founding of small hi-tech startups, as well as other research will facilitate
understanding the changing dynamics of these operations from the perspective of
the founders and their dynamic role in the intellectual property marketplace. At
the completion of this project, eighty to ninety question set interviews
including interviews with at least thirty founders of physics-based startups
will have been acquired. The findings will eventually be published in
professional journals and on the Web.

This study is important for understanding the role of startups in knowledge
creation within industry and further investigating the changing patterns of
research and development organizations and funding within the industrial
community.