* 0849278
* SGER: Spin-Transfer-Torque Devices Based on Magnetostatically-Coupled Sub-50nm Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 10/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

TECHNICAL: There has been significant progress in the understanding of spin-
transfer torque (STT) effects in nanoscale magnetic structures. STT is capable
of switching the magnetic state of a magnetic structure by the passage of a
spin-polarized current, offering advantages in terms of device simplicity and
power consumption. Most STT research has been directed towards the development
of magnetic random access memories. However, the possible applications of STT
are much wider than this, including for example combined programmable logic and
memory devices. Progress in this field is based on the development of new
magnetic materials and an understanding of the influence of the processing
conditions, composition, microstructure and patterning on the magnetic
properties of the materials. The intellectual merit of this SGER award is to
investigate STT effects in metal multilayer nanostructures with different layer
sequences and compositions, through building functional magnetic nanostructures.
PI will design a device that will combine STT effects with magnetostatic
interactions to show how data can be written, transmitted, and processed within
a single magnetic device. Multilayer stacks chosen for patterning will contain a
free magnetic layer separated from a synthetic-antiferromagnet pinned layer by a
non-magnetic metal or an insulator. The critical current densities required for
STT operation will be optimized by considering the influence of the cell shape,
multilayer stack, patterning conditions and microstructure. The focus will be on
how the choice of metal alloys and layer sequence in the magnetic multilayer
affects the performance of the device, and the information this yields about the
mechanism of STT. NON-TECHNICAL: The broader impacts are to train a researcher
and undergraduate students in the field of magnetic nanostructures and STT. The
researcher will work with 2 ? 4 undergraduates during the course of the project.
The undergraduates will participate through the undergraduate research
opportunities (UROP) program, or as senior thesis project students, or through a
REU program. In addition, the researcher and the PI plan to work with at least
one teacher during a summer RET program, and incorporate findings from the
project into graduate and undergraduate classes.