* 0849963
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Is All Money the Same? Funding Innovation in Young Firms
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Emily Cox, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 06/30/2010
* USD 8,000.00

Innovation is critical to the success of many young firms. Venture capital is,
in turn, critical if young firms are to innovate. What is not well understood is
what type of venture funding best promotes innovation. In this Doctoral
Dissertation Research Grant, the co PI addresses this question by first
constructing a novel longitudinal dataset on 230 U.S. Minimally Invasive
Surgical device startups founded between 1986 and 2007 and then comparing the
impact of four types of investors (government agencies, venture capitalists,
corporate venture capital groups, and angel investors) on innovation among these
firms.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will make several novel theoretical
contributions. First, it explores how young organizations can best select and
manage relationships with investors. This approach is in contrast to current
research that emphasizes ways in which organizations can mitigate their
dependence on external resource providers. A second contribution will be an
exploration of how external resources, as opposed to internally generated
R&amp;D funds, impact firm innovation. Third, this research considers both the
benefits and perils associated with forming relationships to acquire financial
resources. &lt;br/&gt;Findings will have direct applicability to entrepreneurs
making decisions about when and from whom to take funding in order to promote
innovation. This research has implications for public policy regarding the
public funding of innovation, and about incentives for private investment in
innovation. It will illuminate how aspects of investment relationships-
including timing of investment, and combinations of public and private funds,
can be utilized to promote innovation in young firms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;