* 0849681
* Precipitating Legal Change:  Children's Rights, Family Definitions, and Judicial Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Mellisa Holtzman, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 11/30/2011
* USD 81,671.00

This research focuses on custody disputes between biological and nonbiological
parents in order to explore how changing conceptions of the family and shifting
ideas about parents' and children's rights influence judicial decisions over
time. Although the project will enable researchers to explore a number of
questions germane to issues of family, children's and parents' rights, and legal
decision-making, one primary aim of this research is to empirically examine the
efficacy of two arguments that are often suggested as potential avenues for
legal change in custody disputes between biological and nonbiological parents.
In court, biological parents are often favored in these disputes, but many
scholars argue that such a preference ignores the psychological attachments that
exist between children and their nonbiological parents. Recent work has,
therefore, advocated two distinct approaches for promoting legal changes aimed
at protecting children's attachment relationships: some scholars argue that
legal recognition of expanding definitions of the family is the key to
protecting children's attachments, while others argue that such protection is
contingent upon legal recognition of children's rights. This research examines
the efficacy of these competing sources of legal change through an in-depth,
longitudinal, mixed methods study of judicial decision-making in eight states
over a nearly 40 year period. In so doing, this research contributes to
scholarly understandings of 1) the legal and social factors that precipitate
legal change, 2) the process of judicial decision-making, 3) the implications of
changing social and legal definitions of the family for various litigants in
custody disputes, and 4) the efficacy of children's rights arguments in custody
decision-making. By disseminating these results to legislators, lawyers, judges,
and other policymakers, this study also has the potential to influence the lives
of children and their parents (both biological and nonbiological) by informing
judicial decisions and influencing policy recommendations.