* 0849453
* SHINE: Digitization of 27 Years of Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO) Films and Application in Statistical Study of Filaments and Flares
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Haimin Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/28/2014
* USD 431,262.00

From 1969 to 1995, Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO) staff recorded all of their
observations on 35 mm film before switching to digital imaging after 1995. These
film data include full-disk observations from BBSO's 8 inch telescope and high
resolution observations from the 10 and 26 inch telescopes, with the cadence of
observations ranging from 10 seconds to 1 minute. These film data cover two and
one-half solar cycles, include thousands of flares, and span the entire
operational service of several space missions, including SMM, CGRO, and Yohkoh.
Wide public access to these BBSO data films is impractical and their scientific
capability has never been fully explored.

The requested funding will support the purchase of specialized commercial
digitizing equipment, as well as the employment of a postdoctoral researcher and
undergraduate students to digitize these films and archive them in the public
domain. The BBSO data to be digitized includes full-disk and high resolution
H-alpha images, as well as He I images. The entire set of full-disk data will be
converted to create a synoptic data base. High resolution film data will be
digitized according to events selected by the full-disk data. All observed solar
flares and filament eruptions will be automatically detected and cataloged using
artificial intelligence methods that have been developed and implemented at
BBSO.

Despite some limitations of the film data format, the PI notes that the long-
term coverage and high quality of the BBSO data will have very broad
applications for many statistical studies. The PI's team will carry out targeted
research on the filaments and flares with the digitized data. They plan to
perform statistical analysis of solar filaments, including their motions and
eruptions. They will study filament oscillations to verify whether they are
precursors to, or the result of, solar flares. The PI and postdoc will
investigate the rate of magnetic reconnection at the Sun and the relationship of
filament acceleration to hard X-ray (HXR) emission. This new study will
complement the ongoing comparison of existing BBSO digital data and HXR data
from the RHESSI spacecraft.

This research addresses the SHINE goal of understanding the initiation of CMEs
and electron acceleration in flares. The study of a large number of archived
events will improve the forecasting of future solar eruptive events, and thus
assist operational space weather prediction. Funding is not requested for the
PI, but it will instead support the postdoc and undergraduate students. At least
three undergraduate students will participate in the film digitization and
research, and the postdoc will gain management training by assisting the PI in
supervising these students.