* 0849397
* The fluid equations, shell models and the limit of vanishing viscosity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Susan Friedlander, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 137,002.00

Although all "real" fluids are at least very weakly viscous, in many physical
situations the subtle limit of vanishing viscosity is the relevant regime. In
particular, the seminal ideas of Kolmogorov and Onsager concerning the
statistical theories of turbulence are based on predictions about the behaviour
of fluids in the range of vanishing viscosity. The Euler and Navier-Stokes
equations are very challenging mathematically because the particular nature of
their nonlinearity.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses some of the nonlinear
phenomena that arise in the fluid equations, particularly those connected with
the limit of vanishing viscosity. So called "shell models" are studied: these
are composed of an infinite system of nonlinearly coupled ordinary differential
equations which, although less complex than the Euler and Navier-Stokes
equations retain certain important features of their nonlinearity. It has been
shown in previous NSF-supported work that the inviscid model behaves precisely
as Onsager conjectured for a turbulent fluid. In the project that will be
supported by this award, it is proposed to prove Kolmogorov's "law" for the
viscous model, namely that the average dissipation rate of the viscous system
stays positive and converges to the average turbulent dissipation rate in the
vanishing viscosity limit. Another line of research concerns instabilities in
fluid motion, and the interrelation between linear and nonlinear instability in
the vanishing viscosity limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical study of
the differential equations that model fluid motion forms an essential foundation
for many applications, such as oceanography, meteorology, astrophysics and
engineering. An issue of particular importance is the behaviour of turbulent
fluids. Under this award, Friedlander will be using mathematical techniques to
study the cascade of energy to smaller and smaller structures that occurs in
developed turbulence. She will also by studying the inevitable instabilities
that occur in most fluid environments. Such unstable flows break up and may form
the trigger for developed turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;