* 0849445
* RUI: Impact of Military Service on Health
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Jay Teachman, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2012
* USD 74,785.00

SES- 0849445 Jay Teachman Luck Tedrow Western Washington University

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The U.S. military is the single largest employer of young men in the United
States, with about 10-12% of recent cohorts of young men serving a term in the
military. Military recruitment is an often hotly debated topic of public policy
centering on issues such as access, equality of representation by race, and
transferability of training to the civilian labor market. In Congress, veterans'
rights and benefits are significant budgetary items (70 billion dollars were
spent on veterans programs in 2006), and veterans' organizations constitute
powerful political action groups. In 2005, Americans spent nearly two trillion
dollars on health care. The average American family spent nearly $2700 on health
care, or about 6% of its total expenditures. Any institution that affects the
health of a large number of Americans, such as the Armed Forces, thus merits
intensive examination. In addition, the health of veterans holds consequences
for the Veterans Administration. Although the majority of veterans (75%) never
make use of health benefits available to them, the Veterans Administration still
spends more than 30 billion dollars annually on health care. Understanding the
link between military service and need for health care is therefore critically
important for planning purposes.

Using longitudinal data from the 1979 National Longitudinal Study of Youth
(NLSY), this research will extend the investigators? previous research on the
consequences of military service by examining the relationship between military
service and both physical and mental health of men. The study will extend beyond
the existing literature by explicitly considering how military service during
the All Volunteer Force (AVF) era is linked to health up to age 40. The
investigators will pay particular attention to potential variations in the
effect of military service as they occur according to race and characteristics
of service. In addition, the research will make use of several ?natural
experiments? made possible by the design of the NLSY to more accurately adjust
for the nonrandom selection of individuals into military service.

Broader Impacts

The research will add to the existing literature on the impact of military
service on health which should prove useful to groups and individuals
responsible for administering programs directed at military personnel and
veterans. The research will be conducted in the Department of Sociology at
Western Washington University. The department does not have a graduate program
but does have a long history of producing students who eventually enter a
graduate program in sociology. Recognizing this link to higher education, the
department has revised its curriculum to more fully involve undergraduates in
the research enterprise. Thus, all students are now expected to complete a
capstone seminar that involves a research project for which this grant will
provide data and valuable training. In addition, the data generated by the grant
will be used in statistics and research methods courses and in our optional
computer applications course. Finally, the project will employ several
undergraduates on the grant who will participate fully in all aspects of the
research.