* 0849389
* Lightning Detection And Ranging (LDAR II) Network Operation and Analyses Over a Highly Polluted City - Houston, Texas
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Orville, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 694,210.00

Intellectual Merit: Under this award the Principal Investigator (PI) will
operate and analyze data from a twelve-station total lightning detection network
(Lightning Detection and Ranging, LDAR II) around Houston, Texas. The National
Science Foundation under a Major Research Initiative (MRI) grant funded the
purchase of the equipment for the LDAR II network. A high cloud-to-ground (CG)
lightning density anomaly had been previously identified over Houston, which
raised a number of scientific questions. The primary scientific goal of this
research is to address many outstanding questions about CG and intracloud (IC)
flashes that characterize the total lightning occurring over Houston and the
surrounding areas using the LDAR II network and the National Lightning Detection
Network (NLDN). The combination of data from the LDAR II and the NLDN will allow
the PI to determine 1) the location and amplitude of the first lightning flash
within storms, 2) cloud flash rates, 3) cloud-to-ground flash rates, 4) the
evolution of cloud/CG flash ratios, 5) the geometric extent of cloud discharge
channels, 6) the initiation points of cloud and CG flashes, 7) the altitude from
which the primary charge is lowered, 8) the area and volume in which charge is
altered by lightning, 9) the polarity of CG strokes, 10) estimates of the peak
currents in CG strokes, and 11) measurements of the multiplicity of strokes in
CG flashes in the thunderstorms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
research: Data from the LDAR II will have an immediate impact on the research
programs of scientists and students who are performing research outside the
bounds of this award. At the moment, more than ten cooperating institutions have
expressed an interest in this project and the associated information. The
continuing operation of the network will provide instrumentation and enhance the
infrastructure of understanding and forecasting weather in Houston, the fourth
largest city in population in the United States. In addition, general public
access to the experimental LDAR II real-time lightning displays is provided at
no cost through the following web site:
http://www.met.tamu.edu/ciams/ldar/index.html. Informal reports suggest that
this is a popular free web site for the Houston community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the education of several
graduate students who will directly participate in the research, which will
include their sharing in data acquisition and analysis. Research results will be
incorporated into advanced courses on cloud physics and mesoscale phenomena.
Finally, this research will take advantage of ongoing outreach and educational
Texas A&amp;M University programs to engage in mentorship of undergraduate and
high school students with special effort to involve under-represented students.