* 0849627
* Collaborative Research:   A Web-Based System for Modeling and Predicting Neurodevelopment Across Mammalian Species
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Barbara Clancy, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 144,629.00

Led by the University of Central Arkansas, a team of researchers from multiple
universities has been awarded a grant to develop tools that will help
researchers compare and predict brain development across species including
humans. Many aspects of human brain development are studied in non-human species
such as rats or rhesus monkeys. Yet little data are available on how to convert
the timing of brain development from experimental species to humans. Moreover,
one research group might study brain growth in hamsters, who are born relatively
early in development, and another investigate the same process in guinea pigs,
who are ready to leave the nest shortly after birth - leaving each laboratory
group puzzled as to how to best relate results from one study to the other. The
project: Collaborative Research: A Web-Based System for Modeling and Predicting
Neurodevelopment Across Mammalian Species, addresses this cross-species
conversion problem employing researchers and students in neuroscience,
evolutionary science, computer science, data mining, mathematics and statistics.
These researchers produce, maintain and update a unique interactive web-based
program that can model, compare and predict brain development across diverse
species including hamsters, mice, rats, rabbits, spiny mice, guinea pigs,
ferrets, cats, rhesus monkeys, and humans http://www.translatingtime.net/. They
are able to do this because brain development in all species occurs in somewhat
similar fixed sequences, allowing us to employ statistics to relate across a
database constructed from dates of brain development assembled from the vast
published literature. This web program is the only place where this depth of
cross species comparative data can be found and easily accessed. The most
obvious, and most pragmatic, impact of this web-based interface is that it
provides users with predicted dates of brain development for humans where data
are unavailable because studies have not been, or cannot be, accomplished. For
scientists working with other species, there is direct financial savings when
intervals for experimental study can be compared and/or efficiently narrowed
because resources, such as number of animals and/or valuable research time, can
be significantly reduced. This work also permits research previously
accomplished in rats to be equated to current and future studies done in mice,
something that is particularly useful at this time because mice are the species
currently favored in many studies, but most of the previous brain research was
accomplished in rats. There are some brain events that cannot be modeled across
all species, but these exceptions actually help us to understand species
differences, including some aspects of development that might serve to make
humans different from non-human species. Products of this award will be
available at http://www.translatingtime.net/.&lt;br/&gt;