* 0849145
* Request for Participant Support for Fourth Triannual Conference on Foundations of Molecular Modeling and Simulation (FOMMS 2009); Washington State; July 12-16, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Sharon Glotzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 06/30/2010
* USD 40,000.00

This grant provides funding for the Foundations of Molecular Modeling and
Simulation (FOMMS) 2009 conference to be held in Blaine, Washington July 12 ?
16, 2009. The conference will promote the applications and development of
computational quantum methods, molecular science, and engineering simulation.
The funds will be used to support participant costs for the meeting,
facilitating attendance by young researchers, including junior faculty,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students, as well as under-represented
minorities. The conference features an outstanding and diverse slate of 19
renowned innovators in and practitioners of molecular modeling and simulation
from the US, Europe, and Japan who have accepted invitations to present plenary
talks over the 4.5 day conference. Additionally, workshops on the development of
open source molecular simulation code and on the use of molecular simulation
modules in the classroom, and a tutorial and related plenary session on
multicore and graphics processor chips for molecular-based simulation, are new
highlights of FOMMS 2009. &lt;br/&gt;The FOMMS 2009 conference will broadly
impact researchers and students who develop or use molecular-based modeling and
simulation tools in academia and industry. The conference format and venue
provide ample time and opportunity for interaction among participants, cross-
fertilization of disciplines, and mentoring of young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;