* 0849880
* Collaborative Research:  Establishing the Flexibility &amp; Physiology of Symbiodinium Symbioses in the Eastern Pacific: Predicting Ecological Success in Light of Future Climate Ch
* BIO,IOS
* 02/18/2008,05/31/2010
* Todd LaJeunesse, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2010
* USD 94,544.00

Collaborative Research: Establishing the Flexibility and Physiology of
Symbiodinium Symbioses in the Eastern Pacific: Predicting Ecological Success in
Light of Future Climate Change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark E.
Warner&lt;br/&gt;University of Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Todd C.
LaJeunesse&lt;br/&gt;Florida International
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthetic symbionts that inhabit coral
tissues in great abundance may become damaged during periods of severe thermal
stress. These situations lead to mass coral bleaching events often resulting in
the mortality of numerous corals and subsequent degradation of the entire
ecosystem they support. The discovery that some corals can harbor different
species of symbiont with differing thermal sensitivity has led to the hypothesis
that such variability could provide an axis for acclimatization or adaptation to
climate change if corals can host thermally tolerant algae. In particular, it is
thought that zooxanthellae (algae in the genus Symbiodinium) within the "D"
lineage may serve this role, yet knowledge of the ecological distribution and
physiological detail of this and other groups of zooxanthellae is largely
incomplete. The eastern Pacific provides an excellent venue to test ideas of
symbiont change and resilience, as it encompasses regions that have been
differentially impacted by bleaching and has coral species known to harbor
D-type zooxanthellae. Drs. Warner and LaJeunesse will investigate the
distribution of different zooxanthellae within and between several populations
of ecologically important reef-building corals in three regions of western
Mexico with historical differences in bleaching frequency and severity. Genetic
surveys at multiple temporal and spatial scales will utilize new methods for
algal detection to characterize the full complement of zooxanthellae within
chosen corals. The short and long-term impacts of thermal exposure on the
photosynthetic activity and calcification of corals known to harbor multiple or
single symbionts will be assessed, as will the potential for recovery from
thermal stress via symbiont change. Lastly, fitness will be evaluated by
investigating the growth and reproductive output of coral-algal combinations.
The outcome of this research should provide much needed knowledge toward the
question of how (or if) zooxanthellae and reef corals can survive future
environmental disturbance based on predicted increases in sea water temperature.
The proposed work represents a collaborative effort between U.S. and Mexican
scientists and includes the training of two PhD students and several
undergraduate students from the collaborating investigators' home
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;