* 0849223
* Collaborative Research:  Shifting Paradigms: Using Subset Selection to Obtain Matched Samples
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Sheldon Jacobson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 278,767.00

Experimental studies are powerful because the experimental framework allows one
to examine causal effects. Some research questions, however, are not amenable to
an experimental framework. For example, if one is interested in whether long-
term smoking causes lung cancer, it is not possible to randomly assign people to
smoke for 30 years while randomly assigning others to not smoke for 30 years.
Instead, this research must rely on observational data where one simply observes
the rate of lung cancer among smokers and non-smokers who have made individual
decisions about whether they will smoke. To get around the lack of
randomization, researchers have attempted techniques that manipulate
observational data to resemble the randomized experimental framework by matching
individuals from the treatment group to individuals from the control group who
are similar in measurable ways (age, income, education level, previous medical
history, etc.) except that the treated individual smokes while the control
individual does not. There is no consensus on how best to proceed in matching
individuals, and the problem grows increasingly difficult as one tries to match
on larger numbers of attributes. This project provides a novel formulation of
the matching problem. The key insight is that matching individuals is neither
necessary nor sufficient for simulating randomization. In an experiment,
randomization ensures that the treatment group and the control group do not
differ systematically on any attribute, but there does not need to be a ?twin?
in the control group for each treated subject. The proposed procedure ensures
systematically similar treatment and control groups by choosing treatment and
control groups that maximize similarity in attributes. Moving away from the
individual ?twin? approach allows for the exploration of a wider range of
possible and better suited treatment and control groups. The PIs formulate
procedures for addressing this problem that are superior to existing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing the ability to make causal inferences
from observational data will stimulate research in a wide variety of fields and
enhance our understanding of a broad array of phenomena. In political science,
research on causal relationships include, but are not limited to, understanding
the role of information on voters in advanced versus new democracies, the impact
of different voting technologies for counting votes, whether proportional rather
than majoritarian electoral systems are more effective for incorporating
underrepresented groups, the extent to which degrees of campaign exposure affect
the type of information individuals possess about politics, whether voter
canvassing efforts are effective, and the effect of affirmative action on
passing bar exams. The research questions are important and diverse, and the
potential applications are limitless given a proper research design. In medicine
or health, causal inference studies include applications to criminality rates
related to gene patterns, the effect of generic substitution of presumptively
chemically equivalent drugs, and the effect of maternal smoking on birth weight,
to name but a few. Studies are certainly not limited to political science and
health, and it would be simple to compile similar lists for a varied set of
interesting and pressing queries in many other fields of study. The value of
this research and its potential impact affects a diverse scholarly
community.&lt;br/&gt;