* 0849917
* REU Site:   Biological Responses to the Environment from Genes to the Ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Richard Thomas, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2013
* USD 308,962.00

This West Virginia University?s REU Site will provide a research program for
undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Ten students will be selected to
participate in a 10-week research program. Students will receive hands-on
research experience in one of twelve laboratories under the guidance of an
experienced faculty mentor. This REU program focuses on research in
environmental biology with projects ranging from genomics to ecosystem ecology.
Students will receive a $4,500 stipend, on-campus housing, and support for
travel to and from the lab. In addition, health insurance and several social
activities are provided at no cost to participants. Research will be coordinated
with seminars, career guidance, group activities, and a research symposium.
Students have opportunities for training in ecology, environmental biology,
geography, molecular biology or genomics. Upon completion of the REU program,
students will be better prepared for future opportunities as graduate students
and researchers in environmental biology. The program is open to all
undergraduate students enrolled in biology, geography, plant science or related
fields. Underrepresented minorities, women, first generation students and
students from colleges with limited research opportunities are encouraged to
apply. Morgantown is a safe and diverse college town with interesting
entertainment, extensive outdoor recreation, and access to the beautiful
Appalachian Mountains. More information is available at http://reu.as.wvu.edu,
or by contacting the Program Director, Dr. Richard Thomas (rthomas@wvu.edu; Tel
304-293-5201 ext. 31516).