* 0849943
* The California Current transition zone off northern and central California: an extensive region exhibiting Fe-limitation and moderate chlorophyll
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Kenneth Bruland, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2013
* USD 680,298.00

High nitrate levels observed offshore in the California Current (CC) transition
zone filament waters originate from coastal upwelled waters that have become
iron-limited according to a research at the University of California-Santa Cruz.
This scientist further proposes that iron-limitation in the CC transition zone
results in nitrate drawdown and biological responses on time scales of a few
weeks to months. This slow drawdown of nitrate differs from near-shore regions
located over a relatively broad continental shelf with an adequate supply of
iron allowing a rapid phytoplankton bloom and drawdown of nitrate on time scales
of a few days to a week. To determine the role of Fe limitation in controlling
phytoplankton biomass in the California Current (CC) transition zone off
northern and central California, a research cruise, proposed to take place in
2010 on the RV Point Sur, would be carried out to determine the following: (1)
the sources of nutrients, micronutrients, and trace metals from various
upwelling regions along the northern and central coasts of California; (2)
whether elevated macronutrients in the CC transition zone are due to coastal
upwelling and subsequent advection and mixing offshore versus upwelling off the
shelf due to curl of the wind stress or eddy dynamics; (3) Fe limitation in the
CC transition zone; (4) nutrient consumption patterns in the CC system relative
to Fe availability; and (5) remineralization/solubilization and assimilation of
leachable particulate Fe by the phytoplankton community using low abundance
stable isotopes of Fe as tracers.

As regards broader impact, this study would further our knowledge on what
controls phytoplankton biomass and ecosystem productivity in eastern boundary
current regions, an economically important area. In regards to educational
impacts, this research would provide scientific training for a graduate student
and a postdoc.

