* 0849206
* Essential Roles of Receptor-Like Kinases in Brassinosteroid and Cell-Death Control Signaling Pathways
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jia Li, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants are sessile, which makes them
vulnerable to constant assaults by hostile abiotic and biotic stresses. To
ensure normal growth, plants have evolved unique mechanisms to defend themselves
against harm from these stresses. The detailed mechanisms by which plants avoid
death of cells caused by environmental stresses or diseases are poorly
understood, mainly because key regulators are not identified. Recently, the
Principal Investigator's group identified two receptor-like kinases (RLKs), BAK1
and BKK1, which can simultaneously mediate a brassinosteroid (BR)-dependent cell
growth pathway and a BR-independent cell death control pathway. This is indeed
an exciting discovery, as RLKs are critical cell surface receptor proteins
responsible for cell-to-cell, tissue-to-tissue, and plant-to-environment
communications. Objectives of the project will lead to understanding of detailed
mechanisms underlying BAK1 and BKK1 regulation of growth and cell death
processes. Work undertaken to address as part of this project will determine, by
using genetic and biochemical approaches, whether BAK1 subfamily members (also
designated as SERKs) are essential to the BR signaling pathway, and should
demonstrate that SERKs are key proteins regulating a previously uncharacterized
programmed cell death pathway. Attempts will be made to isolate novel signaling
components associated with this cell-death control pathway. Elucidation of the
molecular mechanisms by which the RLKs concurrently regulate growth and stress-
related cell death may permit future genetic manipulation to optimize the yield
of commercially important crops grown under various environmentally stressful
conditions. Broader Impacts. The project will provide excellent training
opportunities for postdoctoral associates, graduate students, undergraduate
students, and local high school students to investigate fundamental biological
questions using a variety of genetic and biochemical approaches.&lt;br/&gt;