* 0849896
* A Plant Genome Duplication Database
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrew Paterson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 453,796.00

The University of Georgia has been awarded a grant to develop a set of
computational tools to help researchers understand the duplication of individual
genes and entire genomes of flowering plants (angiosperms). The burgeoning set
of angiosperm genome sequences provide the foundation for a host of
investigations into the functional and evolutionary consequences of gene and
genome duplication, as well as the means to deduce otherwise-cryptic
relationships among particular genes. Existing algorithms for genome comparisons
are largely inadequate for angiosperms due to the high frequency of whole-genome
duplication and persistence of many duplicated genes. The project will extend
the functionality of a new approach (MCScan) for alignment within and between
such genome duplication (paralog-rich genomes), incorporating elements of both
gene phylogeny and gene colinearity to distinguish between orthology and
paralogy. The free online availability of intra- and inter-genome alignments for
angiosperms from a single resource based on uniform standards that have been
empirically validated is of utmost importance to comparative genomics. The
research will employ new computational approaches and sampling as much taxonomic
diversity as possible to reduce the impact of lineage-specific evolutionary
constraints. Products (results) will be made available to the biological
sciences research community via the Plant Genome Duplication Database (PGDD),
with the functionality of a pilot implementation broadened to better interface
with several other relevant resources and to expedite fine-scale studies of
specific genes (ortholog versus paralog detection).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better
understanding of the relationships among angiosperm (flowering plant) genes and
genomes promises (1) to empower new in silico and empirical studies to advance
knowledge of the central role played by genome duplication in evolution of
higher eukaryotes, by providing a wealth of well-groomed data sets from an ideal
taxon and based on uniform analytical standards; and (2) to clarify angiosperm
evolutionary history and provide a firm foundation upon which to base
translational genomics, the leveraging of hard-won structural and functional
genomic information from crown botanical models to dissect specific evolutionary
novelties in many additional organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project helps
to educate undergraduate and graduate students and includes a teacher internship
program. Teachers in this program spend time in the summer in the lab
participating in research activities. Additional information about the project
may be found at http://www.plantgenome.uga.edu.