* 0849934
* In Support of Mobilizing STEM Education for a Sustainable Future
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Susan Millar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 99,990.00

Assessment / Research (91) Social Sciences - Other (89) Interdisciplinary (99)
This project is a modest yet important expansion of an ongoing project to create
a team of "Critical Advisors" to formulate a new framework for improving
postsecondary resources to meet global challenges (DUE-0744106). The immediate
goal of both the predecessor project and this project is to articulate explicit
and new theory by which to leverage change in institutions of higher education
such that they take up and use existing evidence-based knowledge and resources
for STEM education. A longer term goal is to translate new theory for leveraging
change in higher education into strategies for action that will mobilize and
coordinate the efforts of STEM researchers, educators, and organizations already
seeking to improve quality and access in postsecondary STEM education; and also
enable and sustain the collaborative contributions of this STEM education reform
community. An ancillary goal is to successfully encourage institutions of higher
education and STEM departments to rebalance their values and reward systems to
more readily recognize and enable teaching as a valued professional role for
current and future STEM faculty, as a form of scholarship, and as a respected
career path at the K-12 level for STEM undergraduates. This project enlarges the
group of critical advisors. During its first year of work, the earlier project
discovered through careful analysis of critical knowledge and skills that it
needed to enlarge the planned size of this group by 25 percent. The combined
project is now known as the "Mobilizing STEM Education for a Sustainable Future"
project. The project focuses on postsecondary institutions, which are critical
in developing these capacities because they educate natural and computer
scientists, mathematicians, and engineers, and also K-12 teachers, policymakers,
and workers in business and industry. After they are successfully recruited, the
subsequent analyses, creative thinking, and recommendations of the critical
advisors will be synthesized and distributed to the STEM higher education
community. The scope of work entails: (1) participation in two workshops planned
and executed by the National Research Council, described in a companion grant
proposal; (2) preparation for and participation in two CA meetings as part of
this project; (3) synthesis of ideas and recommendations offered at the two CA
meetings; and (4) preparation, presentation, and distribution of a final
National Endeavor Team report that integrates the synthesis of the CA meetings
with the outcomes from the NRC workshops.