* 0849270
* SGER:  Multi-Lifespan Information System Research Initiative - The Information for an International Justice System
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Batya Friedman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2009
* USD 51,926.00

Genocide. HIV/AIDS. Famine. Deforestation. Habitat destruction. Species
extinction. Forced exodus. These problems share some commonalities. In one way
or another, they entail widespread losses to human beings, to other sentient
beings, or to the natural world; moreover, recovery from those losses is not
likely within the time frame of a single human lifespan (if ever). It is also
the case that information and the processes around information may have much to
contribute to the solutions of these problems. How then might this class of
problems be addressed through information system design? What unique
opportunities exist for information systems and what roles might they play? In a
field known for cutting edge innovation, where devices over five years old are
regarded as legacy, how does one begin to consider processes and solutions that
span periods that likely extend beyond a single human lifespan?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed technical and social research initiative
takes up the multi-lifespan design challenge by working with significant real
world problem spaces to begin outlining possible opportunities and roles for
information systems to help construct longer-term solutions. This inaugural
project area is the information heritage of the United Nation's International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The goals are twofold: (1) to contribute
meaningful information system designs to the specific real world problems under
study; and (2) to generate more general knowledge about the design of multi-
lifespan information systems. This SGER will fund one research team and film
crew to travel to Tanzania to conduct Futures Workshops and roughly 20
contextual interviews with ICTR personnel. This is time critical. As of January
1, 2009 the ICTR is scheduled to initiate a radical downsizing. The vast amount
of knowledge in defining and implementing an international justice system will
quickly dissolve as individuals scatter globally to find new career
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. This is truly a multi-
lifespan information system design effort. The project will address unique
technical and social challenges through its efforts to create an information
system that serves the needs of an international audience who access the system
through a multiplicity of information tools. An adaptable infrastructure that
preserves and manages the ICTR's information heritage for the next one hundred
plus years and addresses the difficult challenges of privacy, access, and
security will be highly relevant to other international tribunals.