* 0849586
* SGER-Comparative proteomics of the RNAP II CTD in red and green algae.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* John Stiller, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 04/30/2013
* USD 91,418.00

Intellectual merit: The marriage of molecular biology to informatics brought
about a revolution in broad scale eukaryotic evolutionary biology. To date,
interpretations of how organisms themselves have evolved, along with their key
cellular and metabolic features, have relied almost exclusively on sequence-
based phylogenetic reconstruction. At the same time, genome-level comparisons
continue to reveal new sources of bias that can mislead tree-building
computations. As phylogenomic investigations converge on a single framework for
understanding eukaryotic diversity, a universal "Tree of Life", it essential to
develop new, experimental methodologies to test and extend computation-based
hypotheses. This project develops an innovative approach to address one of the
most vexing problems in comparative evolution, genomics and proteomics; that is,
the origin of green plants and, specifically, whether they share a sister
relationship with red algae. Comparative sets of proteins that bind the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD), a key organizing platform for complex
gene expression, will be identified experimentally in respective green plant and
red algal models. Phospho-CTD associated proteins (PCAPs) will be isolated and
identified from the rhodophyte Cyanidioschyzon merolae and chlorophyte
Chlamydomonas rheinhardii; both of these unicellular algae have complete and
well-annotated genomes, permitting direct identification of specific isolated
proteins through mass spectrometry. They represent, at present, the best system
for experimental comparative proteomics of CTD-based transcription in the red
and green lineages.

Broader impacts: As an example of how empirical approaches can be used to test
computational hypotheses directly, this research can be transformative in the
broader fields of evolutionary proteomics and genomics. The work fosters
development of interdisciplinary collaborative research, supports training of a
Masters-level student, and provides research opportunities for multiple
undergraduates. The research will integrate with ongoing collaborations within
the Porphyra (Rhodophyta) Genome Research Coordinating Network, and raise public
awareness of science through a high school outreach program and public symposia
that accompany annual meetings. The goals and preliminary results from this
project are scheduled to be highlighted for developing network collaborations,
both at a Porphyra RCN symposium at the 2009 joint meeting of the American
Society of Plant Biologists and the Phycological Society of America, and at the
subsequent RCN meeting scheduled at East Carolina University for spring 2010.