* 0849465
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  Self Confidence in a Principal Agent Relationship
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Guillaume Frechette, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 01/31/2010
* USD 11,487.00

In a perfect market, employers will offer wage and bonus packages that will
provide employees with just the right incentives to accomplish tasks they are
given. But what if, as has been widely documented, employees are systematically
over or under-confident regarding their abilities? If so, employers might be
able to take advantage of these biases. For example, employers could offer
overconfident employees low wages and very high bonuses tied to outstanding
performance. Overconfident employees will accept the low wages because they
assume (incorrectly) that they are very likely to get the big bonuses.

To test such predictions, the PIs will conduct an experiment in which
participants are first assessed in terms of their self-confidence by comparing
each participant's score on an aptitude test to the score the each participant
predicted he or she would get. Subjects then participate in a simulated
employment situation in a computer laboratory. The effect of over- or under-
confidence is measured by comparing behavior when participants' probability of
success in their task is determined by their test score, and when it depends on
a randomly assigned number. This setup holds everything but the employee's self-
assessed ability constant. The experiment will confirm if different self-
confidence levels are indeed associated with different incentives, effort
levels, and overall profits for employers and employees. Ultimately, it will set
the stage for exploring the connection between self-confidence and demographic
factors like gender and the implications of gender differences for the structure
of work contracts.