* 0849758
* Collaborative Research: Social and Economic Differentiation in Hongshan Core Zone Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 81,940.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Christian E. Peterson, Robert D.
Drennan, Lu Xueming, and an international team of colleagues will conduct three
field seasons of archaeological survey and excavation in northeast China. They
will investigate the societies of the Hongshan period (4500-3000 BC), which
represent the earliest "chiefdoms" or complex societies in their part of the
world. Monumental scale religious and burial structures in the Hongshan cultural
core zone testify to dramatic social inequality and the presence of large labor
forces. Multiple small regional polities are known for Hongshan times, but only
in areas far from the Hongshan core zone. Direct evidence about the human
communities that built and utilized the monuments of the core zone has never
been collected. It is not at all clear, then, what these most developed Hongshan
communities were like, or what social, political, economic, or ideological
forces produced this development. Core zone communities may have been much
larger than peripheral ones. They may have had highly developed craft
specialization. There may have been wide gaps in standard of living between rich
and poor families. Shamans or other kinds of religious figures may have been
sharply set off from the rest of the population. Such characteristics have been
speculated about, but in fact only ritual platforms and burials with elaborate
jade carvings are known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on three
different tasks in the field in order to collect the information needed to
describe Hongshan communities. First, a regional settlement survey of 150 km2
will be carried out around the core zone monumental site of Dongshanzui. The
survey will document the regional distribution of habitation around this central
place and provide an indication of the community's population and spatial
extent. Second, intensive surface artifact collection within Hongshan settlement
areas revealed by the regional survey will identify individual household
locations and yield artifactual remains to assess differ-ences between them in
terms of wealth, status, and economic activities. Third, stratigraphic test
excava-tions will provide better chronological control and at least a glimpse of
the features associated with varied household artifact
assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is becoming ever clearer that early
chiefdoms followed highly varied trajectories of development, and that
comparisons between them can contribute to better understandings of this
fundamental trans-formation in human societies. The information collected by
this project will make it possible to place Hongshan societies alongside other
chiefdoms for comparison.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its intellectual contributions, the
proposed research will have broader impacts as well. As a joint effort of the
universities of Hawai'i and Pittsburgh and the Liaoning Province Institute of
Archaeology, it will foster closer international scholarly collaboration. It
will provide training and field experience for both Chinese and foreign
archaeology students in methodologies not widely employed in China; and it will
give foreign students first-hand exposure to archaeology in China. It will
provide experience to local cultural patrimony workers in systematic
archaeological survey, and the survey results will contribute to their efforts
to inventory the cultural remains they seek to protect and preserve.