* 0849285
* SGER: Surface and Bulk-Like States in Bismuth
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Tito Huber, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 03/31/2010
* USD 70,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant for Exploratory
Research enhances research opportunities for minority students at a Historically
Black University. It will allow them to contribute to the discovery process,
including experimental research and the exchange of ideas at the frontier of
science. The project will attempt to elucidate whether an interpretation for the
transport behavior of electrons in bismuth (Bi) nanowires when subjected to high
magnetic fields is also valid for the recently observed behavior exhibited by
charge carriers in bulk single crystal Bi. The observed effects in bulk Bi have
been interpreted as being due to the electrons in bulk Bi behaving like
electrons constrained to moving only in a thin layer (i.e., exhibiting the
fractional charge of a collective quantum state of 2 dimensional electrons). The
transport behavior in Bi nanowires has been interpreted as arising from
electrons near the surface of the wire (i.e., the surface states). However,
there are similarities between the magnetic field dependent transport
measurements of Bi nanowires and bulk Bi. Low temperature electronic transport
measurements in magnetic fields on bulk Bi will be performed. These measurements
are designed to reveal the possible contributions from surface states and
fractional charge. This timely project could be transformative in our
understanding of Bi in the quantum limit and lead to future technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Grant for Exploratory Research enhances research opportunities for minority
students at a Historically Black University. It will allow them to contribute to
the discovery process, including experimental research and the exchange of ideas
at the frontier of science. The project will attempt to elucidate whether
surface states could explain the recently observed magneto-transport behavior in
bulk Bi. Recent experimental studies of the Nernst effect and Hall effect of
bulk Bi in the quantum limit (magnetic fields larger than 9 Tesla) have been
interpreted in terms of charge fractionalization, an unusual collective quantum
state seen only in two-dimensional electron gases. Absorption peaks with the
same Shubnikov-deHaas period of 0.03/T have been observed in the
magnetoresistance and thermopower of Bi nanowires both below and above the
quantum limit of 9 T. In this case an interpretation in terms of surface states
related to a spin-orbit surface interaction was proposed. Measurements of the
magnetoresistance and Hall effect of thin samples of bulk single-crystal bismuth
in magnetic fields up to 45 T will be performed. These measurements are designed
to reveal possible contributions by surface states and fractional charge, allow
evaluation of their properties such as effective masses, and permit evaluation
of the relative importance of surface effects and electronic transport by bulk-
like electrons and holes in bulk Bi. This timely project could be transformative
in our understanding of Bi in the quantum limit and lead to future technologies.