* 0849169
* Biotechnology Workforce Collaborative
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* John Law, Community College of Allegheny County Allegheny Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 04/30/2015
* USD 597,920.00

The biotechnology and life sciences industry has become one of the primary
economic forces in Pittsburgh, projecting 20% growth in the need for qualified
technicians in the next ten years. If the frontiers of knowledge in Pittsburgh's
biotechnology research and development community are to be advanced and
scientific breakthroughs are to occur, trained biotechnicians must be available
to meet the demand. The aim of the Biotechnology Workforce Collaborative (BWC)
is to widen the spectrum of available, skilled workers in the region by
enhancing ongoing partnerships with local stakeholders to a burgeoning program
for the training of biotechnology/life sciences laboratory technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives and methods include: &lt;br/&gt;(a)
Academic training at the college resulting in the associate
degree.&lt;br/&gt;(b) A laboratory internship in the laboratories of Allegheny
General Hospital, Allegheny Singer Research Institute (ASRI), the Pittsburgh
Tissue Engineering Initiative (PTEI); and the University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Career
development support for individual students starting at the early stages of
participant preparation for college work and continuing in assistance for those
students upon employment at various research laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;(d)
Workgroup meetings to further develop and refine the training approach for
laboratory technicians. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Recruitment
efforts focus on developing three staggered cohorts of students. Both academic
and employment criteria used in the field are being applied to the selection of
promising candidates. Economically and educationally disadvantaged students are
being supported by the project that integrates the associate degree for
biotechnology technician with the workforce needs of research laboratories that
specialize in molecular genetics, tissue engineering and regenerative medicine,
and innovation in the application of research results for health care. The
collaborative effort includes an internship and long term support for career
development of biotechnology/life sciences laboratory technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Based on gender, ethnicity, and
geography, the cohorts broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
the biotechnology field, predominantly serving the biological sciences. As the
BWC continues to become a major player in the Pittsburgh region, this project
has an important role in advancing discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training, and learning between the academic and industry partners. It
enhances the infrastructure for research and education as a feeder to meet
employment needs and as a critical link to industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;