* 0849776
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Influence of Temperature and Acidification on the Dynamics of Coral Co-Infection and Resistance
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* C. Drew Harvell, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 504,963.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Coral reef ecosystems are highly endangered by recent increases in temperature
and by projected increases in ocean acidification. Although temperature has been
identified as a driver of some coral disease outbreaks, nothing is known about
direct effects of acidification on host immunity and pathogen virulence, or the
potential for synergism with temperature. Natural coral populations often suffer
from simultaneous infection by multiple pathogens that can also influence host
immune responses, but co-infection dynamics have not been investigated in
invertebrate systems lacking classical adaptive immunity. Changing climate will
very likely influence the outcome of single and co-infection.

This project will investigate the influence of environmental stress on co-
infection dynamics of the sea fan coral, Gorgonia ventalina, with a fungal
pathogen, Aspergillus sydowii and a protist parasite, SPX. The goal is to
identify the mechanisms through which multiple infections, temperature and
acidification modify host resistance, leading to changes in within- and among-
colony rates of disease spread.

The Objectives of this project are to:

-Identify incidence and co-infection frequency of Aspergillus sydowii and SPX
Detailed field surveys of the two diseases will test the hypothesis that co-
infection is significant, provide valuable information about drivers of
aspergillosis, and will help to characterize an emerging new sea fan disease.

-Investigate how co-infection influences sea fan susceptibility, resistance, and
within host disease dynamics. Through manipulative lab inoculation experiments
we will test the hypothesis that single infections increase susceptibility to a
second pathogen.

-Examine the effects of temperature increase and ocean acidification on pathogen
virulence, on underlying host resistance, and on the dynamics of single and co-
infections

The hypotheses that acidification will increase pathogen virulence and host
susceptibility will be tested in a temperature and pH controlled experimental
system. This system will also allow the potential synergistic effects of
temperature and acidification on host immunity and co-infection dynamics to be
explored.

The primary intellectual merit of the proposed work will be a greater
understanding of how changing climate mediates co-infection and immunity in a
non-model invertebrate. While fungal pathogens are primarily opportunistic,
labyrinthulid protozoans are recognized as primary pathogens in shellfish. Even
in shellfish, little is known about co-infections involving labyrinthulids, and
these protists are entirely unstudied in corals.

The Broader impacts of this activity include training of undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, as well as collaborations with
established local (e.g. Ithaca Sciencenter) and international educational
outreach programs (World Bank Global Environmental Fund: GEF). In addition, the
public's fascination with coral reefs can be used as a tool in drawing attention
to the global climate crisis. The considerable notice the investigators work has
received from major national and international media has bolstered Cornell's
science communication efforts. This public interest has also allowed then to
participate in policy discussions that will influence global environmental
policies, such as speaking before the U.S. Coral Reef Task Force. The
investigators collaborative efforts through the World Bank have also recently
culminated in the publication of a Coral Disease Handbook and underwater ID
cards that will coordinate international coral reef management. The project will
further support these efforts to communicate the need for continued support of
the marine sciences, climate studies, and proactive management programs.