* 0849839
* Developing Expertise in Science Education, Research, and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Timothy Whittier, Arizona Western College
* Continuing Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 12/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Project DESERT (Developing Expertise in Science Education, Research, and
Technology) supports cohorts of academically promising, financially needy,
underrepresented students majoring in biological or environmental sciences.
Students benefit from cohort classes, a Learning Community, a natural history
field trip, and scientific meetings. Faculty mentors and a Science Academic
Coordinator provide individualized academic planning. Academic coaches help
students succeed, especially in chemistry and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Project DESERT adds to the body of
knowledge on effective advisement, retention, and support for underrepresented
populations, particularly Hispanics. It is improving student retention,
enhancing students' general self efficacy, increasing the number of declared
majors in science by 100%, and improving efficiency of course taking for degree
completion among cohort students. It is deepening the knowledge of science among
underrepresented students through a mentored learning community, cohort
interactions, research like experiences, and scientific field trips.
Longitudinal learning and value added assessment using the Community College
Learning Assessment is comparing cohort to non-cohort students with regard to
development of critical thinking, analytic reasoning, problem solving and
written communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Project DESERT
responds to an urgent community and national need for a scientifically literate,
technically competent workforce. It is enhancing the diversity of the scientific
community through its focus on underrepresented populations. It is strengthening
partnerships among industry, state and federal agencies, the college, and
universities and thereby increasing the number of students prepared for
scientifically technical jobs and/or upper division studies. Research is being
conducted to determine and address forces that keep students from declaring
majors in biology or environmental science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;