* 0849361
* Collaborative Research: Caterpillars and Parasitoids in the Eastern Andes of Ecuador.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* marc branham
* 08/31/2011
* USD 196,627.00

Plants, caterpillars, and parasitic wasps and flies that attack caterpillars
(parasitoids) are important components of most terrestrial ecosystems and
represent more than 20% of all described organisms in the world. ?Caterpillars
and parasitoids in the Eastern Andes of Ecuador? is an intensive plant,
caterpillar, and parasitoid inventory at the Yanayacu Biological Station (YBS)
in the Ecuadorian Andes. The primary objectives of the project are to collect
and catalog the diverse community of caterpillars and associated parasitoids at
this site, to discover new species, to characterize diversity of the region, and
to disseminate this information with a searchable database accessible to
scientists and the public throughout the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes significant advances in
insect classification as well as providing a critical inventory that can be used
in conservation efforts in the equatorial Andes, a global hotspot of
biodiversity. The data will also be used to address a variety of basic and
applied questions, particularly those associated with climate change and
biodiversity. The broader impacts of this project include direct involvement of
four local field assistants, three Ecuadorian students, three Ecuadorian senior
scientists, one postdoctoral researcher, at least twelve collaborating insect
specialists, and various graduate and undergraduate students. The project will
also include enhancements in science education and research experience programs
for minorities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;