* 0849242
* Special Meetings: Annual Spring Institute in Noncommutative Geometry and Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Alain Connes, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 03/31/2015
* USD 207,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Bisch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for
the annual Spring Institute in Noncommutative Geometry &lt;br/&gt;and Operator
Algebras (NCGAO) for three years (2009-2011). The aim of each
&lt;br/&gt;school/conference is to bring together graduate students, postdocs
and world-class &lt;br/&gt;researchers in the areas of emphasis of the school
and present introductory material and &lt;br/&gt;recent developments in mini-
courses held by leading experts. Since the number of &lt;br/&gt;graduate
students and postdocs attending the past NCGOA spring institutes has been
&lt;br/&gt;huge, the institute will have an enormous impact on noncommutative
geometry in &lt;br/&gt;particular, and on the US mathematics community in
general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt has hosted six annual Spring Institute
in Noncommutative Geometry and &lt;br/&gt;Operator Algebras since May 2003. The
annual spring institute is a combination of spring &lt;br/&gt;school and
international research conference. It attracts typically over100participants
&lt;br/&gt;with more than two thirds students and postdocs. The topics vary from
year to year and &lt;br/&gt;cover a broad range of areas within noncommutative
geometry and operator algebras. &lt;br/&gt;The annual spring institute in NCGOA
is directed by Alain Connes and organized by the &lt;br/&gt;Center for
Noncommutative Geometry and Operator Algebras at Vanderbilt.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;