* 0849094
* Post-Collapse Community and Social Hierarchy in the Titicaca Basin, Peru: Survey and Excavation at Machu Llacta
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Aimee Plourde, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2010
* USD 180,283.00

Drs. Elizabeth Arkush and. Aim√©e Plourde, and American and Peruvian colleagues
will use National Science Foundation support for three field seasons of
archaeological survey and excavation in the Lake Titicaca Basin of southern
Peru, centered on the large hilltop walled town of Machu Llaqta. The project is
designed to contribute to an understanding of how political networks and social
hierarchies are reformulated in the periods following state collapse. The Lake
Titicaca Basin formed a major locus of pre-Columbian political development,
hosting a series of early complex societies that culminated in the state of
Tiwanaku. After Tiwanaku's collapse ca. AD 1000, there ensued a tumultuous
period of extended drought, political fragmentation, and intense inter- and
intra-ethnic conflict. During this time, Machu Llaqta and other defensive sites
in the region were settled. People in the Titicaca Basin discarded millennium-
long traditions of ceremonial architecture, religious iconography, and elite
privilege, and developed new ways of ordering society and beliefs. The area is
described in later colonial accounts as the home of the "Aymara kingdom" of the
Collas - a realm ruled by a powerful warlord with a possibly hereditary
position. However, the results of previous research by Arkush and others suggest
a more decentralized social reality of loose regional confederacies and rather
subtle status distinctions. This scenario raises basic questions about how
political networks across space are maintained and how status and centralized
leadership are expressed or minimized in times of severe social disruption and
hardship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surface architecture at Machu Llaqta is
well-preserved, and reveals a densely populated center with a degree of internal
organization unparalleled at other Colla sites. Over a thousand domestic or
storage structures are arrayed around patios in small residential compounds,
organized around a few long alleyways, the whole protected by cliffs and massive
defensive walls. This project aims to define how the social group centered at
this site was structured by uncovering difference or similarity in domestic
production and consumption, craft, trade, ritual activity, the hosting of
feasts, and access to valued goods in residential areas across the site and its
nearby satellites. A full-coverage survey will identify, date, map, and collect
surface artifacts from earlier and contemporaneous sites in the vicinity.
Subsequently, the researchers will conduct both broad exposure excavations and
smaller targeted excavations in a sample of domestic compounds at the site and
at three smaller sites in the vicinity. Analysis of the resulting materials
should illuminate how social difference worked here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies not only in clarifying the problem of
Colla sociopolitical complexity, but also in addressing the theoretical issue of
how societies and hierarchies are reworked in response to major social crisis.
The project's broader impacts include training and research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students; international collaboration with Peruvian
scholars, and the employment and sharing of skills with local workers in an
impoverished part of Peru; and the promotion of responsible tourism and local
respect for archaeological sites.