* 0849666
* REU Supplement to Incremental Wizard Ablation: A Novel WOz Paradigm for Learning, Testing and Evaluating Human-Machine Dialogue using Parameterized Corpora
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Susan Epstein, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Automated telephone dialog systems rely disproportionately on accurate
transcription of the speech signal into readable text. When the system has low
confidence in the automatic speech transcription &lt;br/&gt;(ASR) of a caller's
utterance, a typical dialog strategy requires the system to repeat its best
guess, and ask for confirmation. This leads to unnatural interactions and
dissatisfied callers. The current project focuses on developing better dialog
strategies given current ASR capabilities by learning automatically from
contrasting &lt;br/&gt;corpora, and comparing the results. Using a novel
methodology, wizard ablation, simulated human-system dialogs are collected that
vary in controlled ways. The testbed application, an Automated Readers Advisor
for New York City's Andrew Heiskell Talking Book and Braille Library, has
appropriately limited complexity, and &lt;br/&gt;potentially broad social
benefit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for wizard ablation is that
research is needed into the problem-solving strategies humans would use if the
human communication channel were restricted to be more like a machine's. In
conventional wizard-of-oz studies, unsuspecting users interact with human
wizards "behind-the-screen", thus providing data on the way humans interact with
(what they believe to be) machines. Unlike a conventional wizard, an ablated
wizard is restricted to seeing the ASR input to the system dialog manager. Under
a further ablation &lt;br/&gt;condition, the wizard must choose actions from the
repertoire that the system uses, but can combine them freely. The book-borrowing
scenarios for the wizard interactions have been designed to be realistic, and
Heiskell Library patrons participate in the studies. The collected dialogs will
be made available to the community.