* 0849911
* Science Scholarship Program at Lyman Briggs College
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Richard Shipman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 03/31/2014
* USD 598,576.00

The Science Scholarship Program offers three-year scholarships for approximately
30 talented and financially needy students at Lyman Briggs College (LBC), a
residential science college at Michigan State University. LBC offers a unique
science experience to undergraduates combining the intimacy of a liberal arts
college with innovative teaching, the research resources of a large institution
and a stimulating living environment. By interlacing academics, residential life
and student services, LBC is able to fulfill its educational philosophy that is
based on the belief that those sharing an interest in the sciences will benefit
from learning and living together. The Science Scholarship Program supports two
cohorts of students who are being relieved of the stressors associated with the
costs of higher education during their sophomore through senior years, while
being exposed to the process of and careers in science. Half the scholarship
recipients will be from within the LBC student population, each of whom
anticipates pursuing a natural sciences degree. The other half will be recruited
from within the pool of undeclared Michigan State majors, with these recipients
enrolling into the LBC experience and receiving all the support that the College
provides to its science undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Scholarship Program is intended to have multiple impacts on the student
experience. From the start, scholarship recipients will become members of a
cohesive cohort by living together and taking seminar courses that aid in their
understanding and appreciation of the entire scientific endeavor. These seminar
courses focus on helping students understand the scientific enterprise including
basic research, dissemination, graduate school and career options. Although
these courses have been initiated for the benefit of the scholarship recipients,
it is anticipated that the courses will persist beyond the proposed funding
period and will continue to inspire students in their pursuit of science
careers. Additionally, scholarship recipients are encouraged to complete
undergraduate research as a portion of their program through either on-campus
research with faculty, or through internship experiences fostered through the
LBC alumni base.