* 0849831
* S-STATSMODEL: Scholarships in Statistics and Stochastic Modeling
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2009,03/31/2015
* Raquel Prado, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 03/31/2015
* USD 276,000.00

The S-STATSMODEL (Scholarships in Statistics and Stochastic Modeling) program is
designed to increase the number of academically talented but financially
disadvantaged students who complete graduate degrees in the Department of
Applied Mathematics and Statistics. Need-based scholarships are awarded each
year for up to two years to a cohort of three to four students who would
otherwise be unable to attend graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The graduate program in Statistics and
Stochastic Modeling is a relatively new program that has been extremely
successful academically and also in attracting and retaining financially
disadvantaged students, particularly those from minority groups such as
Hispanics and Latinos. At least 50% of the current graduate student body belongs
to financially disadvantaged groups, and about 60% of these students are from
minority groups. This project contributes to increasing the number of highly
qualified professionals with degrees in the areas of Statistics and Applied
Mathematical Modeling. The excellence of the teaching and research done by the
faculty and students is evidenced by several facts. First, all of the graduate
students who have received SSM degrees in the past have been very successful in
securing well recognized academic, government or industry positions. In
addition, faculty members have received awards for their excellent teaching and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project attracts
academically talented and financially disadvantaged students from minority
groups that represent a largely untapped source of talent in the areas of
Statistics and Applied Mathematics. Such students bring ideas and perspectives
that are not well represented by the current population of professionals. For
example, statisticians belonging to minority, underrepresented or financially
disadvantaged groups can help improve the design, analysis and disclosure of
critical research, as well as lend credibility to scientific studies that
directly relate to their communities of origin.