* 0849323
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and Modeling of Convectively-Coupled Equatorial Waves and the Madden-Julian Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Patrick Haertel, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2009
* USD 99,515.00

Tropical disturbances have a global impact on weather and climate and for this
reason, it is important that their dynamics are well represented in general
circulation models. The aim of the research is to study in detail the dynamical
structures of two types of tropical atmospheric disturbances, convectively
coupled equatorial waves (CCEWs) and the Madden-Julian oscillation (MJO), using
observational and modeled data, and statistical analysis methods. Further, using
a Lagrangian ocean model, upper ocean response to the MJO wind perturbations
will also be studied. Three outstanding problems that will be addressed are (1)
the existence of multiple conflicting theories for the mechanisms and
interactions of CCEWs and the MJO, (2) the inadequacy of representations of
CCEWs and MJOs in global models, and (3) uncertainties in the behavior of
oceanic Kelvin waves forced by MJO-related wind
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The PI will perform: (1)
the analysis of the existence of multiple conflicting theories for the
mechanisms and interactions of CCEWs and the MJO; (2) evaluate the inadequacy of
representations of CCEWs and MJOs in GCMs; and (3) the analysis of uncertainties
in the behavior of oceanic Kelvin waves forced by MJO-related wind
perturbations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will improve
our observational understanding of CCEWs and will lead to improved general
circulation model simulations. This project will prepare two graduate students
for careers in atmospheric sciences.