* 0849069
* Auxin Signaling in the Early Diverged Land Plant Physcomitrella Patens
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Mark Estelle, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Alexander McClure
* 01/31/2011
* USD 450,000.00

Mark Estelle, IOS-0744800, Auxin Signaling in the Early Diverged Land Plant
Physcomitrella patens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many aspects of plant growth and
development are regulated by a hormone called auxin. Traits such as plant
stature, flower development, and fruit and seed development are influenced by
auxin. The hormone regulates these processes by influencing plant cell division
and expansion. During the last decade there have been several important advances
in our understanding of auxin signaling. However, there are still many
unanswered questions. In particular there is little information on how auxin
affects cell growth. In addition, the role of auxin in key events during plant
evolution is largely unknown. To address these questions, studies of the moss
Physcomitrella patens will be conducted. Because growth and development of the
mosses is relatively simple compared to flowering plants their study offers some
important advantages. In addition, the mosses are some of the earliest land
plants to appear on earth. Therefore understanding how auxin works in P. patens
will contribute to knowledge of the role of auxin during plant evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, moss genes involved in auxin
signaling will be identified based on their similarity to known genes in
flowering plants. Moss plants with mutations in these genes will be generated
and the effects of the mutations on growth will be analyzed. The biochemical
characteristics of auxin receptors from moss will be determined. This
information will help to establish fundamental rules for auxin receptor
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will have broader impact in
several areas such as the training of postdoctoral fellows and undergraduate
students, participation of initiatives for maximizing student diversity, and
involvement with outreach programs to local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;