* 0849342
* SGER - Fundamental Understanding of Catalytic Cleavage of Lignin in Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Conrad Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2010
* USD 115,000.00

0849342&lt;br/&gt;Ekerdt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;Lignin is one of the major components in lignocellulosic biomass. The
recalcitrant nature of lignin toward microbial breakdown is a highly beneficial
feature in guarding natural forestry from rapid degradation by nature itself.
Even though nature has evolved a number of enzymes that collectively are
efficient in hydrolytically cleaving cellulose and hemicelluloses into their
building units, the presence of lignin has been known to severely inhibit such
activities. This research addresses this most pressing of issues in biomass
conversion and seeks to develop processes and insight into key steps in lignin
depolymerization, which are first steps in efficient biomass conversion. The
research builds on previous studies and literature that demonstrate lignin can
be dissolved in ionic liquids and that lignin is attacked by bases. Lignin has a
complicated but poorly characterized composition and architecture, which also
depend on the plant species and conditions in which the lignocellulosic biomass
are produced. To avoid analytical complication for the purposes of understanding
the mechanisms involved in base catalyzed hydrolysis of lignin oxygen linkages,
this research will study model compounds that contain oxygen linkages found in
lignin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigates neutral ionic liquids
and basic ionic liquids, each with an optimized amount of water, and with and
without using a catalyst. The pH and the temperature of the test media will be
controlled and followed. The effects of reaction time, process pressure, base
catalyst type and concentration will all be examined. The research will employ
aromatic alkali, of which the basicity can be tuned by the alkalinity of the
metal ion, the type and the size of aromatic moiety, and polybasicity. Basic
aromatic carboxylates will be included in the study to leverage their strong
affinity toward lignin structure in a suitable carrier solvent, such as ionic
liquids. By selecting catalysts of varying basicity and by varying operating
conditions, we propose to target selectively oxygen linkages of different bond
strength in different bonding networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;By working with a number of model compounds that simulate the oxygen
linkages in lignin, this research seeks to achieve a fundamental understanding
of the mechanisms involved in lignin hydrolytic cleavage. Ionic liquid solvents
that dissolve lignin will be used as media to carry out the reactions. Base
catalysts with varying basicity will be used to study the effect of base
strength in their activity toward the hydrolytic cleavage of oxygen linkages in
ionic liquid solvents. The types of oxygen linkages in the model lignin
compounds will be ranked according to their ease of cleavage in the presence of
a base in ionic liquids. The knowledge to be gained through this research will
help design processes for the rapid fragmentation nature of lignin in ionic
liquids. Further, building upon an understanding in the hydrolytic cleavage of
oxygen linkages in lignin, the model lignin compounds will be further studied in
ionic liquids for selective cracking to produce aromatic molecules as potential
fuels and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;