* 0849695
* Physical-Biological Interactions in the Fertilization Ecology of Broadcast Spawners:  The Role of Gamete Traits and Turbulence Structure
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* John Crimaldi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2013
* USD 449,984.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
determine the role of key biological and physical factors on fertilization rates
in broadcast spawning, the reproductive strategy used by many benthic
invertebrates. The objectives are to quantify the effect of gamete traits,
instantaneous turbulence structure, and unsteady flow phenomena on subsequent
gamete coalescence processes and fertilization rates. Fertilization is typically
modeled as a bimolecular reaction, with the fertilization rate proportional to
concentrations of gametes. Conventional thought has been that since turbulence
produces efficient dilution of gamete concentrations, it hinders fertilization
success. However, this conclusion is based on consideration of average turbulent
dispersion. Recent work has provided evidence that instantaneous turbulence
structure promotes local coalescence at shorter timescales, before dilution
takes place, thus enhancing fertilization rates. This work will extend idealized
numerical and laboratory studies to include ecologically relevant factors
specific to the broadcast spawning process. It integrates numerical simulations
and laboratory experiments to investigate process-level effects of individual
biological and physical factors. The numerical simulations will consider the
effects of gamete viscosity, rheology, and taxis, for 2D pseudo-turbulent flow,
unsteady obstacle wakes, and 3D chaotic mixing scenarios. The laboratory
experiments will model the effects of gamete viscosity, rheology, morphology,
and buoyancy, using 3D boundary layer turbulence, obstacle wakes, and surface
waves. A novel two-color planar laser-induced fluorescence system will be used
to quantify concentrations of gamete surrogates, including those regions where
they overlap. Surrogates made using dyed solutions of glycerol and a biopolymer
will model the viscosity and rheology of sea urchin gametes, and fluorescent
particles will be used to investigate size and inertial effects. Floating
particles will be used to study the effect of convergence zones in free-surface
turbulence on fertilization rates for species with buoyant
gametes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational and outreach goals are to
integrate research methods into the PI's teaching curriculum as an effective
tool for learning fluid mechanics, and to use the topic of broadcast spawning to
get K-16 students interested in engineering and science. A numerical simulation
platform will be integrated into a course; students will use the simulation
environment and their knowledge of the Navier-Stokes equation to model an
unsteady cylinder wake. Likewise, a simplified version of the obstacle wake
experiment will be developed as a teaching tool. The PI will also develop an
interactive laboratory demonstration to use with visiting groups. The
demonstration will include a removable benthic seascape for the bed of the
teaching flume, complete with sea urchin mimics that spawn viscous gamete
surrogates. Visitors will be able to experiment with hands-on props such as flow
obstacles and a removable bed-roughness section. Several permanent posters and a
short video about broadcast spawning in nature will enhance the demonstration.
Finally, the PLIF system will be used to make educational movies for
dissemination via a digital library of the American Physical Society.