* 0849055
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Diasporic Networks and Processes of Incorporation among the Hmong in the US and Germany
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Faith Nibbs, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

With the guidance of Dr. Caroline Brettell, Southern Methodist University
graduate student Faith Nibbs will conduct research on how refugee populations
are or are not incorporated into the host societies to which they migrate. She
will pursue this question through a comparative case study of two Hmong refugee
populations, of similar backgrounds and from a single rural site in Southeast
Asia, who have settled in two different nation states, the United States and
Germany. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At each research site, the researcher will
interview a sample of Hmong and examine Hmong interactions with American and
German citizens, with the different state policies embodied in officials, and
with their diasporic network resources and human connections. These micro-level
data will be contextualized with relevant aggregate statistics and archival
data. Diasporic networks will be investigated and analyzed through the use of
social network analytical methods. To examine the social processes important in
the affirmation of extra-local Hmong culture, the researcher also will conduct
participant observation at two major Hmong events, one in Europe and one in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher poses the hypothesis that
over time, even among a second generation of refugees in the host country, the
diasporic networks (international connections to Hmong elsewhere) will continue
to be important and generate identifications that resist local incorporation. If
found to be true, the research would challenge the more usual argument that
schooling and socialization in the host culture significantly affect the
identities of young first-generation and especially second-generation members of
diasporic populations. Thus this research will contribute to the development of
dynamic and multi-level theoretical models of immigrant incorporation. The
research also will help develop more appropriate social policy for immigrant
populations, and will contribute to the education of a social scientist.