* 0849186
* U.S.-Mauritius Doctoral Dissertation Enhancement Project:   Baker's Rule and Mating System Evolution in Madagascan Coffea (Rubiaceae)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation enhancement project that examines
genetic variability in the molecular basis of self-incompatibility (i.e., the
ability of plants to recognize and reject their own pollen) in the genus Coffea,
the economically important genus of coffee trees. A second line of research will
examine evolutionary transitions in self-incompatibility that are putatively
associated with ancient island colonization by coffee trees endemic to
Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands (Mauritius and Reunion). The resulting data
will be used to test whether Madagascan coffee was an exception to Baker's Rule
(that self-incompatible taxa cannot colonize islands).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enable a U.S. graduate student to undertake a project jointly
developed and conducted with international collaborators, including scientists
and students in Madagascar and Mauritius, as well as in the United Kingdom. The
project will involve field experiments and collections of coffee trees in
Madagascar, Mauritius and Reunion, and in each country a resident student will
gain experience in designing and executing field experiments and collecting
plants for herbariums. The project will strengthen international collaborations
between U.S. and African scientists and will provide opportunities to share
molecular genetic and computational expertise with host countries.