* 0849355
* Supporting a Community Building Meeting with US Computing Societies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Heikki Topi, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2009
* USD 49,610.00

This CISE Special Project award provides funding to the Association for
Computing Machinery for the organization of a high-level summit to bring
together the main computing societies in the United States to address the future
of undergraduate computing education on a national scale. The ACM Education
Board is to lead the activity. The meeting will focus on the collaborative
efforts to revitalize undergraduate computing education. Underlying this meeting
is the current perception of a crisis in undergraduate computing education with
decreasing enrollments, adherence to outdated traditional models for
undergraduate education and a need to foster innovation across computing
education to provide exciting educational pathways for the computing
professionals of the future. Through collaboration and discussion with leaders
of the professional societies the group plans to develop a shared understanding
of the main issues, identify key steps to address the current situation, and
develop agreement about responsibilities for a range of actions leading to a
substantial transformation and revitalization of undergraduate computing
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in the efforts to
address the major issues impacting undergraduate computing education on a
national scale. The participating groups, the ACM Education Board and the other
participating professional organizations, represents a powerful alliance
informed by experience as computing professionals and service in professional
organizations as representatives of the computing education community uniquely
qualified to undertake a project of this scope and to implement a national
vision for transformation of computing education in the United States. Through
these activities, the computing community should develop promote a better
understanding of computing, promote relevant research, support excellence in
computing education, and emphasize the range of opportunities available in
computing to the national as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
lie in the potential to set the stage for a comprehensive national strategic
agenda for improving computing education across the nation. Developing shared
national goals and strategies among the major computing organizations can impact
the potential and opportunities for all citizens and thus address the national
need for a diverse group of computing professionals for the future.&lt;br/&gt;