* 0849881
* New York City College of Technology, CUNY, S-STEM Program in Chemical Technology, Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Pamela Brown, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 05/31/2013
* USD 459,796.00

The S-STEM project at New York City College of Technology (City Tech), the
designated college of technology within the City University of New York, S-STEM
provides scholarships to twenty-five promising, but financially disadvantaged
students, each semester for up to four years. This support enables students to
earn associate degrees in Chemical Technology or Computer Science, or bachelor
degrees in Applied Mathematics. Incoming freshmen, continuing, and transfer
students enrolling in one of these three programs are eligible for scholarship
support. City Tech's practical career-oriented programs are linked to an
institutional student support infrastructure. Students are provided with
freshmen learning communities, peer-led-team-learning, internships, research
opportunities, counseling, and mentoring targeted to career interests for S-STEM
scholarship recipients to ensure academic success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City
Tech S-STEM project employs specific strategies to address the NSF S-STEM
program goals: Improve educational opportunities for students; Increase
retention of students to degree achievement; Improve student support programs;
and increase the number of well educated and skilled employees in technical
areas of national need. These strategies include, but are not limited to: easing
financial concerns, so that students have more time for study and involvement in
professional career activities on campus; family involvement to provide
nurturing emotional support; establishment of a STEM recruitment plan that
reaches out to the approximately 800 students enrolled in City Tech's
Unclassified Health (UCH) program, who have had significant undergraduate STEM
courses; each S-STEM Scholar is assigned an individual counselor and one of the
PIs or co-PIs as an advisor, based on major; entering freshmen are part of an
S-STEM Scholars Learning Community; the Counseling Services Center provides
information on developing better study habits; the Placement Office assists
students in finding summer employment; for students nearing graduation, the
scholarships allow them to accept valuable, but unpaid credit-bearing
internships, which develop work place skills; and high school counselors and
teachers are given information regarding the S-STEM scholarship opportunity in
order to increase motivation among students to take more challenging high school
science and mathematics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a student
population often considered 'at risk,' the NSF ranked City Tech 4th in the
nation in the number of science and engineering associate degrees awarded to
African American students, 14th in degrees to Hispanics, 21st for women, and
19th for men. These scholarships will not only increase the STEM graduates
needed to build a more diverse US workforce, but this City Tech S-STEM project
also is engaged in evaluating recruitment and retention practices, with the
potential of serving as a model for similar institutions.