* 0849986
* A PAARE Program Between New Mexico State University, the National Solar Observatory, and the AFRL
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Bernard McNamara, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 06/30/2013
* USD 651,870.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this program is to enhance diversity in
astronomical research and education by establishing a partnership between the
minority serving university, New Mexico State University (NMSU), the National
Solar Observatory (NSO), and the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Space
Weather Center of Excellence. Scientists from the latter group are permanently
stationed at the NSO facilities. The primary focus of this partnership is
graduate education. A complete pathway, starting with a student's admission to
NMSU and ending with his/her transition into the professoriate is provided.
Research will target three areas where the partner institutions have common
interests: 1) the origins and prediction of stellar activity, 2) instrument
development, and 3) computational astrophysics. These have been designated as
long-term research fields by the NSO, are central to the mission of the AFRL
Space Weather Center of Excellence, and coincide with NMSU faculty research
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will recruit superior students
regardless of their ethnicity. However, once it reaches a mature state, it will
lead to a 50% increase in the number of Hispanic Ph.D.s awarded in Astronomy. It
also 1) impacts research at NMSU by increasing external collaborative activities
in five academic departments, 2) enhances the graduate curricula in these
departments, and 3) produces graduates who can work in academia, at the NSO and
AFRL, in businesses such as General Dynamics and Boeing, and in federally-funded
national facilities and laboratories. Predictive models of space weather are
highly relevant to today's society. Severe changes in the Earth's space weather
can compromise satellite systems, disrupt global communication networks,
navigation systems, and electric power distribution grids. To avoid the socio-
economic losses associated with these failures, these efforts seek to improve
space weather predictions so that active interventions can take place.