* 0849190
* Collaborative Research:  Measurements and Advanced Modeling of Dispersion in the Urban Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Pablo Huq, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 323,776.00

This project addresses the challenging problem of the impact that density
stratification has on contaminant dispersion in urban areas. Potential
atmospheric hazards include toxic industrial chemical spills, intentional or
accidental releases of nuclear, biological and chemical agents, and power plant
accidents. Despite its importance, there is a lack of efficient approaches to
the problem of determining the parameters necessary to predict the concentration
statistics under stably stratified atmospheric conditions. This shortcoming
arises because of several factors:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;i) scarcity of data due
to the difficulty in conducting experimental campaigns for urban
areas;&lt;br/&gt;ii) the variety of possible building
configurations;&lt;br/&gt;iii) the multiscale nature of the flow over complex
geometries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This gap will be bridged by combining
laboratory experiments and numerical modeling as complementary techniques, with
a multi-institution collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final goal is to
progress towards a more complete understanding of the air pollution dispersion
and micrometeorology in urban canopies in both neutral and density stratified
conditions. Efforts will concentrate on four interrelated tasks:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i) Set up of a novel water tunnel experiment involving
urban geometry and density stratification. &lt;br/&gt;ii) Creation of an
experimental database of density-stratified urban flow to characterize mean
dispersion and fluctuations through the collection of long time series of
turbulent velocity and scalar fields. &lt;br/&gt;iii) Development of a new high
performance Lagrangian computational fluid dynamics code for three dimensional
stratified flow. Parallel simulations will be performed on state of the art high
performance computer clusters. &lt;br/&gt;iv) Development of theory and
parameterizations to estimate the impact of stratification on concentration
statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The water tunnel data will
be used to validate the results of a Lagrangian probability density function
(PDF) numerical model specifically developed for urban environments. The
analysis of the time series and the development of new parameterizations offer a
unique potential for a significant improvement of our understanding of urban
dispersion. These data will also be used to extend ongoing research on
turbulence to stably stratified flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project will have a substantial impact on the development of
parameterizations, models and theories necessary for improving capability to
predict dispersion of hazardous materials in urban areas. Findings of this
project will be presented beyond the traditional university audience through
outreaching activities. George Mason University (GMU) organizes the Annual
Conference on Atmospheric Transport and Dispersion, regularly attended by
various stakeholders such as government agencies, emergency managers and
commercial companies as well as international researchers, where the results of
this research will be presented and discussed. The multidisciplinary character
of this research will have a significant educational impact on the graduate
students involved in the project as they work interactively on both experiments
and theory. The participation of the students in the GMU conference will give
them practical knowledge of the spectrum of research and operational
environments related to their projects.