* 0849004
* SBIR Phase II:  Wearable Tactile Display System for Blind Individuals
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Mandayam Srinivasan, Yantric, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 03/31/2011
* USD 454,274.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the
development of a novel system for communication with computer through touch,
particularly relevant to blind individuals. The system includes a newly
developed Tactile Display Device (TDD) technology with miniature thermo-fluidic
actuators that uniquely revolutionizes the way humans interact with different
machines and systems using a wearable tactile display. The proposed new
technology is a significant breakthrough as the concept of sensing touch
actuation based on bubble formation and vapor pressure has a wide potential for
miniaturization, embedding, flexibility, and wearable possibilities with
amplitude and force of actuation not achieved by other means so far. The
specific objectives of the project are to improve the actuator modules and the
TDD developed during Phase I of the project, so that the technology can be
brought to market.

The research will impact both the education and scientific segments of the
market by addressing many challenges in application of bubble and vapor based
motive power in miniature systems. Additionally, this outcomes of this work is
expected to catalyze new avenues and variants discovered by the scientific
community working in the areas of miniature actuators and systems, eventually
leading to new innovations in Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) and in
nanosystems. The research has very high societal impact potential as it
addresses the blind population market segment that is somewhat neglected by the
larger corporations due to its relatively smaller size. The blind population is
not benefiting fully by the latest trend in information decimation increasingly
through internet and computer based mediums. As these medium are highly graphic
and visual in nature, alternate and enhanced interfaces with computers that use
touch to convey information will be of great service and importance in making
the visually impaired population more informed and productive.