* 0849225
* Dynamical Processes of Orographic Cumuli II
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Wojciech Grabowski, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2013
* USD 475,985.00

In the summer of 2006 a field campaign focused on orographic cumulus convection
and boundary-layer circulations was conducted. The field campaign was called
CuPIDO (Cumulus Photogrammetric, In-situ and Doppler Observations). This
campaign deployed a unique combination of instruments, including an airborne
cloud radar, atmospheric soundings, a surface mesonet, and stereo-
photogrammetry. The present project involves further analysis of the CuPIDO
dataset and builds on research completed in the initial two years following the
field campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the new research is
to describe the observed fine-scale vertical and horizontal structure of the
radar-observed cloud circulations and reflectivity fields within orographic
cumuli congesti, and to use this in combination with flight-level measurements
and other CuPIDO data to test the following key hypotheses: 1) Toroidal
circulations surround the buoyant cores of growing cumuli. Significant
entrainment occurs due to fine-scale instabilities at the updraft interface, and
the mixed air is efficiently transferred to the cumulus core by the toroidal
circulation, and 2) In places where a cumulus grows in the detritus of older
clouds, its growth is enhanced, in particular at levels where the environment is
dry (moisture-convection feedback hypothesis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
objective is to use a high-resolution cloud-resolving model to statistically
compare observed vs. modeled cumulus properties and patterns of entrainment and
detrainment, and to use the continuous and dynamically consistent model output
to assist in the interpretation of the observations, in particular regarding
cumulus-environment interactions. The model will be used also in a more
idealized way to assess the impact of ambient conditions (wind, wind shear,
stable or dry layers) on the evolution of orographic (locked-source)
convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. In the past half-century
several field studies of cumulus dynamics have been conducted by means of
ground-based precipitation radars and aircraft making in situ measurements. The
CuPIDO experiment places flight-level observations, collected while penetrating
a cumulus, in the context of the radar-derived echo and velocity field, at a
resolution of 40 m or better, in both vertical and horizontal planes. This
combination constitutes a powerful tool for the study of fundamental cumulus
dynamics. In particular, cloud radar data reveal entrainment events at various
scales, and close-proximity aircraft data allow assessment of the thermodynamic
and cloud microphysical characteristics of these events. The combination of the
rich CuPIDO dataset with numerical modeling of orographic convection at
resolutions matching that of the cloud radar will improve our understanding of
characteristic cumulus properties and evolutions, the patterns and scales of
entrainment, and mechanisms of cumulus-environment interaction.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Most warm-season precipitation results from deep
convection. Cumulus convection operates over a range of horizontal and vertical
scales, both over mountains and elsewhere. Not all scales can be resolved by
operational numerical weather prediction models, now or in the foreseeable
future. Parameterization of the effect of these unresolved cloud circulations on
the larger-scale resolved circulations remains one of the greatest uncertainties
in these models and also in climate models. Our analyses and numerical
simulations of the fine-scale structure and evolution of cumuli, and of the
interaction of cumuli with their environment, should lead to more accurate
parameterization of the effects of cumulus convection on the resolved scales of
these models.