* 0849392
* SGER: PQL: A Path Query Language
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Margo Seltzer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2009
* USD 130,000.00

This proposal extends current research in creating a query
language&lt;br/&gt;for provenance to a broad range of application domains by
designing,&lt;br/&gt;developing, and evaluating a general-purpose query language
for&lt;br/&gt;graph-oriented data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PQL, the path query
language, was designed to address the challenges&lt;br/&gt;encountered in
expressing queries on provenance or lineage data,&lt;br/&gt;but it was conceived
to be the foundation for a general purpose&lt;br/&gt;data model and query
language for manipulating any type of&lt;br/&gt;graph-oriented data. Graph-
oriented data arises in many disciplines&lt;br/&gt;including computer
networking, information retrieval, biology, web&lt;br/&gt;search, social
networking, genealogy, etc. A characteristic that&lt;br/&gt;unites all these
domains is that need for expressing queries on&lt;br/&gt;paths through a graph.
Most existing solutions today have either&lt;br/&gt;a weak or non-existent
notion of paths as first-class entities that&lt;br/&gt;can be named, compared,
manipulated and constructed. PQL addresses&lt;br/&gt;this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Derived from the semi-structured database
language, Lorel, PQL&lt;br/&gt;operates on semi-structured data, which can be
viewed as a collection&lt;br/&gt;of objects linked together. In PQL, these links
are unidirectional,&lt;br/&gt;although we support both forward and backward
queries across these&lt;br/&gt;links. Queries are expressed by selecting and
filtering one or&lt;br/&gt;more paths in the graph, where paths can be described
by regular&lt;br/&gt;expressions. Thus, in the provenance domain, one can talk
about,&lt;br/&gt;''all paths in the graph between invocations of a compiler and
the&lt;br/&gt;resulting executables.'' In biology, one might pose a query
about,&lt;br/&gt;''all paths from a particular combination of gene expressions
to&lt;br/&gt;resulting insulin production.''&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
described in this proposal extends PQL to include update&lt;br/&gt;syntax and
semantics and the ability to produce query results that&lt;br/&gt;are graphs
constructed from components of the original. The result&lt;br/&gt;of this work
will be captured in both a machine-checkable formal&lt;br/&gt;specification of
the language and an open source PQL implementation,&lt;br/&gt;complete with a
(replaceable) back-end implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information
on the project can be found at the project web
page:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/~syrah/pass/&lt;br/&gt;