* 0849578
* Pickled Protists or Community Uniquely Adapted to Hypersalinity
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Virginia Edgcomb, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2014
* USD 588,094.00

Protists are an essential component of microbial food webs and play a central
role in global biogeochemical cycles, and thus are key players in sustaining the
healthy functioning of any ecosystem. Over the past few years a rich diversity
of protists has been revealed in a range of extreme environments, indicating
that the frontiers of eukaryotic life are still being explored. Only recently,
one of the most extreme marine environments known to science was discovered in
the eastern Mediterranean Sea at a depth of ~3500m, namely deep hypersaline
anoxic basins (DHABs). These basins are characterized by extremely high salt
concentrations (up to saturation) that have been considered anathema to life.
Instead, highly diverse communities of bacteria exist in the waters of these
basins. With the exception of a preliminary study to this proposal that
indicated a diverse and active assemblage of protists in the water column along
the halocline and below the halocline, these DHABs remain largely unexplored
regarding eukaryotic life forms. The sediments of the DHABs have not been
explored for protists at all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
collect water column and sediment samples on a short cruise to two basins with
different brine chemistries. An exciting combination of molecular, cultivation-
independent and culture-based approaches will be used to study the microbial
communities of Bannock and Discovery Basins as well as determine adaptive
strategies of marine protist communities to hypersaline, anoxic environments and
the degree of their potential impact on biogeochemical cycling as a result of
their predation activities, the degree to which the dominant protists maintain
bacterial or archaeal symbionts, and the identity of those symbionts. Methods to
be employed include RNA-based sequence analysis of diversity based on 18S rDNA
genes, statistical analyses of community composition and phylotype richness,
geochemical documentation of the water column and sediments using classical and
microelectrode approaches, expression profiling using 3'-UTR fragments of mRNAs,
sequencing of complete gene transcripts for proteins appearing to confer
adaptation to hypersalinity, analysis of the proteome signatures, FISH-SEM to
characterize novel extremophiles, CARD-FISH to identify eukaryote prey and
putative symbionts, and TEM to assess morphology and endobiont presence in
common benthic morphotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;Hypersaline environments rank highly in the list of extreme
systems that have attracted increasing notice in science as well as by the lay
public. For example, considering predictions of increasing temperatures and
drought in certain regions of our planet, the number of hypersaline habitats may
increase dramatically causing this ecosystem to gain importance on a global
scale. Thus, an understanding of the ecosystem in these habitats will help
predict future ecosystem functioning due to global change. From a different
perspective, revealing the mechanisms of adaptation to high salinity has become
a major objective, both for biological science and for potential commercial
exploitation of natural products associated with those adaptations.
Additionally, this project has varied educational components, ranging from
middle school to graduate studies, and outreach opportunities for secondary
school science teachers and the lay public. For example, this project will
partially support one graduate student, who will join the research cruise to
gain first-hand oceanographic experience and augment their knowledge of marine
microbial ecology and physiology. The methodologies and results of this project
will be presented at a well-established annual workshop for middle and secondary
science teachers from around the world.