* 0849163
* SICB symposium: Psychoneuroimmunology Meets Integrative Biology. January 3-7, 2009. Boston, MA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Lynn Martin, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 19,524.00

The endocrine, immune and nervous systems help animals adjust their behavior to
survive challenging conditions. Historically, these systems were studied
independently but now they are recognized as an integrated network, which
explain how stress can increase chances of sickness in many species. Most work
in this new field, psychoneuroimmunology, or PNI, has focused on improvement of
human health, but many discoveries might reconcile basic biological problems
such as why animals reduce activity when they get sick. Reduced activity, as
well as reduced food intake, increased sleep, and lack of interest in
pleasurable stimuli, comprise a suite of sickness behaviors that may serve to
redirect an animal's priorities towards survival of infection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the symposium are two-fold. First, PNI
researchers will be brought together with comparative physiologists to begin
generating frameworks for testing some of the above ideas. PNI researchers tend
to be lab-based and work on domesticated rodents whereas comparative
physiologists often work on wild animals in the field. Results of these
interactions will be disseminated to the public and broader scientific community
through the SICB website and papers in the primary scientific literature.
Second, the symposium will represent an excellent training experience for
students, especially underrepresented groups. Interactions at the symposium will
connect promising new scientists to potential mentors. Also, historically
underrepresented students will be highlighted in the symposium, as at least
three of six trainees funded to attend and present their data will be women or
minorities.