* 0849622
* Energetics of Estuarine and Coastal Flow
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Parker MacCready, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2014
* USD 478,635.00

This project will conduct a number of theoretical and numerical analyses of
coastal and estuarine circulation focused on the mechanical energy budget.
Mechanical energy (potential and kinetic) forms a powerful conceptual
integrating tool between atmospheric, tidal, and river forcing of coastal flows,
and the resulting vertical fluxes (both by overturning circulation and by
turbulent mixing). However, our current understanding of the functioning of the
energy budget is severely limited in coastal and estuarine flows by the combined
effects of irregular domains, open boundaries, and highly variable forcing (and
hence the lack of a steady state). The work will build on the PI's recent work
on energy budgets in estuaries and on the Washington and Oregon continental
shelf. This will lead to a greatly improved theoretical understanding of how
coastal upwelling and the estuarine exchange flow work, and how sensitive they
may be to changes in forcing conditions. Simulations will be done in both
idealized domains and for realistic hindcasts of the WA/OR shelf including the
Columbia River and Puget Sound. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results of this work will be of benefit to the coastal and estuarine physics
community by providing (i) a better theoretical understanding of energy budgets,
and (ii) improved numerical tools to use with ROMS for energy analysis. The
research will also increase our understanding of coastal upwelling, and of the
linkages between shelf and estuarine systems, and hence the ecosystems which
rely on these. This work will train a new graduate student in coastal and
estuarine physical oceanography. It will support computational infrastructure
that is used by many students at the UW School of Oceanography as a critical
aspect of their research. It will also support a 5-week summer school.