* 0849958
* REU Site:   Networked Access to Systematic Resources for Undergraduates in Chicagoland
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Petra Sierwald, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 05/31/2012
* USD 259,464.00

The Field Museum REU Site will provide a research program for undergraduates
during the summers of 2009-2011. Eight students will be selected each year to
participate in an intensive 10-week research program in biodiversity-related and
evolutionary biological research. The Field Museum houses one of the world's
foremost scientific collections of biological diversity (>25 million specimens)
and supports active biodiversity research around the globe. Despite the urgency
of the current biodiversity crisis, few educational opportunities exist for
students in the biological sciences to interact with scientists and institutions
dedicated to the study of organic diversity. Each participant will undertake an
independent research project supervised by a museum scientist in a discipline
such as taxonomy and systematics, phylo/ biogeography, paleontology, molecular
phylogenetics, or conservation. Students will experience biological diversity
through the use of the museum's collections in their research and will be
trained in project-relevant techniques and equipment such as the scanning
electron microscope, various light microscopy set-ups, and equipment in the
Pritzker DNA lab. A six-week course in phylogenetic systematics, run
concurrently with intern projects, will provide a common theoretical framework
for their research, and a symposium at the conclusion of the summer will allow
students to present their results to their peers and museum scientists.
Providing equal opportunity in biodiversity-related research is an important
goal of the program. Additional information can be found at
http://www.fieldmuseum.org/research_collections/scholarships/reu.html or by
contacting the Program Director, Dr. Petra Sierwald, psierwald@fieldmuseum.org,
telephone 312-665-7744.