* 0849660
* Mathematics, Science and Engineering Transfer Scholarships (M-SETS)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2009,12/31/2014
* Catherine Lipe, San Mateo County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2014
* USD 655,249.00

Through its "Mathematics, Science and Engineering Transfer Scholarships
(M-SETS)" program, Cañada College, a member of the California Community College
System and one of three colleges in the San Mateo Community College District, is
providing scholarship awards to academically talented, financially needy
students working to transfer to a 4-year university to complete an undergraduate
degree in an engineering, mathematics or science major. M-SETS awards are
offered for up to three years of full-time academic study at Cañada College and
in the first semester that a student transfers to a 4-year university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M-SETS is an exceptional opportunity for low-income
students to focus full-time on their studies. Mathematics, science and
engineering faculty are mentors to students with the goal of increasing student
self-efficacy in mathematics and science, furthering their success at Cañada
College, and preparing them for work in mathematics, science and engineering
professions. In addition, M-SETS recipients benefit from a support system
provided through Cañada College's Math, Engineering &amp; Science Achievement
(MESA) program which offers academic and extracurricular support in numerous
ways, such as:&lt;br/&gt; a) Academic Excellence Workshops and study groups to
support students who are clustered in core mathematics, science and engineering
courses so that they can excel academically, learn to study in a group and
develop relationships based on common academic goals. &lt;br/&gt; b) A MESA
Study Center which provides a place for students to study as well as being a
focus area for MESA workshops, on-campus seminars and STEM-related student
clubs. &lt;br/&gt; c) A MESA Student Lounge which serves as a center of social
activities and student-faculty interaction outside the classroom. &lt;br/&gt; d)
A MESA tutoring program which provides tutors for core mathematics, engineering
and science courses and the College's Tutorial Center which offers tutors for
other subject areas. &lt;br/&gt; e) A MESA Counselor, with specific expertise
focused on STEM majors, who provides academic advising and develops an
individual education plan for each student given their major and the 4-year
universities where they intend to transfer. &lt;br/&gt; f) Transfer Agreement
Guarantees with nearly every university in California which enables MESA
students to gain early guaranteed admission to a 4-year university during the
fall of their final year at Cañada College. &lt;br/&gt; g) Field trips to
industry and MESA panels featuring scientists, doctors and engineers to help
students clarify their academic and career goals. &lt;br/&gt; h) Visits to
4-year universities which provide students the opportunities to evaluate
campuses and to make connections to people and programs. &lt;br/&gt; i) Student
leadership retreats, professional conferences and participation as student
members in professional societies which build students' leadership skills and
motivation while developing relationships with other students and industry
professionals.