* 0849363
* SGER: Giant Virus Regulation of Coccolithophorid Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* William Wilson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 69,523.00

With an average of 10-million viruses in a teaspoon of seawater, they are the
most abundant biological particles in the ocean. The marine environment
represents an almost infinite reservoir of unknown viruses with unknown
functions. Perhaps surprisingly, their role is not to kill everything, but to
act as vectors for gene transfer that drive evolutionary processes and to act as
"catalysts" in marine biogeochemical cycling. This research focuses on a group
of giant viruses (from the genus Coccolithoviridae) that infect the
coccolithophorid Emiliania huxleyi, a unicellular calcifying microalgae and a
key species for current studies on global biogeochemical cycles, climate
modeling and ocean acidification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
hypothesis of this grant is that these giant algal viruses rapidly respond to
changes in marine coccolithophore diversity and abundance as the ocean becomes
more acidic. The investigator's hypothesis is that giant algal viruses will
essentially maintain the necessary equilibrium to allow the phytoplankton
community to function effectively during elevated levels of acidification. The
research is coordinated with a research cruise along the Patagonian Shelf off
Argentina, one of the world's largest, most productive, yet largely unexplored
shelf regions. The aim of the cruise is to investigate ocean acidification as
well as other key biogeochemical parameters that influence phytoplankton bloom
dynamics. Virus activity will undoubtedly play a key role in shaping these
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using dilution studies, isolation studies,
flow cytometry, quantitative and qualitative molecular approaches, including
metagenomics, the investigator will assess how virus-host interactions can react
and adapt to ocean acidification. Parallel data collected on the cruise will
prove an incredibly valuable resource for correlation with the molecular
ecological and eventual metagenomic data (for which samples will only be
collected, not analyzed) and should provide quantitative insights into the role
of viruses in the Patagonian Shelf region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
of this study will derive mainly from interactions between the scientists
directly involved in the research and students/general public. For example,
research outlined in this proposal will be discussed during an informal "Caf√©
Scientifique" program designed to teach the general public about the latest
ideas in science. In addition, the investigator has developed individual
programs for teaching K-12 students the structure of viruses that are targeted
to the different education levels. A post doc is also supported by the project.