* 0849396
* SGER: Origin and Consequences of 'Dry Lightning' in a Dry Desert Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* John Hallett, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 25,975.00

Intellectual Merit:

High level thunderstorms (sometimes called 'dry thunderstorms') originate from
advection of mid level moisture with cloud condensation level near 0°C. Below
the moist level lies dry air so that any precipitation particularly, in the form
of smaller particles readily evaporates and fails to reach the surface. Charge
separation may occur from convection in the moist region, aided by local
orographic and local convergence effects, leading to strikes to ground, with the
ability to initiate fires under the dry surface conditions. Such events are in
contrast to deeper instability thunderstorms, formed in moist air and having
cloud base temperatures above 20°C, leading not only to charge generation
through the mixed phase regions aloft but giving rise to significant rain at the
surface, discouraging any fire starts under the previously dry conditions.

In collaboration with wildfire experts, the Principle Investigator will perform
a preliminary investigation into the characteristics of these dry thunderstorms
which appear to have a significant influence on the initiation of some
wildfires. This investigation will include ascertaining the antecedent
conditions that might lead to the formation of electrically active dry
thunderstorms.

Broader Impact:

The ultimate purpose of the study is to assemble aspects of the events important
for anticipating and forecasting similar future scenarios and to examine the
frequency of the particular meteorological and midlevel cloud forming condition
and the associated charge generation.

There are further ramifications of the project since the large amount of smoke
produced by the fires may lead to health problems extending many miles downwind.
The ability to predict such events may have implications for public health as
well implications for early deployment of fire fighting capabilities.