* 0849689
* Tropical Atmosphere/Ocean Variability in the Boreal Summer and Its Relationship with Atlantic Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* James Kossin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 669,052.00

The Atlantic Meridional Mode (AMM) is the leading mode of coupled variability in
the Atlantic, and represents a distinct coupled pattern of sea surface
temperature and atmospheric fields that emerges through a broad spectrum of
external forcing mechanisms. Previous work has shown that the AMM may provide a
dynamical explanation for the observed coherence between a number of regional
atmospheric and oceanic conditions that are relevant for tropical cyclone
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to better understand the
cause of AMM variations during boreal summer, with an emphasis on understanding
the link between the AMM and tropical cyclone activity. The research will
utilize designed experiments using global general circulation models, dynamical
analysis of simple coupled models, analysis and interpretation of observational
data, and analysis of existing global coupled model simulations of present and
future climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will address
(i) What is the structure of the AMM during boreal summer? (ii) What dynamical
processes control the AMM during boreal summer, and the relationship between the
AMM and environmental conditions that influence hurricane activity? (iii) What
external forcing mechanisms influence the AMM during boreal summer, and what is
the relationship between the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) and AMM,
and (iv) What is the predictability of the AMM, and what processes influence
that predictability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project
include encouraged integration between the disciplines of climate dynamics and
tropical cyclone characteristics, training of two graduate students and one
post-doctoral researcher, broader dissemination of results in national and
international venues, and public availability of real-time data relating to the
AMM and to tropical cyclone activity.&lt;br/&gt;