* 0849380
* Stress, Energetics and the Costs of Reproduction in Wild Chimpanzees
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Richard Wrangham, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress, Energetics and the Costs of Reproduction in Wild
Chimpanzees&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining accurate, regular assessments of energetic
condition is a major challenge in studies of wild mammals. For behavioral
ecologists, it is particularly important to record non-invasive measures of
condition that impact neither behavior nor energy budgets. Preliminary research
indicates that urinary C-peptide, a byproduct of insulin production, is a
reliable and sensitive indicator of energy balance in apes. This study will
employ non-invasive urine sampling to understand variation in energetic
condition in wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii). Measurements of
both C-peptide and cortisol (a stress hormone) will be used to quantify the
independent effects of energetic and social stress on chimpanzee growth,
reproduction and health.&lt;br/&gt;The research exploits a unique 14-year
dataset of urine samples and behavioral and ecological data from the Kanyawara
chimpanzees in Kibale National Park, Uganda. Together with new, targeted
observations, these data will test hypotheses about social dominance and the
costs of reproduction. For females, the study will examine such costs over the
reproductive cycle, with attention to differences between females living in rich
and poor habitats. For male chimpanzees, the study will examine the impact of
mating competition on energy budgets and health. The study tests the hypothesis
that competition results in increased stress for dominant animals, reflecting
the substantial energy costs of male reproduction. Results will shed light on
the potential constraints on acquisition and maintenance of high status in this
and other species. The broader impacts of this study will contribute to
understanding the causes and consequences of energetic and social stress thus
furthering conservation goals, particularly when ape populations visited by
tourist groups can be regularly monitored. The project will support Ugandan
field assistants, a post-doc, and at least one US graduate student. As a long-
term research presence, the Kibale Chimpanzee Project will continue to support
broader activities in chimpanzee conservation and community
development.&lt;br/&gt;