* 0849204
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Locomotor Function and Phylogeny: Implications for Interpreting Extinct Hominoid Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Terry Harrison, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2011
* USD 14,270.00

The interplay of evolutionary relationships (i.e., phylogeny) and function in
the manifestation of skeletal anatomy complicates reconstructions of locomotor
patterns in well-known fossil hominoids (apes and members of the human lineage)
such as Australopithecus afarensis and Proconsul heseloni. These species
demonstrate unique combinations of features in the forelimb that represent
contrasting evidence for locomotor behavior. In order to understand which
forelimb traits are most useful in predicting the locomotion of extinct hominoid
species, this research explores the relative correspondence between variation in
forelimb characters and observed locomotor behaviors of extant primates. The
main objective of this project is to determine the relative strength of the
functional signal in forelimb features related to locomotor behavior and to
demonstrate the degree to which the manifestation of these traits is constrained
by phylogeny.

Three-dimensional geometric morphometric data will be collected on skeletal
samples representing a wide range of extant primate species. Landmark data will
be collected on forelimb elements, and linear measurements will be extracted to
be employed as shape variables. These shape variables will be regressed against
published percentages of locomotor behavior in a generalized least-squares
analysis to account for phylogeny. Shape variables will be ranked based on their
correspondence to locomotor behavior. Predictive models will be constructed and
used in more refined assessments of the locomotor behavior performed by the
extinct hominoids Australopithecus afarensis and Proconsul heseloni. This novel
approach will enhance understanding of the relationship between locomotion and
skeletal anatomy in living primates, allowing researchers to more accurately
reconstruct the behavior of fossil species. In addition, this research has
broader implications for paleontology and how researchers view skeletal features
in functional studies by demonstrating the need for a greater emphasis on the
complex interplay between phylogeny and function.