* 0849215
* Another Great Illusion: The Advancement of Separatism through Economic Integration
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Dawn Brancati, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 119,300.00

This project investigates whether the formation of the European Union (EU) has
stimulated the formation of separatist movements and parties within European
countries. The economic integration brought by the EU is viewed as advantageous
to the economic interests of some regions within European countries (but
detrimental to others) and may have motivated the formation of
regional/separatist political parties, as a result.

This study examines whether the effect of EU economic integration on separatism
is overstated. Regional threats to secede often lack credibility because regions
face major obstacles gaining EU membership after declaring independence.
Moreover, the interaction of regional parties at the EU level offers little
material advantages to regional/separatist parties. And, national governments
still serve important functions in countries despite integration.

The study hypothesizes that the effect of EU integration on separatism is
conditional on the characteristics of regions (e.g., economic development ? GDP,
employment, size) and parties within these regions (e.g., left-right and
position toward EU membership). These conditions identify those regions and
regional/separatist parties that are more likely to support EU integration and,
thus, to use integration to advance their goal of independence, as well as those
regions most likely to gain entrance to the EU upon declaring independence.
Preliminary analysis suggests that the effect is indeed overstated both in terms
of substantive and statistical significance.

This study expands the widely used Constituency-Level Elections (CLE) dataset to
increase the number of countries and time periods covered. The expanded dataset
provides complete coverage of all post-WWII national elections in Western and
Eastern Europe for all parties (votes and seats) at the constituency-level of
government. The study also extends existing work on European regional parties by
systematically distinguishing among regional parties based on their ideologies
(e.g., left-right, EU integration), goals (e.g. autonomy and separatism) and
strategies (e.g., violence).

The study has implications beyond Europe. Efforts at continental economic
integration elsewhere are likely to face regional/separatism challenges, too. An
understanding of these implications for Europe will allow us to anticipate these
challenges elsewhere and serve as the basis for a more comprehensive account of
regional separatism throughout the world.