* 0849956
* A Web-Based Data Source for Metabolomics Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Richard Hanson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2013
* USD 521,962.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Case Western Reserve University has been awarded a grant to build computational
tools to facilitate research in metabolic profiles. Metabolites are molecules
that are intermediates and products of metabolism. Current blood-labs in most
hospitals and health care centers in the country can only measure in a blood
sample small numbers of (less than 15) metabolites. However, recent advances in
high-energy physics technologies has now made it possible (for researchers for
the time being) to measure much larger numbers of metabolites in a blood sample,
up to about 300 of them. When these measurements differ from those in a healthy
individual (i.e., the control subject), the basic question is: what do they
mean?

Currently, the above question can only be answered manually by experts in
metabolic biochemistry. This project will test the validity of computationally
and algorithmically deduced first-cut interpretations of such large sets of
metabolite measurements. These interpretations are made available through web-
based, database-enabled, easy-to-use, online and reliably correct software
systems that are - Scalable to the complete metabolic network, not parts of it
and - Grounded by the well-known and accepted metabolic biochemistry principles,
instead of being done manually as there are not enough metabolic biochemistry
experts around to manually interpret each such lab result.

This project develops a web-based resource and its tools to enable the research
community to help answer the above-listed question. The tools of the resource
include - Observed Metabolite Analysis tool that eliminates those metabolic
paths that cannot have caused the observed measurements (i.e., inactive
metabolic paths in the metabolic network), and provides a small list of
activated metabolic paths that may have caused the observed measurements. Note
that no effort is made to return actual flux estimations in the network,
simplifying the task at hand,

- Metabolomics-Oriented Querying tool, that allows researchers/users to further
focus on activated metabolic paths within a subnetwork (by allowing them to
formulate queries about activated paths, futile cycles, etc.), and provides
users with explanations of its query answers,

- Metabolomics-Oriented Visualization tool, which provides visualizations of
activated paths within the complete metabolic network or zoomed-in and focused
parts of the network, allowing users to visually interpret and analyze the
results.

The resulting online tools will be an excellent web-based educational tool for
educating students in metabolic biochemistry, biology, bioinformatics, and
metabolomics--to train them on the use of bioinformatics tools in terms of
metabolic network models. Additional information about the project may be found
at http://nashua.case.edu/.