* 0849843
* BOOST: Building Occupational Opportunities in  Science and Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Deborah Hutti, Lake Land College
* Continuing grant
* Gul Kremer
* 12/31/2013
* USD 574,678.00

Through "BOOST: Building Opportunities for Occupations in Science and
Technology," Lake Land College is extending a prior NSF-funded scholarship
program that started in 2004 and focused on six technical areas, and will now
offer an additional 50 scholarships per year for each of four years starting in
the 2009-2010 academic year. The new BOOST scholarship recipients are
academically talented, financially needy students selected in an effort to
increase the number of well-educated and skilled professionals to fill high
technology positions in five Associate Degree areas - Applied Science-
Engineering and Manufacturing Technology, Applied Science-Electronics, Applied
Science-Information Technology/Computer Science, Science-Natural Science,
Science-Math & Engineering.

Scholarship recipients are supported through a number of ways. Lake Land College
faculty and staff work together across the identified institutional departments
to coordinate project implementation and facilitate BOOST Scholar success; the
faculty conduct recruitment activities, encourage students to complete the
application and enrollment process, and provide mentoring and academic support
for the scholars. Key personnel from Financial Aid and the Lake Land College
Foundation help determine financial eligibility, manage the scholarship award
process, and maintain the scholarship records. A BOOST retention coordinator
works with BOOST scholars to help them overcome academic and personal barriers,
and connects students with internship, job shadowing, and mentoring
opportunities within industry. The College also offers: Counseling and Career
Services that include career planning assistance, online career guidance
programs, job search workshops and individual assistance; an Early Advantage
Program to identify students at high risk of academic failure and help them
through tutoring, career exploration, college transition issues, study skills,
time management and test anxiety; and a Learning Assistance Center that offers
free math tutoring to all students, something important for BOOST students whose
degree programs require a solid foundation in mathematics.