* 0849274
* Enzymes Required for the Biosynthesis of Deoxysugars Decorating Aglycone Scaffolds
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Daniel Toomey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2013
* USD 608,500.00

Intellectual Merit: The biochemical importance of carbohydrates cannot be
overstated for they are essential elements in nearly every physiological process
and represent the most abundant biomolecules in living systems. Apart from their
role in providing metabolic energy, carbohydrates are involved in a wide range
of biological processes including the immune response, cell-cell interactions,
fertilization, cell adhesion, and drug efficacy, among others. The focus of this
research is on the unusual 2,3(4),6-trideoxyhexoses, which are found attached to
important antibiotics such erythromycin A, antitumor agents such as adriamycin
or insecticides such as spinosad. Specifically, this project is aimed at
understanding the structure and function of the enzymes involved in the
biosynthesis of D-forosamine and D-rubranitrose. These particular sugars
decorate macrolide, or ansamycin aglycone scaffolds, respectively, and they were
chosen for study because they contain novel functional groups and display
strikingly different stereochemistries. Techniques to be utilized for this
investigation include x-ray crystallography, site-directed mutagenesis,
enzymatic synthesis of appropriate nucleotide-linked sugar ligands, and kinetic
analyses. Ultimately, these investigations will reveal unprecedented chemistries
and provide important and fundamental contributions to mechanistic enzymology.
Broader Impacts: These projects were selected for study because they are ideally
suited for instilling in middle school students the excitement of chemistry
through biochemistry, which is absolutely critical for the continuation of high
quality science in this country. Active collaborations between the Holden
laboratory and Mr. Dan Toomey's science classes at Edgewood Campus Middle School
in Wisconsin have already been established. During the first year of the
project, Edgewood will select six qualified and interested students from the
sixth, seventh, and eighth grades to begin an internship with a graduate student
in the Holden laboratory. The ratio will be three middle school students to one
graduate student. One day a week, each of these students will spend
approximately three hours in the laboratory learning about the project and
helping with the research. New sixth graders will be selected for the second
year, while those students moving up to seventh and eighth grade will continue
with the program. The primary benefits for the educational component of this
research are threefold. First, students from grades six to eight will have hands
on experience in a research laboratory working on biologically relevant
projects. Second, the graduate students participating in this program will have
the opportunity to teach in a laboratory setting and thus will already be on a
trajectory toward establishing a meaningful and fulfilling career in education.
Finally, the third benefit is to both Dan Toomey and the Holden laboratory. Dan
Toomey has the educational background to know what is developmentally
appropriate for the middle school students, and the Holden group has the
scientific background to strengthen his curriculum. This synergy will have an
enormous impact on how the topics of biochemistry and chemistry are presented to
middle school students.