* 0849713
* Orientations of Proteins in Membranes: Tools and Database
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Andrei Lomize, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2011
* USD 416,510.00

The University of Michigan in Ann Arbor has received a grant to develop
computational tools and a database for structural studies, modeling and
comparative analysis of membrane-associated peptides and proteins. More than
half of all proteins in cells interact with membranes. These proteins do not
function individually but as large multi-protein complexes immersed in the
phospholipid matrix. Although many individual components of biological membranes
are well studied at the atomic level, little is known about the spatial
organization and the function of membranes as supra-molecular assemblies. In
particular, the spatial positions in the lipid bilayer have been experimentally
studied only for a few dozen out of several thousands of membrane-associated
proteins deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). To fill this gap, a fast
computational method to determine the optimal rotational and translational
positions of proteins in membranes has recently been developed. This method will
be extended, improved and adapted for the automated large-scale analysis of
membrane-associated proteins from the PDB and for modeling alpha-helical domains
of single-spanning transmembrane proteins. The computational tools will include
software for positioning proteins in membranes (PPM 2.0) and folding of
membrane-associated peptides (FMAP), as well as the next generation of the
Orientations of Proteins in Membranes (OPM) database
(http://opm.phar.umich.edu). The expanded OPM database will hold several
thousand three-dimensional structures of transmembrane and peripheral peptides
and proteins. It will provide the calculated spatial positions of the proteins
with respect to the lipid bilayer, classification of membrane proteins into
evolutionarily related families, along with their subcellular localization,
topology, biological source, functional data, interactive visualization tools
and links to other bioinformatics resources. These tools and the expanded
database will satisfy the needs of researchers who work in the field of membrane
proteomics, lipidomics, biophysics, biochemistry and cell biology. They are
vital for the comparative evolutionary analysis, experimental mutagenesis
studies and de novo design of membrane peptides and proteins. The planned
resources will also be very valuable for teaching and will enhance the Medicinal
Chemistry and bioinformatics curriculum at University of Michigan and other
schools worldwide. The graphical representation of data and visualization tools
will be especially useful for teaching high school and undergraduate college
students, as well as for the general public.