* 0849838
* Travel for Participants to the 24th and 25th International Cartographic Conferences
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Robert Baber, University of Redlands
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 04/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The International Cartographic Association (ICA) has 82 member Countries, each
entitled to send representatives to a biennial international meeting. The
meetings provide a forum in which all attendees can communicate their own
research, and to develop collaborative relationships that last beyond the
conference, and sometimes for decades. This has been the case for many
scientists at U.S. academic and government institutions who are conducting
research activities in cartography and geo-visualization, and more broadly in
GIScience. Many past attendees have advanced to international involvement and
leadership that has encouraged research and its dissemination.

The ICA is composed of various commissions and working groups that meet during
the conference. These commissions and working groups are organized around
various themes and initiatives, such as internet mapping, education, technology,
and map design as just a few examples. All countries have members on these
commissions and working groups, resulting in a national presence by participants
from the United States.

This project outlines plans to support early career scholars to attend the
International Cartographic Association Conferences in Santiago, Chile in 2009
and Paris, France in 2011. The rational for supporting early career scholars is
to encourage experiences that facilitate the development scientific research
agendas within the broader international community. Scholars early in their
careers (for example Ph.D. students and untenured faculty) are most likely to
need financial support to enable them to attend international meetings. These
scholars are important to the ICA, and their presence at ICA meetings is an
investment in United States leadership in cartographic scholarship.

Attendance at these ICA meetings will enable participants representing the U.S.
to share their research with an International community, and to forge
international collaborations. A strong United States attendance ensures
continued national presence on ICA commissions and working groups. These ICA
Commissions and Working Groups address cutting-edge research, and scholars from
the U.S. are integral to them. Participants from the U.S. bring international
ideas back to their universities and research laboratories. It is especially
inspiring for young scholars to know that an international audience will be
hearing the results of their research.