* 0849878
* American Student Placements and Internships in Rehabilitation Engineering (ASPIRE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

Proposal: 0849878&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Rory A. Cooper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
three year REU site program at the University of Pittsburgh will provide an
opportunity for undergraduate students to do hands-on research in the area of
Rehabilitation Engineering (RE). Rehabilitation engineering employs a systematic
approach to design, modification, customization and/or fabrication of assistive
technology for persons with disabilities. Research efforts in rehabilitation
engineering are focused on identifying and addressing problems critical to
achieving and maintaining the highest possible level of function in areas
related to mobility, communications, sensory (e.g., hearing, tactile, vision)
and cognition and in activities associated with employment, independent living,
and education. The primary objectives of this program are to provide an
exemplary mentoring and resourceful environment that will enable undergraduate
students to do the following: 1) transition from dependent to independent
thinkers; 2) develop a sense of excitement about entering an engineering or
technical field; and 3) be well prepared for future careers. A unique feature of
the REU is that the students have the opportunity to experience first had the
application of technology to real people in both a clinical and research
setting. At the end of the program, participants will prepare a conference
formatted research paper and make a formal presentation of their work at a
Student Research Symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research
projects, students will also be engaged in a series of enrichment activities
that will help them become more confident as researchers, including field trips,
seminars, and workshops on disability and technology, design and research
practices, scientific writing and presentation of research findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts will be targeted to participants from
underrepresented groups, in particular, persons with disabilities and students
from African-American, Hispanic and Native American
descent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is co-funded by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;