* 0849636
* Settlement and Migration under the Global Fresh-Produce Industry: Indigenous Farm Laborers in Baja California, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Christian Zlolniski, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 76,149.00

Over the past few decades, there has been a singificant expansion of the fresh-
produce industry in northern Mexico. It has been fuled by American demand for
fresh vegetables, the expansion of United States agribusinesses in Mexico, and
Mexican pro-export agriculture macroeconomic development policies. University of
Texas at Arlington anthropologist, Dr. Christian Zlolniski, assisted by graduate
student researchers, will examine the impact of these developments on indigenous
farmworkers from Southern Mexico who have settled down in this region attracted
by employment in commercial agriculture. The research will address three main
questions: &lt;br/&gt;1) Has employment in this industry contributed to reduce
labor migration of indigenous workers to the United States? &lt;br/&gt;2) To
what extent has work in the local fresh-produce industry enhanced the employment
stability and economic mobility of indigenous farm laborers? &lt;br/&gt;3) What
economic, social, and political resources do these workers and families mobilize
to build new communities in this scarcely populated
region?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zlolniski and his team will conduct ethnographic
fieldwork among Mixtec, Triqui, and Zapotec workers in three squatter
settlements in the San Quintin Valley in Baja California. They will employ a
variety of research methods, including participant observation and in-depth
interviews with ethnic leaders and farmworkers in each of these colonias; and
semi-structured interviews with a sample of households in each of these settings
to examine how settlement has shaped farmworker occupational and economic
opportunities, and migration histories (especially, migration to the United
States).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Export agriculture has become a common economic
growth strategy in many developing countries. This project will contribute to
social science theory of the relationship between internantional, national, and
local economic effects, by examining in depth the costs and benefits of expoert
agriculture at the local level in northern Mexico. The study will help policy
makers assess the impacts of commercial agriculture in the Mexico/United States
border areas, particularly its effects on migration to the United States.