* 0849637
* Mount Holyoke Undergraduate Mathematics Summer Research Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2014
* Jillian McLeod, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2014
* USD 384,620.00

Mount Holyoke College proposes to continue operating a mathematics and
statistics summer research site for undergraduates. Each summer, for the next
five years, we envisage selecting ten students from a diverse array of U.S.
colleges and universities to engage in mathematical or statistical research.
These students shall work in groups of five, each group carrying out a different
project under the supervision of a faculty member. The projects will be rooted
in mainstream areas of mathematical or statistical research and will often
involve computer experimentation and computation. One of the messages we intend
to communicate strongly to the students is the power of examples to illuminate,
and possibly transcend, current impasses in purely theoretical strategies. The
two groups will meet separately several times a day but there will also be ample
(structured and unstructured) opportunities for students in the different groups
to exchange ideas. Students will organize and participate in their own speaker
series, give weekly talks/reports in the program's research seminar, and will be
encouraged to attend and participate in local and national meetings. We intend
to simulate, as best we can, what life at a research institute feels like. For
summer of 2009, Jessica Sidman's group will investigate questions in
computational algebraic geometry and commutative algebra while Giuliana
Davidoff's group will be involved with a number theory
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research projects are substantial and
mainstream. The intense exposure that we provide, along with the intimacy of
small working groups, facilitate and support learning of very deep and abstract
concepts in a concrete and non-superficial way. Through the REU the students are
strengthened in their enthusiasm for mathematics and statistics; they learn how
to effectively communicate mathematical or statistical ideas; they develop
confidence in their ability to take a new concept and, through experimentation
with examples and questioning, build intuition for it. This experience also
serves as a bridge to graduate school for those students who pursue that path.
Often the foundational material that is covered in the first couple of weeks of
the program coincides with courses that students encounter during their first
year of graduate school. Finally, each student will be encouraged to prepare a
preprint of his or her work by the end of the program. These preprints are made
available on the program's website. It is not uncommon for honors theses as well
as journal publications to result from the summer projects. The intense research
experience provides an opportunity for students to see for themselves what life
as a researcher can entail. Thus it may help them answer (or reaffirm their
position on) questions about their potential for a career in mathematic or
statistics. Additionally, we seek to increase our program's visibility among
students who may otherwise not consider attending an REU. In particular, we
intend to recruit heavily from historically black colleges and universities. In
this way, we hope to contribute to the diversification and subsequent
improvement of these disciplines.