* 0849038
* Motor City: Ford, Mass Production and the Industrial Ecology of Detroit, 1908-1927
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Ruth Cowan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 7,934.00

Between 1908 and 1923, annual production at the Ford Motor Company exploded from
6,000 to 1,800,000 automobiles. The company's meteoric rise propelled Henry Ford
to national fame and made icons of the sprawling plants at Highland Park and
River Rouge. This dissertation funded by the Science, Technology & Society
Program argues that historians have overlooked a key development behind the
advent of mass production: innovative systems of industrial logistics organized
around "the purchasing function." Recent, empirical scholarship in business
history indicates that Ford continued to buy half of the 5,000 parts in each
Model T from outside suppliers until at least 1916, a year in which production
reached 585,000 cars. Mass production at Ford was not only cutting-edge, it was
double-edged. The assembly line facilitated an exceptional degree of internal
synchronization, but it also entailed an unprecedented level of external
coordination.

This project examines Detroit as the site of an industrial network,
investigating systems of inter-firm control and the urban landscape on which
they depended. It studies automotive purchasing agents as technical experts and
the reconstruction of manufacturing districts where the automobile industry's
"outside suppliers" made their niche. The project assesses mass production in
Detroit as a political as well as a technological achievement by combining the
history of industrial procurement with the history of municipal growth.

Although a spate of scholarship related to Japanese models of "just-in-time
inventory" and "supply chain management" has appeared since the 1980s, the
history of early industrial procurement in the U.S. has yet to be written. This
project reframes the history of mass production in terms of manufacturing
networks and industrial districts. It contributes to literature concerned with
industrial practice, business organization, standards and standardization,
"regional advantage," and the history of the automobile.