* 0849370
* Design and Interpretation of Observational Studies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Paul Rosenbaum, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2013
* USD 205,922.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

An observational study is an empiric investigation of the effects of a
treatment, policy, intervention or exposure which was not randomly assigned to
subjects, as it would be in a randomized experiment. Observational studies are
common in most fields that study people ? such as economics, education,
medicine, and sociology - because harmful or unwanted treatments cannot be
imposed on human subjects for experimental purposes. The central difficulty in
an observational study is that, because treatments were not randomly assigned,
the subjects receiving different treatments may not be comparable, so differing
outcomes after treatment may not be effects caused by the treatment. If the
treatment groups differ before treatment in ways that have been measured, there
is an overt bias that often can be removed by adjustments, such as matching.
However, if treatment groups differed before treatment in ways that were not
measured, concern about hidden biases may arise. Hidden biases cannot generally
be removed by adjustments and must be addressed by other means; these are the
focus of the current proposal.

Four projects are planned for the current project. The first component considers
the use of sample splitting to guide design choices with a view to increasing
the design sensitivity parameter in an observational study. This means setting
aside a small portion of the study sample to improve the design sensitivity for
the remaining study sample. The second component considers ways to implement Sir
Ronald Fisher?s proposal to ?make your theories elaborate? in observational
studies, including testing such theories without problems of multiplicity,
without losses of power, but with suitable sensitivity analyses for unmeasured
biases. The third component concerns the interpretation of sensitivity analyses
for unmeasured biases in observational studies. Because sensitivity analyses
refer to what has not been measured, they tend to become both complex and
difficult to interpret; combating this tendency, an amplification of a
sensitivity analysis maps a simple sensitivity analysis into the large set of
its possible interpretations. The fourth component concerns situations in which
most subjects are unaffected by treatment, but a few are strongly affected. It
turns out that such situations can be highly insensitive to unobserved biases,
and a thorough study of this phenomenon is proposed.