* 0849494
* SGER: Collaborative Research - Mechanisms behind non-Redfieldian P Cycling in Water Masses of the Southern Ocean, New Insights from X-ray Spectromicroscopy and Electrodialysis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Ellery Ingall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2011
* USD 96,699.00

In much of the global ocean the (Redfield) ratio of nitrogen (N) to P is
remarkably constant, both in the concentrations of these nutrients in seawater
and in the plankton species that it supports. A number of studies of sub-
Antarctic mode water, a convectively formed descending water type identifiably
by its exceptionally uniform properties, suggest that high latitude P cycling is
altered from the Redfield balance resulting in unusually enriched P compared to
low latitude waters .

Synchrotron based x-ray spectromicroscopy will be used to chemically
characterize and spatially map, at sub micron dimensions, the abundance of
several P forms (e.g. polyphosphates, organo-P compounds) in organisms and
marine particulates. These samples will be taken along the cruise track of the
I/B Oden as it transits from Punta Arenas to McMurdo Station, through the
Bellingshausen, Amundsen and Ross Sea regions,and which will provide a unique
data set from a remote and understudied ice shelf and under-ice ecosystem.
Characterization of Antarctic ocean P status is expected to shed further light
upon aspects of Southern Ocean P biogeochemistry.

As well as using novel characterization techniques, which may lead to a
transformative restatement of aspects of Southern Ocean P chemistry, this
project meets an additional SGER criteria of representing a quick response to an
international field campaign opportunity afforded by the transect of the Swedish
ice breaker I/B Oden from Punta Arenas to McMurdo through the Bellingshausen,
Amundsen and Ross Seas.