* 0849615
* Annotating the Cis-Regulatory Binding Sites in Sequenced Prokaryotic Genomes
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Zhengchang Su, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,202,998.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina at
Charlotte has been awarded a grant to develop software and a database resource
for characterizing cis-regulatory binding sites in sequenced bacteria.
Biological functions of a bacterial cell are carried out by the products of
genes (proteins and RNAs) in the cell, but when, where, how much and how fast
these proteins and RNAs should be expressed under different physiological and
environmental conditions are mainly controlled by the interactions between
specific transcription factor proteins and the cis-regulatory binding sites in
the upstream regions of the genes on the chromosome. A better understanding of
prokaryotes in general has great significance in global ecological control,
efficient agriculture, better medicine and health, and renewable energy
production. However, our general understanding of cis-regulatory systems in most
sequenced bacterial genomes is very limited due to the lack of efficient and
accurate experimental and computational methods for their characterization. The
research team of this project will develop: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) A new tool
for more accurate prediction of operons in bacteria, since operons are the basic
transcription units in bacteria and knowing operon structures in a genome can
facilitate its cis-regulatory binding site prediction. &lt;br/&gt;2) An
efficient and accurate tool for genome-wide prediction of cis-regulatory binding
sites in bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;3) A database system to store the predicted operons
and cis-regulatory binding sites in all sequenced bacteria genomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the results of these prediction tools will be
verified and further refined through experimental validation of a large portion
of the predicted novel cis-regulatory sites in E. coli K12. &lt;br/&gt;These
software, database and experimental procedures will be freely available to the
public, thus researchers can 1) directly apply the software to their genomes of
interest; 2) use the database for target selection, experimental design and
testing hypotheses when characterizing cis-regulatory systems in certain
genomes; and 3) use the experimental procedures to verify the predicted cis-
regulatory binding sites, and at the same time, identify the cognate
transcription factors. Therefore, these tools and database will fundamentally
change the way that biologists study cis-regulatory systems in bacteria. This
project will also provide a unique educational platform to train the next
generation of computational biologists, as one postdoctoral fellow, three PhD
graduates, and various numbers of undergraduates and high school students will
be trained in the project. Traditionally underrepresented minority and/or female
students will be particularly encouraged to participate in the project.
Furthermore, the algorithms and results generated from this project will be
incorporated into the principle investigator?s newly developed courses at the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte. More information about the project
can be found at http://gleclubs.uncc.edu/pbs and information about the research
team can be found at http://sulab.uncc.edu. &lt;br/&gt;