* 0849233
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Kinetic Energy Pathways to Dissipation in the World Ocean
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Raffaele Ferrari, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2013
* USD 243,738.00

The ocean circulation is the result of a balance between forcing at basin scales
and dissipation at millimeter scales. While we have measurements of the
climatological mechanical and thermal energy sources, and some limited coverage
of small-scale dissipation, much less is known about the processes that transfer
energy from the forcing to the dissipation scales. The goal of this project is
to quantify from observations and numerical models the major pathways towards
dissipation in the global oceans. The analysis will be global, but particular
attention will be paid to the Southern Ocean, because most of the large scale
wind forcing powers this part of the ocean and the resulting currents play a key
role in driving the meridional overturning circulation. It is widely believed
that most of the wind power input to the surface geostrophic flow drives the
large reservoir of available potential energy of the large-scale mean flow, and
that this energy is released by baroclinic instability, driving mesoscale eddy
kinetic energy (EKE). How this energy is dissipated is much more controversial.
The hypotheses to be tested are: 1) A majority of the EKE cascades to the bottom
of the ocean through an inverse cascade into larger horizontal scale barotropic
motions. 2) A large fraction of this energy flux is dissipated in the bottom
boundary layer by quadratic drag. 3) A significant residual energy flux
generates topographic waves over rough topography, which have the potential to
propagate and upon breaking to drive mixing and dissipation higher in the water
column. A combination of satellite and in situ observations, and two realistic,
high-resolution ocean general circulation models (OGCMs) will be used.

Quantifying the relative importance of the many pathways to dissipation is a
great unsolved problem of physical oceanography. Knowing the mechanisms of
energy dissipation is a necessary first step in proper parameterization of
diapycnal and along isopycnal mixing processes in more realistic OGCMs. Mixing
is a critical oceanic process that must be parameterized in order to have the
proper feedbacks operative in state-of-the-art models that simulate present and
future climate. Together these results will be crucial for guiding future
research on the variability and predictability of the global oceans and the
climate that it influences.