* 0849483
* Workshop:   FIND Student Collaboration Meeting
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen L. Fisher
* 08/31/2009
* USD 42,364.00

This proposal requests funding to cover the costs of running a workshop to
permit students funded under the NSF FIND program to come together to present
their work to each other, discuss potential collaboration, and identify
important open problems for future research. The FIND program is distinctive
from many other NSF programs, both in its technical emphasis and its approach to
research. The FIND program seeks to involve the research community in a
collective exploration of what the Internet of 15 years from now should be. This
project requires a long-range perspective, the invention of new concepts not
fettered by the constraints of today?s networks, an understanding of the larger
social, economic and legal issues that arise from the interplay between the
Internet and society, and a willingness to collaborate on larger visions that
build on the ideas developed in individual research grants. Because of the value
that the FIND program places on integration and collaboration, it is important
that those working on the parts of the program have opportunities to meet and
discuss objectives, approaches and opportunities. The FIND program has held five
prior meetings for PIs funded by FIND, as well as others associated with the
program. However, the size of these meetings has precluded including students in
the meetings. The FIND planning committee, and the community of FIND researchers
generally, have said that it is very important to give students an opportunity
to get together in the same way that faculty have been encouraged to do. It is
important for the careers of the students, especially those who will enter
academia when they graduate, and as well important for the health of the FIND
program. These students, as they perform their research, will greatly benefit
from having in their minds the larger picture of the goals of FIND. This meeting
is planned to occur immediately following the ACM SigComm conference in Seattle
this August, which many of these students would attend, in order to reduce the
cost and overhead of travel.

Intellectual merit The agenda of this workshop has been centered on the
identification and discussion of open questions?aspects of a future network that
are not yet being explored as part of the FIND program or elsewhere. While the
students will be invited to present their own work (via a poster session and
?lightning talks? in breakout sessions) the challenge that will be put to the
working groups of the meeting is to assemble a list of important open problems.
Such a list will prove valuable both to the students as they plan their own
future research.

Broader impact The broader impact of this workshop will be to facilitate and
further the careers of students, especially students who will enter academia
when they finish their graduate work. The objective is to generate excitement
and motivation, a sense of purpose and coherence, and a collegial context for a
future generation of network researchers.