* 0849736
* Graduate Opportunities at Fisk in Astronomy and Astrophysics Research (GO-FAAR)
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Arnold Burger, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,711,300.00

The Graduate Opportunities at Fisk in Astronomy and Astrophysics Research (GO-
FAAR) program builds on a successful partnership between Fisk University and
Vanderbilt University, the centerpiece of which is the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-
to-PhD Bridge program. The Bridge program is a graduate program in physics and
astronomy that has, to date, attracted 29 underrepresented minority students,
with a retention rate of 97%, positioning the program to become a leading
producer of minority PhDs in astronomy and astrophysics in the United States.
GO-FAAR will enable a stable foundation of support for the purposes of scaling
up the Bridge program, institutionalizing a strong infrastructure for astronomy
and astrophysics research at Fisk, solidifying research collaborations, and
launching a parallel program for Fisk undergraduates. Faculty and students in
the GO-FAAR Partnership will execute a broad, multi-faceted, multi-institution
research plan, involving collaborative projects in astronomical instrumentation,
computational astrophysics, and observational astronomy. The GO-FAAR Partnership
includes Vanderbilt University, Boston University (BU), the National Optical
Astronomy Observatory (NOAO), the National Solar Observatory (NSO), the
Southeastern Universities Research Association (SURA), the University of Hawaii
at Hilo (UHH), and the University of Cape Town
(UCT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the program has a goal increasing by 75%
the annual number of underrepresented minorities earning the PhD in astronomy
and astrophysics in the United States, and sustaining this level in steady
state. In addition GO-FAAR will support and mentor a cadre of undergraduates at
Fisk who will (a) complete a sequence of courses leading to a new Minor in
Astrophysics at Fisk University, and (b) participate in astronomy and
astrophysics research through the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates
programs at Fisk, Vanderbilt, BU, NOAO, and NSO. Finally, the successful Fisk-
Vanderbilt Astronomy Roadshow outreach program will be adapted and expanded to
bring the excitement of astronomy to underrepresented minority students in the
Nashville public schools and to act as a program of leadership development for
GO-FAAR participants.