* 0849031
* SuperDARN Radar Investigations of Global Processes in the High-Latitude Ionosphere: Infrastructure, Community Support, and Science
* GEO,AGS
* 05/31/2008,10/31/2011
* J. Michael Ruohoniemi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert M. Robinson
* 10/31/2011
* USD 1,058,750.00

This award supports the operation and scientific use of the Super Dual Auroral
Radar Network (SuperDARN). SuperDARN is a global network of HF radars that
provide continuous measurements of the high-latitude ionosphere in both the
northern (9 radars) and southern (6 radars) hemispheres. It provides the meso-
and global-scale views of the structure and dynamics of ionospheric plasma
convection and electric fields that are needed to study the processes that
couple mass and energy from the solar wind into the magnetosphere-ionosphere-
atmosphere system. Other valuable measurements from the radars include the
velocity of the neutral winds near the mesopause, proxies for the projection of
magnetospheric boundaries into the ionosphere, and the characteristics of small-
scale ionization irregularities. SuperDARN is an international collaboration
involving the funding agencies of ten countries. The U. S. responsibility
includes the operation of the SuperDARN radars at Goose Bay, Labrador and
Kapuskasing, Ontario, as well as the data processing and distribution for the
entire SuperDARN network. The U.S. research community gains access to the entire
dataset through association with SuperDARN researchers at the awardee
institution, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL). As
the founding institution of SuperDARN, JHU/APL provides oversight and management
for the entire collaboration. The JHU/APL team is responsible for the
development and distribution of the core operating software for the SuperDARN
radars and for much of the analysis software. JHU/APL is also responsible for
assembling data from the northern and Australian radars for subsequent DVD
production. The activities at JHU/APL in support of the SuperDARN facility
include both community support and research functions. The wider community is
supported in its use of SuperDARN data by a variety of means, including
distribution from a dedicated web site and the personal involvement of JHU/APL
staff. The research programs of the JHU/APL team include the response of
ionospheric convection to IMF variations, the realization of a space weather
capability for ionospheric electric fields, and the magnetic conjugacy of
convection between the ionosphere and magnetosphere. Other topics to be studied
include global determination of atmospheric Joule heating, characterization of
planetary waves in the mesosphere, and collaborative research with the NSF
Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar (AMISR). The planned construction of
additional SuperDARN radars, which will both augment the existing high-latitude
chains and extend coverage into the polar cap and mid-latitude regions, promises
a significant boost in the supply of data for resolving critical problems in
Sun-Earth connections research.