* 0849584
* Science, Democracy and Environmental Policy in Developing Countries: The Case of India
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2013
* S. Ravi Rajan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,440.00

The vast majority of research on the interface of risk, science, and democracy
has been limited to the advanced industrial nations of North American and
Western Europe. This project funded by the Science, Technology, and Society
(STS) Program addresses this gap by focusing on India, the largest democracy in
the third world. Three recent controversies are examined that cast light on the
social, economic and political contexts that drive the interactions between
scientific knowledge, expertise, policy making, and implementation. These
controversies are about: a) the processes of environmental impact and hazard
analysis in India (studied with the case of the decision about siting a large
dam (Tehri) in a seismic Himalayan region); b) policy making on chronic
environmental risks such as pollution (approached through the case of the CNG
controversy in Delhi); and c) regulating emergent risks (addressed via the case
of Bt Cotton controversy). The project undertakes a content analysis of all
publicly available data sources on public controversies in each of the three
sectors (hazards and impact assessment processes; chronic risk mitigation; and
emergent risks). The project addresses two central questions: a) how, and to
what extent, is the process and efficacy of public policy on environmental risks
in developing country democracies constrained by the "co-production" of science
and politics; and b) whether there is something distinctive about contexts such
as India or Brazil that offers new insights for STS theory on science advocacy
and environmental policy making. The first question is important to scholars of
public policy, for whom learning about the interactions between science and
politics in the making and implementation of environmental policy in
industrializing third world contexts, is a compelling new frontier. The second
question is compelling because the sheer fact that policy making, and mobilizing
science for it, have, for several decades in India, been embedded in a complex
interactive, democratic process that is distinctively different from USA or
Western Europe. In addition to these academic and scholarly contributions to STS
theory, the project has pressing policy and societal implications. Critically,
it is one of the first systematic research projects to help plug the gap in the
literature on the role played by scientific expertise in environmental
controversies in democracies in the developing world. There are two important
reasons that this gap is socially significant. First, while attempting to
mitigate the environmental impacts of rapid industrialization, governments in
these countries often act upon the advice of expert advisory teams, who, in
turn, often select from existing environmental policy regimes in the developed
world. The societal consequences of such outcomes are not fully grasped by
scholars or policy makers. Second, as a result of a lack of reflective awareness
about the efficacy of such regulatory institutions, and especially, of the
limits of grafting science based expert judgment strategies onto complex
political cultures and socio-economic realities, the ability of such countries
to address the environmental risks posed to their citizens, or to meet their
global environmental obligations, is arguably diminished.