* 0849543
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Inequality and Social Exclusion in the Southern Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Margarita Huayhua, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,998.00

University of Michigan doctoral student Margarita Huayhua, under the guidance of
Dr. Bruce Mannheim, will investigate fractal social categories that are
situation-specific markers of ethnic hierarchy in the southern Andes. Huayhua
will study how these categories are created and re-created by the rhetoric of
hierarchy in daily social interaction and how they are displayed by language and
body comportment. This research will investigate whether the socially created
categories of runa ("native Quechua speaker") and misti ("Spanish speaking local
elite") conflict with the ideal of Peruvian citizenship that is understood to
offer all individuals equal rights and responsibilities. Huayhua will focus on
the face-to-face interactions between Quechua speakers and Spanish speakers in
the countryside near Cuzco in order to study how these hierarchical social
categories are deployed in everyday social relationships.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will consist of ethnographic and socio-linguistic
research on the relationship between runa and misti based on long-term
participant observation, in-depth interviews, photos and sketches, body hexis
codification, sociolinguistic analysis of interactions and analysis of body
comportment a variety of settings. The researcher will examine why and how
fractal relationships work and if and how they contribute to establishing a
social world in which, although runa are nominal citizens, they are placed in
hierarchical relationships inferior to the misti. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will contribute to better understanding of patterns of inequality and
social exclusion and the often unseen ways in which they are created and
perpetuated. Understanding how such mechanisms of inequality and exclusion work
will contribute to developing policy to address them more concretely and
effectively. The research also will contribute to the education of a graduate
student.