* 0849322
* Toward Seismic Tomography Based Upon Adjoint Methods
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Jeroen Tromp, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2011
* USD 542,206.00

The increasing availability of large numbers of high-quality digital records
from the global seismic networks has made possible a variety of new ways to
study earthquakes and deep Earth structure. By analyzing hundreds or thousands
of seismograms, it is often possible to resolve new features in the data, or to
perform more comprehensive analyses of problems that were previously addressed
on smaller scales. This project will continue analyses of global seismic data at
U.C. San Diego to examine a variety of geophysical issues. These include: (1)
Study of seismic discontinuities in the upper mantle using reflected and
converted seismic phases. Resolving details of mantle discontinuity properties
is important, both for modeling of mantle composition and for understanding the
effect that the discontinuities can have on mantle convection. (2) Imaging
earthquake rupture using back-projection methods. These methods have the
potential to provide near-real-time images of the rupture extent of large
earthquakes, which will help in planning disaster relief operations. (3)
Analyses of earthquake spectra to resolve directivity and stress drop. This will
help determine whether large, damaging earthquakes are simply "scaled up"
versions of smaller earthquakes, in which case strong ground motions could be
predicted for future large quakes by studying records of the much more numerous
smaller earthquakes that are detected instrumentally. (4) Study and modeling of
high-frequency waves scattered from small-scale mantle and core structure. This
will provide information on compositional variations in the mantle at much finer
scales than are possible from other seismic methods and will provide constraints
on geochemical models of the mantle. (5) Development and application of waveform
cross-correlation and cluster analysis techniques to long-period waveforms. This
provides a practical way to process the large volumes of seismic data that are
currently available and will lead to improved models of three-dimensional
seismic velocity variations. (6) Observing and modeling lateral variations of
seismic attenuation in the mantle, which will provide valuable constraints on
mantle temperatures and chemistry. This project supports the educational program
at U.C. San Diego by providing funds for graduate and postdoctoral students.
This research will lead to improved models of Earth structure and earthquake
rupture processes, which will be of interest to the tectonics, geodynamics and
mineral physics communities. Results will be widely disseminated through
publications, conference presentations, and material provided to education and
outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;