* 0849207
* III/SGER:   Hypothesis Based Query and Verification of Pathway Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Mark Musen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

Advancing knowledge in the biological sciences involves&lt;br/&gt;experimentally
testing hypothesesand interpreting the &lt;br/&gt;results based on prior
scientific work. Researchers face &lt;br/&gt;the challenge of collecting,
evaluating and integrating &lt;br/&gt;large amounts of different kinds of
information about &lt;br/&gt;organisms, cells, genes and proteins to generate a
valid&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis. And once a hypothesis is generated, the challenge
&lt;br/&gt;is to evaluate the hypothesis with respect to what &lt;br/&gt;is
already known. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed research
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Test the scalability and extensibility of a novel
&lt;br/&gt; computer system that allows biologists to construct &lt;br/&gt; and
evaluate alternative hypotheses against a knowledge &lt;br/&gt; base on the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Test a knowledge
archive that supports the archiving &lt;br/&gt; and search of validated
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In our work, we define a hypothesis as a
statement about &lt;br/&gt;relationships between components of a biological
system &lt;br/&gt;that are intended to explain experimental observations.
&lt;br/&gt;A set of validated hypotheses can be used as building blocks
&lt;br/&gt;to construct larger, more complex models such as &lt;br/&gt;pathways.
We plan to develop and test a new paradigm: &lt;br/&gt;that of hypothesis-driven
querying of model organism knowledgebases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work, called HyQue (for Hypothesis-based Querying &lt;br/&gt;of pathway models),
will take as input working hypotheses about&lt;br/&gt;pathway models expressed
in a knowledge-based formalism, &lt;br/&gt;evaluate their consistency using
existing data in a knowledgebase, &lt;br/&gt;and provide as output contradictory
evidence and suggestions for&lt;br/&gt;improving hypotheses. HyQue will
incorporate formal knowledge &lt;br/&gt;representations based upon Semantic Web
standards and &lt;br/&gt;an ontology to represent biological objects and
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;HyQue will also contain a library of rules that
determine &lt;br/&gt;counts of support and contradiction for a given hypothesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will prototype an archive of hypotheses that allows
users &lt;br/&gt;to compare their hypothesis with other hypotheses submitted by
&lt;br/&gt;their peers. We will explore the capability to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
(1) express working hypotheses about the yeast cell cycle; &lt;br/&gt; (2)
provide integration of data in the Saccharomyces Genome &lt;br/&gt; Database to
evaluate/test pathway-specific hypotheses; &lt;br/&gt; and&lt;br/&gt; (3)
archive these results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As analytical tools and database
resources proliferate, &lt;br/&gt;biologists require facilities to integrate
existing data &lt;br/&gt;into knowledge that can create a shared understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;biological models. Our work will explore the expressivity
&lt;br/&gt;and scalability of unique and novel querying and contradiction based
&lt;br/&gt;reasoning methods that use rich formal knowledge specifications
of&lt;br/&gt;biological events in order to accomplish information integration.
&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed work will lead to a novel paradigm of querying
&lt;br/&gt;biological knowledge that can dynamically retrieve, integrate
and&lt;br/&gt;interpret information in terms of biologically relevant
&lt;br/&gt;relationships asserted as pathway models. Our work will
&lt;br/&gt;examine the value of Semantic Web technologies in building
&lt;br/&gt;a knowledgebase for such querying and reasoning and will
&lt;br/&gt;aid in standardizing models of biological knowledge and
&lt;br/&gt;add momentum to a range of ongoing ontology building efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on the project can be found at the
&lt;br/&gt;project web page: http://nigam.web.stanford.edu/hyque
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;