* 0849052
* Scholars Award:  Measure for Measure: Social Ontologies of Classification
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Marion Fourcade, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 218,653.00

This project funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society Program examines
how different forms of social classification -- from high brow to low brow, from
scientific to popular, from state-directed to society-driven -- relate to one
another within a particular society, and explains their common origins in the
institutional and political make-up that supports them. The PI investigates the
existence of national classificatory styles through a detailed analysis of the
emergence and development of three debates over classification in America and
France: the ranking of wines, the digitization of books and the economic
valuation of nature. The unfolding and settlement of these debates in each
country are followed, and narratives are drawn together by showing the common
institutional and cultural logics at work across them, in spite of their large
differences in origin, purpose and function. By systematically embedding
classificatory activities in particular discursive repertoires and institutional
environments, this project makes an important contribution to our understanding
of how people come to construct the world in a particular way, as well as to our
appreciation of the political and economic force of these representations.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At a material level, each of the case studies undertaken
for this project is the occasion for the PI to work closely with one research
assistant. The project thus contributes to the training of three graduate
students, draws them together as a team working on parallel issues and
stimulates their interest in the intersection between technology, knowledge and
politics. Second, at the analytical level, the project bridges an important
disciplinary gap by connecting the philosophical and historical literature on
measurement and value in science studies with the abundant literature in
sociology and political science that deals with cross-national variations in
institutional systems and cultural representations, thereby contributing to
enrich both literatures. Finally, at a more metaphysical level, this project
fosters a better understanding of the institutional, economic, and cultural
basis of knowledge that could be useful in many applied domains -- including
cross-cultural psychology, consulting, economic activity and policy. It draws
attention to the importance of technologies of classification and measure in
carrying out certain visions of the social order and in explaining why some of
these visions become focal points for political contention and economic
conflict, as is the case in all three domains singled out for empirical
examination.