* 0850764
* The evolution of life histories in geminate echinoderms: a comparative approach to unscrambling the relationships among environment, egg size, and the energetics of development.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Amy Moran, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2013
* USD 441,054.00

Egg size is one of the most important and often-studied aspects of the life
history of marine organisms, and is correlated with many traits including larval
developmental mode, length of larval development, starvation resistance, larval
form and function, size at metamorphosis, and juvenile growth and survival. Much
attention has focused on the ecological factors that drive evolutionary changes
in egg size, but the relationships between ecological, evolutionary, and
physiological aspects of larval development have yet to be characterized.
Likewise, while assumptions about the relationships between egg size and the
utilization of egg energy by developing larvae are built into all major models
of life history evolution in marine organisms, no study has explicitly tested
the underlying assumptions of these models in a rigorous comparative framework
with a well-described ecological and evolutionary context. To examine these
assumptions, the principle investigator will use geminate species pairs of
echinoderms separated by the closure of the Central American Seaway as a model
system for understanding the evolution of egg size and its implications for a
wide range of other life history correlates among marine invertebrates. Specific
questions to address by the research include: (1) What are the changes in
biochemical composition that are associated with evolutionary changes in egg
size? (2) How do evolved differences in egg size, egg composition, and total egg
energy affect the growth rates and developmental trajectories of larvae? (3) In
planktotrophic species, do larger eggs contribute a higher proportion of energy
to the total cost of development than smaller eggs? (4) How does egg size affect
subsequent larval performance under different food regimes that mimic the
contrasting natural food environments in the two oceans?

The broader impacts include funding one postdoctoral researcher, two graduate
students, and at least 3 undergraduates. Students will be directly involved
working with samples collected in Panama, and will learn the principles of
comparative biology, data acquisition and organization, and data analysis by
working directly (under faculty supervision) with datasets they collect
themselves. This research will be communicated to the public via a web page
hosted at Clemson University and maintained by the principle investigator and
will serve as the foundation for the development of a "Larval Wiki," a public
web resource that can be contributed to and edited by anyone. The principle
investigator hopes this Wiki will become a self-sustaining resource that will be
of considerable use to the global community of larval biologists as a forum for
discussing major issues, disseminating information, and sharing photographs for
teaching and public presentations.