* 0850841
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Pelvic Shape and Locomotor Cost: an Empirical Test of Biomechanical Models of the Hip
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,10/31/2010
* Herman Pontzer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 10/31/2010
* USD 13,600.00

The adoption of habitual bipedal locomotion required major alterations in the
pelvic shape of hominins, changes which are clearly evident in the fossil record
by at least 3.4 million years ago. However, variation in pelvic width both
between extinct hominin species, and in the form of sexual dimorphism among
modern humans, has led to the hypothesis that wider pelves result in less
efficient or less effective locomotion. This hypothesis is based on
biomechanical models which suggest that wider pelves diminish the mechanical
advantage of the hip stabilizer muscles (hip abductors) thereby increasing
muscle force production and increasing the metabolic cost of walking and
running. However, this model has never been tested during locomotion. This study
will test whether skeletal measures of pelvic width are correlated with relevant
mechanical dimensions during locomotion, and determine how the hip abductors are
specifically related to locomotor cost. Kinematics, kinetics, and oxygen
consumption data will be collected on 30 individuals along with magnetic
resonance imaging to determine the mechanical advantage, muscle force, and
energetic cost associated with activation of the hip abductors. Once these
relationships are established, they can be used to address the energetic
consequences of variation in pelvic shape between living humans and make
inferences about locomotor efficiency in extinct hominin taxa. Accurate
reconstructions of locomotor cost in early hominins will aid in testing
hypotheses about the selective pressures responsible for the evolution of
bipedalism. Furthermore, quantifying the relationship between skeletal
morphology and locomotor cost is relevant to understanding the energetic
accommodations required by the major changes in brain and body size, and
alterations in ranging and dietary patterns seen with the evolution of the genus
Homo. The locomotor consequences of changes in parturition related to these
increases in brain and body size in Homo can also be addressed. Additionally,
establishing a new empirically tested biomechanical model of the hip during
locomotion has important applications in orthopedics, where determining proper
treatment for conditions such as hip dysplasia and osteoarthritis require
accurate assessment of hip joint stresses, and ground and muscle forces.



