* 0850625
* Community Phylogeny and Global Phylogeography of the Neuston
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Diarmaid O'Foighil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 381,829.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to construct the
first marine community phylogeny. It is inspired by the integrative perspective
that lies at the core of the modern concept of biodiversity. Empirical
realization of this integration requires that study systems be simple enough to
be tractable, yet (ideally) contain compelling ecological and evolutionary
phenomena. The target marine community, the neuston, embodies these
characteristics to an exceptional degree. It consists of a relatively small
number of interacting species that drift at the water/atmosphere interface of
the planet's subtropical gyres (40% of oceanic surface area) and play an
important role in open-ocean epipelagic food webs. The ecological base of the
neuston community is an endosymbiosis involving chondrophore cnidarian hosts
(Porpitidae) and their dinoflagellate photosymbionts. Chondrophores are preyed
upon by a variety of predators, chief among them two lineages of highly
specialized gastropods (Janthinidae and Glaucinae). This prominent open ocean
community has been poorly studied, apart from its resident insect genus
Halobates. The investigator aims to complete a combined phylogeny/phylogeography
of neuston taxa across three trophic levels (photosymbionts, chondrophore hosts,
predatory gastropods) and all 5 subtropical gyre systems. The two main goals of
the community phylogeny section are to determine the evolutionary origins of the
photosymbiosis, and to establish the benthic sister lineages of both gastropod
lineages in order to identify the synapomorphic changes associated with
ancestral ecological transitions from benthos to neuston. The primary aims of
the phylogeographic section are to establish the spatial scale of speciation for
the target neustonic taxa, and to test three hypotheses of within-species
genetic structuring: global panmixis; ocean basin panmixis; within gyre
panmixis. The investigator has developed a multi-faceted sampling strategy that
involves ichthyoplankton research colleagues in multiple gyres systems, the bi-
coastal, ocean-going ships and students of the Woods Hole Semester at Sea
program, national and international museum collections, and an informal network
of colleagues worldwide that will sample spontaneous neuston stranding event. He
has also established collaborative relationships with colleagues expert in
cnidarian, nudibranch, caenogastropod and epitoniid diversity, who will work
closely with him on their respective groups within the neuston and, for
gastropods, also within benthic sister lineages. To-date, preliminary samples
from 3 of the 5 gyres have yielded results that not only demonstrate the
feasibility of the primary project goals, but also provide exciting initial
insights into the generality of the photosymbiotic association, the putative
benthic sister lineages of neustonic gastropods, the likely presence of cryptic
species complexes, and the divergent patterns of among-gyre and among-basin
genetic structuring exhibited by sister taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has an unusually extensive student outreach component in the form of the &gt;100
Sea Education Association (SEA) undergraduates and high school students that
will participate in multiple upcoming SSV Seamans &amp; SSV Cramer cruises and
who will collect neuston taxa. The investigator will provide detailed electronic
feedback to the SEA courses, in the field, so that students will be able to
connect the organisms they collect with the biogeographic and evolutionary
hypotheses being testing, and to determine for themselves which hypotheses the
available data reject, or corroborate. One graduate and three undergraduate UM
students will receive in-depth training during this project. The graduate
student, Celia Churchill, has participated in offshore neuston sampling,
generated much of the preliminary data, and recently presented at her first
scientific meeting. She will work/train with the P.I., and also with 4 expert
collaborators, directly in their laboratories for 2 of them. One UM
undergraduate student has already worked directly on this project and the
investigator will recruit at least two more. Substantial international outreach
and collaborative activities are planned across research specialties, especially
involving ichthyoplankton colleagues working in different gyre systems, as well
as international museum colleagues. This study promises to significantly enhance
background knowledge of the vast subtropical gyre surface ecosystem, now heavily
impacted, even in mid-ocean, by the incremental accumulation of non-
biodegradable, plastic flotsam. This is a major new marine conservation issue
that is just now entering public discourse, e.g., see recent descriptions of the
North Pacific's Giant Garbage Patch in the popular press.