* 0850655
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Domesticating Human Rights:  Examining Political Opportunities and Consciousness in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Zakiya Luna, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 07/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This project examines a coalition of women's social movement organizations to
both explain the shift toward use of human rights by US-based organizations and
to explain and effects of the shift on participants' human rights consciousness
and therefore interpretation of their status and agency within the U.S. rights
system. The rejection of human rights by the US state may explain why
marginalized women of color are using the concept to build a domestic social
movement for reproductive justice that challenges narrower reproductive rights
analysis. The lack of human rights law in the US should result in fewer
opportunities to mobilize human rights discourse, which would result in weakened
belief in the utility of human rights. Yet, since its founding in 1997, the
coalition has grown from 16 to over 80 organizations, with hundreds of
additional individual members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on interviews,
observation, archival analysis and a survey, this research seeks to understand
why the coalition chose to integrate human rights when US social movements
generally do not engage with this discourse and the state generally rejects it.
This project also aims to understand how the coalition's integration of human
rights discourse impacts individual members'sense of self and other people as
rights bearers. This interdisciplinary project engages with scholarship on human
rights, legal consciousness, social movement framing and collective identity,
and intersections of marginalized identities to explain the coalition's
anomalous choice and success. This coalition's path shows that current
literature fails to address these new possibilities for raising consciousness
and mobilizing around human rights. This study will increase socio-legal
understanding of shifts in understanding of rights due to increased global
dialogue at both the institutional and individual level. Further, the findings
will illuminate the "vernacularization" of human rights discourse, adding to the
scholarship in multiple disciplines including law, sociology, political science,
and gender studies, ultimately increasing the interdisciplinary dialogue
necessary to understand how law and legal discourse permeates social life and
social movements.