* 0850564
* California State University Undergraduate Research Experiences (CSUURE) in Astronomy
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Eric Sandquist, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 06/30/2013
* USD 278,432.00

Dr. Eric Sandquist (San Diego State University, SDSU) and collaborators will
continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at San Diego State
University. Mentors for the program will be drawn from SDSU, other California
State University (CSU) campuses, and the University of Kansas. The scientific
focus of the program is observational astronomy, specifically photometry
(brightness measurements) of stars and galaxies. The proposed student projects
fall within several important areas at the foundations of astronomy: supernovae
and the distance scale, stellar corpses, eclipsing binary stars, open and
globular star clusters, extrasolar planets, and dwarf galaxies. Large blocks of
observing time are available to the program on Mount Laguna telescopes.

The SDSU REU program will provide research experiences for students without
access to active astronomy faculty, facilitate student training and research for
research faculty at other campuses, and encourage research at campuses that do
not grant Ph.D. degrees (none of the physics or astronomy departments in this
program grant doctoral degrees) and that serve disproportionately large
populations of students from ethnic groups that are underrepresented in the
physical sciences (40% at SDSU and 55% in the CSU system as a whole). Planned
recruitment from community colleges under this renewed program will reach
thousands of additional students with little access to research opportunities.

This site is funded by the NSF Division of Astronomical Sciences.