* 0850818
* NSF Travel Grant Support for IEEE Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC) 2009
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Carl Chang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 09/30/2009
* USD 14,400.00

The IEEE COMPSAC2009 will be held in Seattle, Washington from July 20 to July
24, 2009. &lt;br/&gt;This preeminent technical conference is the primary venue
for presenting new research &lt;br/&gt;results in the computer systems and
software: theory and applications along with a number&lt;br/&gt;of workshops
with topics such as Security, Trust, Privacy for software; Barriers towards
&lt;br/&gt;Internet-Driven Information Services, Software Cybernetics, Open
Complex &lt;br/&gt;System - Metasynthesis of Computing Paradigms, and is widely
attended by researchers and&lt;br/&gt;practitioners in the field. Attending
conferences such as COMPSAC is of paramount&lt;br/&gt;importance for the
research and career development of graduate students.
Participants&lt;br/&gt;have the opportunity to present their work, attend panel
and keynote talk sessions, and&lt;br/&gt;interact with many others performing
leading-edge research in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
funding to support approximately 12 graduate students in the United
&lt;br/&gt;States to attend this premiere conference. The travel awards will
target graduate students,&lt;br/&gt;in particular, women and under-represented
minority students, since attending conferences&lt;br/&gt;is an important part of
their educational experience, and they often have limited travel
&lt;br/&gt;funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;