* 0850809
* Effects of Marine Preserves and Nonindigenous Species on Rocky Subtidal Communities: Indirect Interactions, Disturbance and Community Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Kenneth Sebens, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2013
* USD 718,448.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subtidal communities in temperate
geographic zones of the world are faced with changes caused by fishing, climate
change, habitat alteration and invasive species, yet we know fairly little about
their community dynamics. The loss of large predators (species removals), and
the introduction of nonindigenous species (species additions), are likely to
have immediate and large consequences for the structure, resilience and function
of subtidal communities. Marine preserves have recently been established in many
coastal locations, including the San Juan Archipelago of Washington State. While
they are demonstrated to have positive effects on certain fish populations,
effects on the rest of the subtidal community are generally not known. The
benefit of marine preserves to fisheries remains to be determined on a case-by-
case basis. Regardless of the benefit to fisheries, they can serve effectively
as conservation zones, similar to terrestrial parks, where original species
assemblages can recover in the absence of human extraction. They also provide
excellent venues to study the effects of large predators in relatively intact
communities, in comparison to nearby non-preserve
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With goals such as maintaining or increasing
biodiversity, it is important to understand how the protection of large
predators influences small prey and non-prey species. Determining the ecological
effects of fish extraction is of prime interest in the growing body of marine
protected area science. Higher level predators can decrease the abundance of
their prey, but can also indirectly increase the abundance of organisms two
trophic levels beneath them through a trophic cascade. Additionally, non-trophic
interactions may cause species abundances to change in unpredicted ways after
the recovery of large predators. The investigators in this project will explore
the interaction of invasive ascidian species in the Puget Sound region,
including sites where they have invaded successfully and sites where they have
not. Much of this research will be conducted in (and out of) a regional network
of MPAs in San Juan Co., WA, with a focus on the rocky subtidal community on
these shores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this research applies to
any nearshore temperate ecosystem with rocky substrate; thus it has broad
ecological relevance, particularly with regard to management of coastal
ecosystems. Coastal communities are changing due to extraction, invasive
species, and climate change, yet we know little about these effects in the
shallow rocky subtidal zone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FHL Research
Apprenticeship Program is a successful vehicle to provide intensive research
experiences to undergraduates, and it motivates many to pursue graduate and
professional training. There will also be an opportunity for summer FHL Blinks
Fellows (undergraduate researchers of diverse background) and REU students to
work on this project. FHL research, including that done by students, also
supports citizen-driven conservation priorities. A primary connection is through
the San Juan County Marine Resources Committee (MRC). This research will also
provide training for several graduate and undergraduate students in current
techniques in subtidal ecological research and advanced SCUBA based research and
operations. They will also be encouraged to take part in FHL K-12 Outreach
activities, and the new GK-12 Program at FHL (and Seattle).