* 0850419
* Larval Response to Turbulence During Dispersal and Settlement
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Karl Helfrich, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2015
* USD 925,421.00

The planktonic larval stage of benthic marine invertebrates provides a mechanism
for exchange of individuals between remote populations. Dispersal is affected by
swimming behaviors, particularly those that alter the larva's vertical position
in the water. Larvae of some species change their vertical positions in response
to turbulence by ceasing to swim and sinking downward (diving). By doing so,
they can alter their horizontal transport in currents and increase their supply
to the seafloor. The main objectives of this study are to investigate behavioral
responses of oyster (Crassostrea virginica) larvae to turbulence in the water
column and at the seafloor, and to determine how these behaviors affect
settlement. The investigators hypothesize that diving behavior enhances
settlement into suitable habitat, even where mean bed shear stress is high. They
expect that once larvae approach the bottom, they can take advantage of temporal
and spatial refuges (such as turbulent lulls in the lee of roughness elements)
to settle in otherwise harsh conditions. Investigating larval responses to
turbulence is a challenge because it requires simultaneous measurement of time-
variant flows and larval behaviors. The investigators will modify a conventional
particle image velocimetry (PIV) approach so it can be used to track larval
motions and fluid velocities simultaneously. PIV provides information on flow
kinematics (e.g., rotation and strain rate) in the immediate vicinity of a
larva, as well as bulk dissipation rates and measures of Taylor and integral
length scales that likely influence larval acceleration. When these measurements
are coupled with a larval trajectory, they provide a history of the fluid
environment a larva experiences, and can be used to determine what
characteristic of turbulence triggers the diving behavior. They also make it
possible to calculate the bottom shear stress an individual larva experiences
when it encounters the bottom and attempts to settle. The investigators will
examine turbulence effects on larval behaviors in the water column using a grid-
stirred tank. They will use a racetrack flume to test the hypothesis that larval
settlement success depends on the frequency of lulls of sufficient duration for
larval attachment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Laboratory
experiments will provide a mechanistic understanding of larval behavior that can
be used in general theoretical models exploring how behavior influences
dispersal and population connectivity. The quantified swimming responses of
oysters are critical input for coupled bio-physical models of dispersal in the
field. An understanding of larval behavior contributes to our ability to predict
the effects of natural and anthropogenic perturbations (some of which are linked
to global climate change) on benthic communities in coastal ecosystems where
turbulence and habitat suitability vary spatially. This information is critical
for informed decision making on shellfish management and design of marine
reserves. The technique developed for simultaneous PIV and larval tracking will
open new questions in larval ecology and be broadly&lt;br/&gt;applicable to
studies of plankton interactions with turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. Various training and outreach activities that incorporate aspects of
this research will be conducted. The investigators will develop an active
learning module for the MIT/WHOI Biological Oceanography course based on
concepts of organismal responses to flow, and will develop a low-tech version to
contribute to the SERC at Carlton College (a web resource for Geoscience
faculty). They will provide the graduate student and a series of summer
undergraduate research fellows with mentoring and an experience with
interdisciplinary research. Co-PI Helfrich will use support to help maintain the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at WHOI, which is recognized as one of the
finest facilities of its type and has a tradition of assisting students and
scientists in a variety of experiments in fluid dynamics in physical
oceanography, geology, and bio-physical interactions.