* 0850648
* REU Site:  Summer Research Experience for Undergraduates
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Doug Henry, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2012
* USD 294,545.00

This project the University of North Texas (UNT) Department of Anthropology is a
continuation of funding for an existing program providing quality research
experience for undergraduates (REU). The current project will represent an
opportunity not only to continue the existing program through 2012, but to
utilize ongoing program evaluations and outcome monitoring to more finely hone
the program as developed, assess its outcomes over a longer term, and
disseminate the results. Objectives. 1) To expose under-represented minority and
first-generation undergraduate students to research methods in cultural
anthropology; 2) To prepare students for competitive application to McNair
Scholars Programs or similar mentoring programs on their home campuses; 3) To
foster undergraduate interest in research and to increase their ability to
pursue grant opportunities and graduate study, all with the aim of developing
their academic career goals; 4) To apply insights gained from previous years of
systematic program evaluation to continue refining the program; 5) To use
systematic methods to evaluate the program?s long-term effectiveness in terms of
both its impact on undergraduate research activity and its contribution to
quality social science research; 6) To publish the results of the analyses
described in Objective 5. Activities and Students to be Recruited. Since 2000,
UNT has been funded by NSF to provide intensive, quality research mentoring to
minority and/or first-generation (for whom neither parent went to college)
undergraduates, particularly those coming from junior and community colleges.
This has been accomplished through intensive, 10 week programs each summer, with
the first five weeks instructing fundamental cultural anthropology research
techniques, and the second five weeks offering individualized research
experiences. In the current proposal, as in previous years, nine minority or
first-generation students will be selected each year for training in four major
areas of cultural anthropology research: historical and testimonial case
studies, participant observation, conducting focus group studies, qualitative
data analysis on text-interview material, and quantitative analysis of census
and survey data. Students will also be taught the techniques and critical
thinking skills necessary for conducting resource material location, library
research, and the use of the Internet for research purposes. Throughout the
10-weeks, students are exposed to such topics as writing research results,
reading comprehension, stages of research, validity and reliability, critical
thinking, note-taking during research, getting published, and presenting at
conferences. Students also participate in the UNT McNair Scholars? Friday
Seminar, in order to stimulate student interaction with the McNair Scholars
Program. Students are, and will continue to be followed, to assess the impact of
the REU on their college and postcollege research careers.

Intellectual merit: Currently, nine years of funding have allowed the beginning
of analysis of the longer-term impact of the program, both in terms of its
continuing effect on REU graduates, and the significant contributions its
graduates are able to make to research in the social sciences. The information
to be gathered, analyzed, and disseminated between 2009-2012 should be rich in
both the useful evaluation and practical application of intensive mentoring
programs, and the longer-term influence of such programs on the academic and
career trajectories of first-generation and under-represented undergraduates. An
extension of funding would provide a valuable opportunity to track and monitor
programmatic outcomes over time.

Broader impacts. Results of the program to date are demonstrable and
encouraging. In follow-up surveys with our REU graduates, 75% of those from the
first funding cycle have gone on to graduate school; 58 % of graduates from the
second funding cycle have gone on to graduate school, and 40% of participants
from the third funding cycle have so far gone on to graduate school (100% of the
2008 participants indicate an intent, but have not graduated). The existing UNT
REU program funded by NSF thus provides a baseline of longitudinal evaluative
data to be built upon in the current application. In qualitative interviews,
they voice the broader impact of the program on their intellectual and
professional development, their confidence, and their appetite for researching
the world.