* 0850414
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Boundedly optimal sampling for decisions under uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Nancy Kanwisher, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 03/31/2010
* USD 23,400.00

To model an individual's choices under uncertainty, theorists typically assume
the choices made maximize the individual's utility. While frequently a good
description of observed behavior, there are instances where people instead
choose alternatives in proportion to their associated probabilities of reward.
This probability matching behavior is sub-optimal. Probability matching behavior
and optimal behavior would both result depending on the time available to make
decisions (where more time produces more optimal decisions) if individuals base
their choices on a sampling algorithm. In this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement
grant, the PI will test whether such an algorithm is responsible for observed
choices and, furthermore, whether people are optimally suboptimal (i.e., optimal
in their decision regarding when to be more, or less,
optimal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these hypotheses, experimental subjects
will be assessed in terms of how flexible they are at making tradeoffs between
speed and accuracy in motor decisions under uncertainty and how generic decision
processes are across decision domains. Subjects are then tested for whether
their decisions under cognitive stress deteriorate to probability-matching, as
predicted by the proposed algorithm. Finally, subjects will be tested using fMRI
to determine whether one brain structure represents expected utility arising
from different sources of uncertainty. This research holds promise for
reconciling models of humans as ideal agents with established failures and
limitations of human decision-making.