* 0850242
* Supporting Scholars in Science and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Joanne Kehlbeck, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

The integration of engineering and the liberal arts offers unique opportunities
for students at the college. To encourage and foster academically-talented
students in the intersections of disciplines, the project is initiating a
scholarship program in Converging Technologies (CT). CT Scholars include
students selected from all science and engineering disciplines, with scholarship
support for two cohorts of ten students over four years. There are a number of
opportunities in CT with courses, programs and research opportunities in
intersectional fields including: bioengineering, digital art, entrepreneurship,
environmental science and engineering, nanotechnology, neuroscience, energy
studies, and science and technology policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project goals are to: 1) improve recruitment and retention of
academically-talented students in STEM fields; 2) increase the number of women
in engineering, physics, and computer science, and underrepresented groups in
all disciplines; 3) provide students with opportunities to further enhance their
education through summer research, internships, study aboard, and leadership
training; 4) enable these students to make connections between their major and
other disciplines through pursuit of a dual major, minor or interdisciplinary
major. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The impact of these efforts should
result in increased numbers of students with the education and skills necessary
to enter the workforce or professional and graduate programs in emerging
multidisciplinary fields. CT Scholars are being trained in their respective
disciplines, but provided opportunities to participate in multi-disciplinary
projects. These students are being mentored for leadership roles and have the
interdisciplinary team experience needed in today's science and engineering
workplace &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the project has several
objectives to reflect the academic promise of the CT Scholars, including: 1)
enrollment in a scholar's section of the first-year preceptorial; 2) a CT
Scholars Research Seminar; 3) workshops for "Tomorrow's Leaders;" 4) funding for
earlier involvement in research laboratories; and 5) educational outreach
activities.