* 0850672
* Dissertation Research: The Role of Adolescent Initiation Rituals in Shaping Youth Behavior In Rural Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2010
* Meghan Halley, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2010
* USD 14,990.00

Graduate student Meghan C. Halley, with the guidance of Dr. Jill E. Korbin, will
undertake ethnographic and comparative research examining the role of adolescent
initiation rituals in shaping adolescent behavior in rural Mtwara, Tanzania. The
rural district of Mtwara is one of only a few regions in Tanzania in which
adolescent initiation rituals are still widely practiced. Referred to as unyago
for girls and jando for boys, these rituals provide young people with explicit
instruction on gender roles and family life, including reproduction. Despite the
long history of these rituals, recent changes both in the practices themselves
and in the social, political, and economic contexts in which they occur have
fueled controversy over the role of these practices in shaping youth behavior.

Through person-centered ethnography of youths' experiences of the initiation
process, the researcher will explore how individuals understand, interpret, and
utilize the concepts, values, and meanings discussed in unyago and jando. She
will also utilize a systematic, comparative framework to examine the interaction
between these rituals and other underlying biopsychological, environmental,
economic, and cultural factors that may influence youths' reproductive health
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors.

This research is important for its potential to improve social science theory
regarding the salient factors shaping enculturation during adolescence in
general, as well as the shifting role of adolescent initiation practices within
this process. As traditional practices such as unyago and jando meet with
emerging concerns over adolescent reproductive health, in-depth, systematic
examination of the role of such practices in shaping youth behavior is necessary
to address these concerns.