* 0850904
* Effects of ocean acidification on the formation and sinking of particle aggregates
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Cindy Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 496,689.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0850904&lt;br/&gt;The
ocean, which provides the largest global sink for anthropogenic CO2, has
experienced large-scale changes in the surface ocean chemical equilibrium and
elemental cycling due to decreases in seawater pH. CO2 related changes in the
carbonate chemistry of the ocean affect biological processes including
photosynthesis and calcification. Thus, calcifying phytoplankton species are
likely to be particularly sensitive to changes in oceanic CO2 concentrations.
These biogenic minerals in turn affect the formation rate and properties of
aggregates and delay the microbial degradation of organic matter, thereby
playing a significant role for organic matter cycling and export. Researchers
from the State University of New York in Stony Brook are investigating the
processes of marine particle aggregation and their sensitivity to ocean
acidification. Through laboratory testing of cultured phytoplankton, the
scientists aim to understand the mechanisms and consider the properties of
aggregation that might most result in alterations of sedimentation and chemical
export in the future ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will
provide important new insights on how a decrease in seawater pH could affect the
biological pump of the ocean. This project is a collaborative effort between
German and U.S. scientists and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;