* 0850144
* Cardinal Science Scholars: Enhancing Student Opportunities and Retention in Biochemistry, Chemistry, and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Joan Esson, Otterbein College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2014
* USD 482,993.00

The objective of "Cardinal Science Scholars: Enhancing Student Opportunities and
Retention in Biochemistry, Chemistry, and Physics" is to provide a significant
scholarship and exceptional academic and co-curricular experiences to at least
30 students who are planning on majoring in chemistry, biochemistry, or physics.
Faculty in these disciplines together with the Office of Admissions are
recruiting academically talented students with financial need from Ohio schools
that have a high percentage of minorities, women, and/or an emphasis on STEM
education. Once on campus, the Cardinal Science Scholars are forming an active
learning community through activities including a weeklong summer immersion
experience, a year-long seminar program focusing on career options, programs at
the Center for Career Planning, residence in a living/learning house, and
mentoring triads consisting of a mentor/scholar, upper level student, and
alumnae. The merit of this project lies in the unique programming to increase
career preparation for and retention of the scholars, as well as the mentoring
triads. The broader impact includes not only providing scholarships to select
students, but also building a more supportive community for all students within
these departments. Additionally, recruiting efforts at the high schools are
encouraging all students to pursue STEM fields, regardless of which college or
university they will be attending.