* 0850557
* CILogon: Secure Access to National-Scale CyberInfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Randal Butler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2011
* USD 399,837.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." The emergence of Cyberinfrastructure (CI) that supports the
global research community by linking together researchers, computational
resources,instruments, and data, has had a significant impact on the science and
engineering research communities. At the heart of CI is trust, between
collaborators, organizations, providers, users, applications and services.
Security services, specifically authentication and authorization, are
foundational services that facilitate &lt;br/&gt;trust between those entities.
Without the establishment and maintenance of trust, collaborative relationships
served by CI are jeopardized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed
CILogon project are to maintain and provide critical enhancements for CI
security technologies developed at the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA) and to foster science and engineering by helping additional
communities build secure CI on these services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The security services of the CILogon
project address critical security needs of scientific and engineering
researchers, as evidenced by their wide use. The project team has a proven track
record of providing quality software services to a variety of science
communities, along with strategic leadership in the area of security. Team
members are active &lt;br/&gt;participants in the NSF TeraGrid and Open Science
Grid projects and are actively engaged with other NSF grid projects including
LTER, OOI, NVO, LIGO, and WATERS. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The CILogon
project proposes to enhance the NSF CI for research and education by providing
robust, well-supported software services that facilitate secure access to CI.
These services are used in communities such as magnetic fusion (NFC), climate
research (ESG), high-energy physics (WLCG), and computational chemistry
(GridChem), as well as in CI provided by TeraGrid, EGEE, Open Science Grid,
NERSC and NCSA. The project has a strong &lt;br/&gt;collaboration with Internet2
regarding the integration of Shibboleth with grid security (via GridShib) to
bridge security of higher education campuses to computational grids, broadening
the impact of grid infrastructure to the educational community. &lt;br/&gt;