* 0850132
* RISE:  Research, Internships, Scholarships and Engagement for STEM scholars at Concordia College
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Greg Hoch, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 04/30/2015
* USD 579,550.00

The RISE (Research, Internships, Scholarship and Engagement) program encourages
students to engage in STEM majors by providing scholarships to academically
talented but financially disadvantaged students. The RISE program enhances
retention of incoming STEM majors and broadens the student body through
recruitment of new Americans and students of color. The RISE program supports
two cohorts of twelve students majoring in biology, chemistry, computer science,
mathematics, or physics. Recipients receive an annual scholarship of $6000 for
all four years of their studies. RISE scholars participate in a first-year
experience where they co-enroll in a critical thinking inquiry seminar and a
written communication course. At the end of their college career they enroll in
a senior capstone course. Throughout their studies, students have opportunities
to participate in i) academic success workshops, ii) independent research
projects, STEM conferences, and internships in local technology-based companies,
iii) workshops on career and graduate school placement, iv) meetings with
invited campus speakers and v) a specially designated senior capstone course.
Taken together, these activities increase both retention in STEM disciplines and
placement in STEM careers and graduate schools. Upon graduation RISE scholars
undertake careers in STEM fields where they are engaged in science and
technology in responsible and meaningful ways.