* 0850256
* Software and Server for Taxonomic Binning of Metagenomic Sequences
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Andrey Tovchigrechko, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 809,384.00

The J. Craig Venter Institute is awarded a grant to develop MGTAXA, a freely
available software and a Web server for taxonomic classification of metagenomic
sequences with machine learning techniques. This project will build three major
components: 1) a toolbox for reliable assignment of species composition to large
collections of unassembled environmental sequencing data, with automated and
regular updates of databases and models; 2) a public Web server with a high-
performance computational back-end that will let a wide community of biologists
build classification models specific to their metagenomic samples; 3) an online
instructional environment where students and educators will interactively
combine several machine learning algorithms into graphically represented
pipelines, apply them to sequences from annotated genomes and contribute to the
re-usable repository of exercises and small research projects.&lt;br/&gt;The
tools developed by this project will help both individual biologists and
experienced bioinformatics teams analyze their metagenomic data for the
discovery of novel genes, proteins, and metabolic pathways in microorganisms
that cannot be grown in the laboratory conditions. This basic scientific
research of our living environment will ultimately benefit the public by
providing a necessary foundation for applied areas of study such as alternative
energy sources and new medicines. The first question that needs to be answered
by any metagenomic study is what species or higher taxonomic units are present
in the sample, and to bin individual sequences to these units. The novel
methodology of this project will require neither an existing homology to known
sequences nor a preliminary assembly of individual fragments into longer
segments. It also frees its users from a complexity of data management and
installation that is beyond the abilities of smaller research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;The free interactive online learning interface will provide
both a hands-on experience and a curriculum development tool for students and
teachers from colleges and high-schools, regardless of their geographical
location. Source code of the tools developed by this project will be available
at the open source development site SourceForge
(http://sourceforge.net/projects/mgtaxa/). Web services will be available
through a variety of venues: the JCVI web site (http://www.jcvi.org/) and the
TeraGrid (http://www.teragrid.org). Certain tools will be submitted for
inclusion into existing bioinformatics services Galaxy (http://galaxy.psu.edu)
and CAMERA (http://camera.calit2.net).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;