* 0850465
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Quantitative Science REU at UNCG
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Jan Rychtar, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2013
* USD 182,793.00

We are living in an increasingly inter-connected world that requires the
successful employment of quantitative skills in real-world applications. The
sciences encompass a broad spectrum of academic fields, with most sub-
disciplines having mathematical and statistical analysis as an integral
component of their process. Students majoring in mathematics are well served to
broaden their perspective by engaging in interdisciplinary studies. And,
conversely, students majoring in the sciences should be encouraged to obtain a
strong training in mathematics. Because the demand for quantitatively skilled
scientists with interdisciplinary training will increase in upcoming years, UNCG
developed an interdisciplinary quantitative REU site. The objectives of our REU
are to 1) provide interdisciplinary undergraduate research experiences (URE) for
students and 2) to advance the research programs of our faculty mentors. Each
year, eight (8) students will investigate problems at the intersection of
mathematics and the sciences. The interaction of diverse faculty members and
students will lead to innovative mathematical solutions for scientific
investigations and a rigorous sense of realism in the mathematical models. We
are committed to recruiting and training a diverse group of participants,
improving their critical thinking, quantitative reasoning, and communication
skills. We expect that participants in our REU program will present their work
at local, regional, and national STEM meetings and anticipate our research will
lead to faculty and undergraduate student co-authored peer-reviewed manuscripts.

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program.