* 0850105
* Collaborative Research:  PHANTOME:  Phage ANnotation TOols and MEthods
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Matthew Sullivan, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Dickerson
* 03/31/2013
* USD 292,935.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: PHANTOME: PHage ANnotation
TOols&lt;br/&gt;and MEthods&lt;br/&gt;Institution: San Diego State University
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Date: 03/09/09&lt;br/&gt;Viruses are the most
abundant biological entities on the planet. Since the most&lt;br/&gt;abundant
living organisms on Earth are bacteria, the majority of these viruses
are&lt;br/&gt;phages, the viruses which infect bacteria. Through their diverse
lifestyles and gene&lt;br/&gt;products, phages play important roles in
horizontal gene exchange, in structuring&lt;br/&gt;natural microbial
communities, and in global biogeochemical cycles. Phages carry&lt;br/&gt;genes
for some of the deadliest toxins known and can also carry genes which
confer&lt;br/&gt;adaptive advantages to the hosts they infect. Furthermore,
phage genes and the&lt;br/&gt;proteins they encode are the outcome of evolution
over eons, the products of which we&lt;br/&gt;would be able to exploit if only
we could decode the information in the phage DNA&lt;br/&gt;sequences. The number
of available phage genome sequences is increasing rapidly; on&lt;br/&gt;the
other hand, they represent the largest global reservoir of uncharacterized
genetic&lt;br/&gt;material. Bioinformatic tools necessary for interpreting this
data has lagged behind the&lt;br/&gt;growth in genome sequences. Grants to
develop a platform and toolbox of&lt;br/&gt;computational tools for phage genome
analysis have been awarded to support&lt;br/&gt;collaborative research in the
laboratories of Drs. Robert Edwards, Department of&lt;br/&gt;Computer Sciences,
San Diego State University, Mya Breitbart, College of Marine&lt;br/&gt;Sciences,
University of South Florida, Jeffrey Elhai, Biology Department,
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;Commonwealth University and Matthew Sullivan, Department of
Ecology and&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona. Dr. Elhai is
an Associate Professor, the&lt;br/&gt;other three investigators are Assistant
Professors. This collaborative project is creating&lt;br/&gt;new computational
tools to establish a consistent nomenclature for phage genomes,
to&lt;br/&gt;annotate phage sequences, both from completely sequenced phage
genomes and from&lt;br/&gt;environmental phage metagenome sequences. Most
importantly, this project will&lt;br/&gt;engage a wide spectrum of researchers,
regardless of their computational background,&lt;br/&gt;to access the wealth of
information contained in phage genomes through familiar&lt;br/&gt;graphical
interfaces. These collaborators have developed an extensive and far-
reaching&lt;br/&gt;education plan that targets high school students,
undergraduate students and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. The students trained in
the use of the tools will rotate into trainer roles via user&lt;br/&gt;forums
and workshops. The postdocs will be working across all the labs and
thereby&lt;br/&gt;gain an unparalleled panoramic view of phage
biology.&lt;br/&gt;NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:0850356 PI Name:Edwards, Robert&lt;br/&gt;Printed
from eJacket: 03/10/09 Page 1 of 1