* 0850576
* The Transformation of the New York Stock Exchange before the SEC:  Microstructure and Performance, 1880-1929
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Caroline Fohlin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 372,505.00

The proposed project explores the wide-ranging and essentially unregulated
transformation of the New York Stock Exchange into one of the world's premier
securities markets from the 1880s through the 1920s, a period of major economic
changes, marked by a protracted battle against the arch rival Consolidated
Exchange and punctuated by several sharp financial crises. The proposed study
investigates several hypotheses in three areas: 1. long-term patterns of
microstructure and performance; 2. response to crises and other shocks; and 3.
competitive pressures and anti-competitive behavior. The research studies these
phenomena, at both the aggregate and security levels, using several measures of
market liquidity, transactions costs (and their information and order-processing
components), market power, and inter-market price differentials. Tangible
outputs include several published articles as well as the first comprehensive
database of daily information for all stocks traded on the NYSE and the
Consolidated during the period.

(1) Intellectual merit of the proposed activity The proposed work contributes to
a relatively new line of research on the 19th and early 20th century development
of securities markets as they took on major roles in financing corporate equity
during an era of comparatively rudimentary communications technology, narrow
markets, thin trading, and before investor protection laws aimed at ensuring
information transparency and limiting insider trading. Over the past several
years, the PI has made significant strides in laying out the research agenda,
formulating testable hypotheses, identifying sources, and gathering large
quantities of data. This groundwork, in addition to the PI's prior experience in
closely related fields and collaboration with an expert in microstructure,
ensures quick and efficient use of funds. The PI and co-author have produced
promising results using the first wave of data. The proposed activity expands
substantially on this work, and requires much more data than the PI has so far
assembled, to accurately identify trends and fluctuations in continuous time,
pinpoint effects of specific institutional changes, study several events taking
place in years not yet in the database (e.g. financial crises), and evaluate
effects of competition with the Consolidated. The proposed data collection is
essential to the research plan and also allows comparative analysis with other
apparently very different systems (such as Germany) in order to better
understand political, legal, and economic influences on stock exchange
organization and the impact of microstructure on performance. Ultimately, the
study contributes to an understanding of the links between financial systems and
economic growth. It also advances knowledge across fields of economics,
sociology, political science, history, and legal studies. (2) Broader impacts
resulting from the proposed activity. The proposed research benefits society by
helping devise policies that promote well-functioning, efficient securities
markets that finance industry, benefit investors, and spur growth. The PI will
disseminate data and results via publications, a website, public presentations,
and collaborations with other researchers. The project enhances teaching and
training by providing ideas for new courses, research experience for students,
and data for students to use in research. The PI, who also oversees the JHU
economics honors thesis program, has created a course to introduce students to
academic research. The course instills appreciation of scholarly research for
the public good and often leads to RA-ships, independent study, and theses under
the PI's guidance. As the only woman professorial faculty member in the JHU
Economics department until very recently (and previously in the Caltech
economics faculty), the PI has become a particularly visible role model. She has
a long-standing record of employing, advising, and mentoring women and minority
students, thus having additional impact toward broader societal goals.