* 0850639
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Control of Tropical Cyclone Activity
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Kerry Emanuel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2013
* USD 399,771.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Recent research has established that much and perhaps most of the interannual to
interdecadal variation of tropical cyclone activity integrated over ocean basins
is controlled by the large-scale atmospheric and oceanic environment in which
the storms develop. Statistical and model-based hindcasts of Atlantic tropical
cyclone activity capture as much as 65% of the interannual variance of tropical
cyclone frequency, despite taking little or no account of potential initiating
disturbances, such as African easterly waves. These same techniques, however,
produce greatly divergent results when applied to global warming scenarios. This
highlights the need for a better physical understanding of the link between
tropical cyclones and climate. This project will seek such an understanding
using several different, but complementary, approaches. The first is an
investigation, using a cloud-scale model, of the formation, or failure to form,
of tropical cyclones from seed cyclonic disturbances in large-scale environments
of radiative-convective equilibrium with shear. Previous results with this
method will be extended to a wider range of wind profiles that include speed and
directional shear, allowing for a careful study of cyclogenesis (or failure) in
realistic environments that still can be systematically adjusted and compared. A
second approach builds on the success of the Genesis Potential Index (GPI),
which, when applied to historical data, has been shown to explain much of the
interannual variance and long-term trend in tropical cyclone activity. Here it
will be used to understand the physical factors responsible for predicted
variations in the GPI in climate models simulating the response to global
warming. The index will be improved using results from the cloud-resolving model
simulations. Finally, one or two cases of genesis in the cloud-resolving model
will be analyzed in some depth, in an attempt to test the hypothesis that
tropical cyclones can develop only in mesoscale patches that are nearly
saturated through most of the troposphere.

Broader impacts are in advancing understanding of the relationships between
tropical climate and tropical cyclone activity. This could lead to better and
more useful assessments of how tropical cyclone activity may or may not change
with a changing climate. This work may also yield a more fundamental
understanding of the process of tropical cyclone formation, ultimately leading
to better short-term forecasts of the formation of tropical depressions and
storms. The project will support the training of a young scientist or post-doc
and a graduate student and will contribute to further development of a flexible
idealized hurricane modeling system based on the widely-used Weather Research
and Forecasting (WRF) model.