* 0850875
* Collapse of the Submarine South Flank of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii: Constraints from GPS-Acoustic Data
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2011
* C. David Chadwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Richard L. Carlson
* 09/30/2011
* USD 92,055.00

Collapse of the flanks of ocean island volcanoes poses several significant
hazards, including earthquakes and tsunamis. The south flank of Kilauea is a
currently active volcanic collapse feature. There is evidence that Kilauea's
south flank is rapidly moving seaward, with attendant risk of large earthquakes
and/or tsunami. In addition to the obvious need to understand and monitor this
potential hazard, Kilauea is a natural laboratory for studying the mechanics of
the collapse process. The emerging model of the process at Kilauea is
constrained by onshore GPS (Global Positioning System) measurements, offshore
seismic profiles and vertical deformation of the seafloor measured by GPS-
Acoustic methods. However, horizontal motions are not well constrained. This
project will provide additional constraints by using new methods to estimate
horizontal motions using GPS-Acoustic data collected in previous years. New
processing approaches are expected yield horizontal resolutions of 0.7 to 2.2
cm/yr. Well resolved horizontal displacements will be used to test and refine
models of the collapse process. In terms of broader impacts this work has
obvious implications and application to the significant risks that arise from
the instability of this flank of Kilauea and similar sites elsewhere. Improving
GPS-Acoustic methods will also contribute the broader impacts of this work, as
will training a young scientist.