* 0850151
* S-STEM: Promoting and Supporting Community College Transfer Students in Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Steven Anderson, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 01/31/2015
* USD 586,500.00

The Community College Transfer Scholarship (CCTS) Program is aiming to
financially and academically support the transfer and retention of community
college students within the School of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of Northern Colorado. Fifty-one scholarships are being awarded over
five years. The CCTS program is improving the recruitment of low-income,
underrrepresented community college transfer students. Recruitment efforts
include increased faculty participation, new informative literature, and a
website dedicated to community college transfers. A learning community of
chemistry major transfer students is also being established and features
improved academic advising, career advising, and financial aid services. In
addition, a chemistry curriculum dedicated to scholarship recipients is being
developed along with Brown-Bag Lunch discussions, science cafes, and activities
integrating academic and social learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is based on and is building a greater understanding of
factors contributing to retention of community college transfer students. Our
understanding of the impact of learning communities on retention of transfer
students, particularly in the physical sciences, is being
improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCTS program is creating broader
opportunities for regional low-income students to succeed in chemistry. This
project is also improving partnerships among the School of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, university student support services, community colleges, and
northern Colorado chemical industries. By increasing the numbers of well-
prepared chemists, this project is enhancing and sustaining Colorado's growing
science/technology research and industrial base.