* 0850467
* Atmospheric Deposition Impacts on Marine Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2015
* USD 514,568.00

Chemical components delivered to the surface ocean through atmospheric
deposition influence ocean productivity and ecosystem structure thus are tightly
related to the global carbon cycle and climate. Accordingly, the major aim of
this project is to quantitatively estimate the variable impact of aerosols on
marine phytoplankton and to determine the specific effects on various taxa. Such
data could in the future be used to better understand the global impact of
aerosols on the oceanic ecosystem. To accomplish this goal the PI will monitor
aerosol dry deposition fluxes, determine aerosol sources, obtain the chemical
composition and solubility of aerosols, and evaluate the contribution of
aerosols to nutrient and trace metal budgets of seawater at two
oceanographically different sites (Bermuda and Monterey Bay) representing open
ocean and coastal setting. The effects of the different aerosol "types" (defined
by source and chemical characteristics) on specific phytoplankton taxa will also
be evaluated using pure culture and natural samples bioassays. This project is
particularly important in light of the role atmospheric deposition can resume in
oligotrophic and coastal settings and the predicted future global conditions of
increased aridity and urbanization and associated changes in dust fluxes and
composition. Broader Impacts In addition to achieving research aims and graduate
student education, this project will provide several distinct and complementary
opportunities to inform and train individuals across the educational spectrum.
The educational component of this project includes substantial contribution to
undergraduate education with emphasis on hands-on inquiry-based experience
through classes and direct involvement and participation in the project. To
disseminate the role of aerosols in our environment to the general public and
particularly to middle school and high school students over the next 3 years,
the PI will design, develop, implement, and evaluate a hands-on inquiry-based
educational "Aerosol Monitoring Program". This interdisciplinary course material
and methodology will be compiled and disseminated broadly, so it could be
applied in other environmental and science education programs. In addition, the
PI will teach the COSEE (LHL) developed Communicating Ocean Science course and
is participating as a featured scientist in the NSF funded "Kids' Science
Challenge" a nationwide program to promote science inquiry
(http://www.pulseplanet.com/planetkids/). The PI will expose high school and
underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students to the process of
scientific inquiry through existing outreach activities at the University of
California Santa Cruz (AGEP, SURF, UC LEADS, STEPS). All efforts will be made to
include women and underrepresented groups in the project.