* 0850693
* iREU in Organic Chemistry in Bangkok, Thailand
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Poonsakdi Ploypradith, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2013
* USD 298,500.00

This international ten-week ThaiREU summer program is designed to give eight
students recruited from across the United States an intensive, hands-on research
experience in organic chemistry in Bangkok, Thailand: in laboratories at the
Chulabhorn Research Institute, Chulalongkorn University and at Mahidol
University. Each American undergraduate will be paired with a Thai graduate
student. The American ThaiREU students will be housed together at the Chulabhorn
Research Institute, and will receive an initial Thai culture, history and
language course, which will be supplemented throughout the summer by cultural
enrichment outings to important religious and historical locations. Weekly
research meetings will be followed by a final Research Colloquium for both
American and Thai student participants. In addition, the ThaiREU students will
submit written research reports to complete their formal research experience.
This 10-week research experience in organic chemistry will provide an intensive,
hands-on research experience in a sophisticated, modern Thai laboratory under
the personalized mentorship of a Thai faculty member and partnership with a Thai
graduate student. Scientifically, the long-range impact of this program will
give undergraduates a realistic understanding of the research endeavor, and
encourage students to pursue graduate studies. Culturally, this experience will
foster cross-cultural communication and understanding, and establish long-term
bonds between young American and Thai scientists. This experience will promote
the growth of a globally engaged scientific workforce.