* 0850543
* REU Site:   25 years of Undergraduate Research in Evolution and Systematics at the American Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Susan Perkins, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2013
* USD 475,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The American Museum of Natural History REU Site will provide
a research program for undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2013. Eight
students will be selected each year to participate in an intensive 10-week
research program in biological systematics and evolutionary questions.
Systematics and evolution are central concepts in biological disciplines.
Knowledge of the manner in which species are related to each other and the
mechanisms by which they become distributed across the globe provide a framework
(in evolutionary trees for example) for organizing and communicating ideas
regarding biodiversity or comparative genomics. This program provides students
with a coherent, hands-on introduction to research in systematics and
comparative evolutionary biology, and serves a critical role in attracting,
inspiring and educating undergraduate students in the fundamental importance of
these biological disciplines. Students enrolled in the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH) REU program have at their disposal world-class
collections of fishes, dinosaurs, reptiles, amphibians, mammals and
invertebrates, as well as cutting edge research facilities in the Molecular
Genomics laboratories and the museum's research library. Students are mentored
by museum curators and projects variously include use of genetic, histological,
anatomical or paleontological data and range from primary taxonomic to
integrative phylogenetic studies. Students will also be provided opportunities
to immerse themselves in the richness of New York City's cultural institutions
and summer venues. Eight students will be selected for a 10 week summer program
at the American Museum of Natural History REU program in Systematics and
Evolutionary Biology. Additional information can be found at
http://rggs.amnh.org/pages/academics_and_research/fellowship_opportunities, or
by containing the Program Director, Dr. Mark E. Siddall at 212 769 5638;
Siddall@amnh.org.