* 0850374
* The International Heliophysical Year (IHY) Africa 2009 Workshop; Livingstone, Zambia; June 8-12, 2009
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Mark Moldwin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 02/28/2010
* USD 45,000.00

This project is to support the International Heliophysical Year (IHY) Africa
2009 workshop to be held in Livingstone, Zambia from June 8-12, 2009. The
workshop is a follow-on to the SCIntillation Network Decision Aid (SCINDA)/IHY
Africa 2007 workshop held in Ethiopia. The scientific driver is investigation of
the sources of and responses to space weather, particularly in regards to
communications and navigation. A focus of IHY is the deployment of ground-based
instrumentation in Africa, including the development of research infrastructure
in developing nations. Some of this is accomplished by deploying instruments
from ''donor'' nations to ''host'' institutions in Africa. The workshop will
enable continued and strong interaction between scientists from the donor
institutes and host institutes.

The meeting will focus on four main science areas: (1) Total Electron Content,
(2) Ionospheric Irregularities and Scintillation, (3) Heliospace Science and (4)
Electrodynamics and Plasmasphere. In addition, the meeting will include a fifth
area of emphasis: Space Science Education and Public Outreach. The meeting will
include oral sessions, poster sessions, and discussion sessions, and anticipates
hosting 75 to 100 participants. Special efforts will be made to include graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and young researchers, with particular attention
paid to enabling participation from African nations.