* 0850707
* Long-term and interactive effects of seaweed diversity and herbivory on intertidal community structure and functioning
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* John Stachowicz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2014
* USD 522,631.00

Stimulated in part by rapid changes in the biological composition and richness
of most of Earth's ecosystems, considerable theoretical and empirical research
has focused on understanding the effects of species richness on communities and
ecosystems. This research has resulted in major advances and has shown that
diversity can affect ecosystem processes. However, we are currently limited in
our ability to draw generalities regarding these effects that transcend
ecosystems and to apply this knowledge to conservation and management efforts
because: (1) most experiments are of short duration and relatively few are
conducted under field conditions on natural substratum; and (2) most experiments
manipulate only diversity and so cannot assess the strength of diversity
relative to other known drivers of ecosystem functioning. Previous NSF-funded
work found that species diversity of seaweeds does increase the accumulation of
producer biomass and the diversity and richness of mobile invertebrates
associated with those seaweeds. In this project, the investigator will examine
the interactive effects of plant and grazer richness on seaweed productivity and
assemblage recovery from disturbance by (a) continuing our ongoing diversity
manipulations (b) nesting additional experiments manipulating grazers within
these plots, and (c) performing new experiments to examine effects of grazer
richness on algal assemblages. The main experiment consists of 72 1.5 m diameter
plots in the rocky intertidal at Bodega Bay, California, split into 6 different
treatments: a monoculture of each of the 4 algal species that comprise &gt;85%
of the algal cover in our system; a 4-species polyculture, and an unmanipulated
control plot. The PI created these "diversity" plots by weeding under the
auspices of a previous NSF grant. Objectives of this project are: (1) To nest
within the diversity plots smaller cleared areas that either allow or prohibit
access by grazers in order to test the interactive effects of algal diversity
and herbivory on recovery of the algal assemblage from disturbance (or
resilience). (2) To conduct a separate combined additive and replacement series
experiment to examine the effects of herbivore identity and richness on algal
recruitment and succession. (3) While the nested grazer-exclusion experiment is
in progress, to continue weeding and collecting data in the uncleared portion of
these plots as a continued test of the univariate effect of algal richness on
the cover of algae and sessile invertebrates, and on mobile invertebrate
abundance, richness, and diversity. Together with previous results, this will
produce a 7 year record of the effects of seaweed richness on rocky intertidal
communities, which will then be correlated with archived environmental data. (4)
After the nested grazer exclusion experiment is complete, to cease weeding plots
and track their reinvasion by weeded species in order to evaluate the mechanisms
maintaining diversity of perennial algae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
consequences of simultaneous changes in grazer abundance or diversity and algal
diversity as well as the long-term effects of both on the resilience of algal
communities in the face of disturbance will provide a better understanding of
both the consequences of human encroachment into these habitats and the
appropriate management efforts needed to minimize impacts and maintain ecosystem
functioning. This is especially critical given that harvesting and trampling by
humans are altering the diversity and composition of herbivores and algae in the
California rocky intertidal zone. The PI recently briefed legislative and agency
staff in California on the results of previous NSF work on the consequences of
marine biodiversity, so there is interest from policymakers. The PI will
continue to work with outreach groups like COMPASS and the Aldo Leopold
Leadership Program to help disseminate the findings of this research as broadly
as possible to the general public and decision-makers. In addition, through
outreach efforts such as the Bodega Marine Lab Open House and visits to local
schools the investigator will continue to foster public understanding of the
importance of maintaining biodiversity and more generally of how science works.
Finally, this project will develop future scientists including a technician,
graduate and undergraduate researchers including those from underrepresented
groups.