* 0850719
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Refugee Food Security in Ghana
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Micah Trapp, American University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,700.00

American University doctoral student, Micah Trapp, under the guidance of Dr.
Dolores B. Koenig, will conduct research on food security at the Buduburam
Liberian Refugee Settlement in Ghana. The focus of her investigation will be the
relationship between food security and socioeconomic differentiation within a
prolonged refugee camp situation. Usually, it is assumed either that all
refugees in a camp setting will have equal access to food resources, or that if
there is inequality, it is because some people have more money and can buy food
while others cannot. However, other factors, including humanitarian aid
projects, international flows of people, cash, and food, and relationships
between refugees and local residents, often complicate this simple picture. This
research is designed to understand how these factors come together to produce
food security variability and socioeconomic differentiation The researcher will
employ a mixed methods approach. During the first stage of research, she will
use ethnographic research methods, including semi-structured interviews and
participant-observation, to gather qualitative data. In the second stage, she
will conduct a survey tp measure food security using an adapted version of the
United States Department of Agriculture Food Security Measure. These data will
allow Trapp to (1) examine the development of socioeconomic status in a complex
emergency situation; (2) evaluate the variability of food security at the camp;
and (3) investigate the relationships between socioeconomic status, kin and non-
kin social networks and remittances, and food security.

Conducted during a time of global economic and food crisis, this research
focuses on access to food for refugees, an especially vulnerable population.
Thirty years ago, food shortages contributed to civil war in Liberia, as they
have in other countries. The research therefore will contribute not only to
better understanding of the complex factors that produce food insecurity, but
also to identifying root cause of conflict. The Liberian refugee camp in Ghana
is but one example of hundreds of protracted refugee camps around the world. The
an analytical model produced in this project can be used to understand food
systems and strategies for self-sufficiency in other long-term refugee
populations. The research also will contribute to social scientific theory of
the local outcomes of global factors, and to the education of a social
scientist.