* 0850827
* Collaborative Research: Oceanic diazotroph community structure and activities in a high carbon dioxide world
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Matthew Church, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2013
* USD 437,859.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
(NPSG) is the largest ocean ecosystem on Earth, playing a prominent role in
global carbon cycling and forming an important reservoir of marine biodiversity.
Nitrogen (N2) fixing bacteria (termed diazotrophs) provide a major source of new
nitrogen to the oligotrophic waters of the NPSG, thereby exerting direct control
on the carbon cycle. Oceanic uptake of CO2 causes long-term changes in the
partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2) in the seawater of this ecosystem. Therefore,
understanding how carbon system perturbations may influence ocean
biogeochemistry is an important and timely undertaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the investigators will examine how natural assemblages of N2
fixing microorganisms respond to perturbations in seawater carbon chemistry.
Laboratory and field-based experiments will be placed in the context of monthly
time series measurements on the activities and abundances of N2 fixing
microorganism abundances. Together, the project will provide insight into the
dependence of N2 fixing microorganism physiology on variations in CO2. The broad
objectives of the research are: (1) Quantify the responses and consequences of
changes in seawater pCO2 on the growth and community structure of naturally-
occurring assemblages of ocean diazotrophs; (2) Identify why and how changes in
seawater pCO2 influence the growth and carbon acquisition strategies of two
model marine diazotrophs (Trichodesmium and Crocosphaera); and (3) Quantify
temporal variability in diazotroph community structure and activities at Station
ALOHA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include providing important
insights into potential influences of climate change scenarios on ocean
biogeochemistry which will be valuable to microbial ecologists, climate change
scientists, and biogeochemists. In addition, research opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students are planned with an emphasis on
participation of women and underrepresented groups in science.