* 0850825
* REU Site: Research on Computer Vision and Multi-Agent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Vicki Allan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2013
* USD 305,801.00

This project will provide an opportunity for ten undergraduate students to
participate in the ongoing CVMA (Computer Vision and Multi-Agent) research
activities in the CS department at USU. The REU students will receive formal
instruction on CVMA and an introduction to each project during the first week
and a half. They will then directly work with the faculty mentor to generate
computer programs for testing hypotheses and new techniques, and to demonstrate
the feasibility of the specific ideas. Students will also participate in weekly
individual meetings, alternated bi-weekly REU group meetings and brown- bag
research group meetings, and social events. They are required to accomplish
three oral presentations and writing tasks at three stages to improve
communication skills essential to professionals in any discipline. Our goals are
to provide undergraduate students with the opportunities to learn the research
process, assimilate latest research, assess their own research, present their
own work and experimental results, prepare publications, and prepare for
admission to graduate school. This site will ensure at least four participants
are underrepresented students and at least six participants are from other
institutions, especially undergraduate institutions where research programs are
limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The program will
build a "real-world" working environment to help undergraduate students to
develop an ability to think independently, a willingness to explore a multitude
of approaches, a tenacity to face obstacles, and a background to learn state-of-
the-art technical knowledge. Multiple projects will be defined to support and
broaden current research efforts. These research projects include semantic-based
CBIR (Content-Based Image Retrieval), image forensic and authentication, fire
and flame detection, coalition organization with agent leadership, trust of
robotic systems, and cooperative network monitoring. The proposed work will
address the broad spectrums and challenging issues in CVMA using hands-on
stimulating research projects. Some projects, designed for highly talented
students, seek to advance knowledge and understanding by addressing unsolved
problems. Others seek to employ CVMA techniques to solve the real-world
problems. An intellectual approach will be applied to encourage students in
active learning, free and open exchange of ideas, team spirit, and recognition
and rewards for achievements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The program will impact the disciplines of CS and the
competitiveness of our nation by seeding the next generation of researchers.The
program will impact the individual participants by promoting the development of
their independent thinking and problem-solving skills. The program's focus on
students from primarily undergraduate institutions and on members of
underrepresented groups will further enhance these impacts. Finally, the
research itself has the potential for positive social impact due to its focus on
real-world applications. Early exposure to research activities will
substantially further students' learning process, significantly enhance their
research experience, quickly develop their skills in CVMA related research,
actively promote their interests in research, and effectively inspire their
desire to pursue advanced degrees.