* 0850089
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2011
* USD 286,220.00

Researchers at the University of Washington will purchase a new Thermo MAT 253
isotope ratio mass spectrometer to replace a 25 year old model. This instrument
replacement is needed because the existing instrument is experiencing an
increase in failure frequency and associated down-time. This increase in failure
is causing substantial delays (months) in sample analysis, and the existing
software is not compatible with unattended analyses, making analyses more labor-
intensive. In addition, the laboratory is a heavily used teaching facility that
relies on rapid sample analysis for student research projects, which is
jeopardized by the existing instrumentation. The new instrument will be able to
measure the isotopic composition of noble gases (Ar, Kr, Xe and Ne), which
currently cannot be measured by any mass spectrometers in the laboratory, and
will be needed for future research projects. Currently there are 14 projects
within the College of Ocean and Fishery Sciences (COFS) that rely on isotope
ratio measurements in the laboratory. These projects involve seven faculty and
nine graduate students within Chemical Oceanography. Last year, twelve (out of
80) undergraduate Oceanography majors worked in the laboratory either for pay,
individual research projects, or for class-related research. The laboratory
plays a central role in the research and teaching programs within the COFS.
Realizing that the successful operation of the laboratory is currently at risk,
and the importance of rectifying this situation, the COFS will provide $100K in
matching funds for a new mass spectrometer. In terms of broader impacts, this
equipment will substantially improve the infrastructure for research and
teaching at the University of Washington. The breadth of research and teaching
activities within COFS that are impacted by isotope or gas ratio analyses is
demonstrated by the significant number of faculty and students that rely on the
laboratory. Because of the large number of graduate and undergraduate students
that routinely work in the laboratory, the new instrument will be a key teaching
instrument within the COFS.