* 0850910
* Experimental investigations of the giant colonies of Phaeocystis globosa in China
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Kam Tang, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2013
* USD 461,284.00

This project will investigate the mechanisms by which giant colonies of the
haptophyte Phaeocystis globosa survive and grow in Chinese coastal waters. In
recent years long-lived blooms along the Guangdong coast have formed and caused
substantial fish kills in aquaculture cages, resulting in substantial economic
losses to the local economies. The blooms are relatively predictable, in that
they repeatedly occur in one location each year. One unique feature of the
colonies of these Chinese blooms is their size: they reach up to 3 centimeters
in diameter, an order of magnitude larger that any other known phytoplankter. As
such, the colonies are subject to different physical factors, and aspects of
their cellular/colonial physiology and carbon nutrition, nutrient uptake, and
ecology must be much different than their smaller counterparts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
will involve an international investigation of the ecology of these giant
Phaeocystis colonies in conjunction with colleagues from Jinan University. The
investigators will specifically examine, the relationship among colonial cell
abundance, density and carbon, mucous carbon, and colony size and the
relationships among colony size and cell density with nutrient uptake and
photosynthesis; the sinking rates of colonies as a function of colony size and
physiological state; and Intracolonial fluid contents, including pH, O2, DOC,
DMSP and how it influences sinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a theoretical framework for Phaeocystis globosa colonies that includes
the effects of turbulence, diffusion, and sinking on carbon and nitrogen uptake,
and use the experimental results as part of the theoretical development. The
experimental program will be conducted at Jinan University, using samples of
giant colonies collected near Guangzhou. Through the combined experimental and
observational programs, the investigators hope to develop the beginnings of a
predictive understanding of how this population thrives to such levels in these
coastal waters. &lt;br/&gt;Giant colonies of P. globosa are the largest
phytoplankton known, and represent one of the few planktonic autotrophs that
extend into sizes that are influenced by turbulent motion; hence, a study of the
colonies' ecology will represent a unique investigation of a novel adaptive
mechanism: gigantism in phytoplankton. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a collaboration between two countries
and three institutions, all focused on a single, compelling scientific question.
The US investigators will perform significant outreach activities within this
project that include: 1) training a VIMS graduate student and a Jinan Visiting
Professor in modern algal techniques; 2) participating in an undergraduate
course at William and Mary entitled "Asian Environmental Issues" and highlight
the role of harmful algal blooms in coastal Chinese waters; 3) teaching mini-
courses on Phaeocystis globosa at two Chinese Universities (Jinan and Ocean
University in Qingdao), and repeat the course at VIMS (available to all graduate
students in the broader area at no cost); and 4 organizing an international
symposium on the biology and ecology of Phaeocystis, to be held in China, with
the symposium proceedings to be published in a peer-reviewed volume.