* 0850664
* Anthropogenic Fire, Human Foraging Strategies, and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Western Desert of Australia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Rebecca Bird, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 500,001.00

Stanford University anthropologists, Dr. Rebecca Bliege Bird and Dr. Douglas W.
Bird, will undertake research on the social and ecological contexts of foraging,
landscape burning, and habitat modification among Martu aborigines in
Australia's Western Desert. Indigenous burning is increasingly recognized as an
important force in shaping plant communities and biodiversity in the United
States and around the world. However, the ability of scientists to directly
observe the complex relationships between human culture and subsistence, climate
change, and the patterning of fire is hampered by the fact that few indigenous
communities have relative autonomy in burning. In this regard, Australia
provides a unique research opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
anthropogenic fire is considered to be particularly significant in Australia,
where indigenous burning has been hypothesized to have radically altered the
continent's biogeography. Furthermore, many aboriginal communities in the arid
interior still have relative autonomy in fire application. Therefore, research
that examines Australian practices will (a) inform models of fire management in
similar arid regions in the United States; (b) illuminate the effects of fire
suppression in contexts where anthropogenic burning has been a critical
component of habitat structure; and (c) test the hypothesis that human impacts
on the environment did not begin with agriculture, but extend to hunters and
gatherers throughout human evolutionary history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will develop basic analytical tools and collect new data to
characterize how land-use and fire treatment affects variability in key
components of arid lands diversity and habitat fragmentation. They will employ a
variety of research methods including analysis of climate data and LandSat
photos, detailed landscape mappings, focal follows of Martu individuals,
transect mappings, and agent-based modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is important because it will allow scientists to better understand how the
interaction between land-use and fire may be mediated by climate change, how it
affects plant and animal densities and distributions, and how, in a politically
decentralized society, individuals overcome problems of collective action in
supplying future benefits derived from burning. The project will also support
both graduate and undergraduate education.