* 0850358
* REU Site:   Biological Research in Ecological and Evolutionary Developmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Carmen Domingo, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 06/30/2012
* USD 249,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The San Francisco State University REU Site will provide a
research program for undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Eight
students will be selected each year to participate in an intensive 10-week
research program in the area of ecological and evolutionary developmental
biology. Students in this program will begin with a two-week intensive
lab/lecture course where they will learn about patterns and processes of
molecular evolution and the role of phenotypic and environmental variation in
the evolution of animal diversity and complexity. This will be followed by an
eight-week independent research experience during which students will design and
conduct original research in laboratories at SFSU and the Romberg Tiburon Center
for Environmental Studies. Students will participate in weekly professional
development meetings in which they will learn strategies for pursuing successful
careers in science. The summer's activities will conclude with a campus-wide
research symposium where REU students will present their research findings to
the campus community. The program incorporates social interactions and
networking components designed to help REU students make connections that will
endure beyond the end of the summer and help support them in their academic
paths. Additional information can be found at http://biology.sfsu.edu/faculty-
pages/reu, or by contacting the Project Director, Dr. Carmen Domingo, at
415-338-6995; cdomingo@sfsu.edu.