* 0850373
* Semantic Web Informatics for Species in Space and Time
* BIO,DBI
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Brian Enquist, Santa Fe Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 10/31/2013
* USD 1,651,798.00

The Santa Fe Institute is awarded a grant to extend, integrate, and automate
access to and analysis of ecological data by developing and implementing proven
and emerging information technologies, particularly those related to the
Semantic Web. This will be done "horizontally" by developing integrative web
services somewhat similar to "mash-ups" for several large ecological databases
and by developing graphical user interfaces enabled by these services to access
disparate types of data, seamlessly feed the data into workflow systems, and
conduct integrated analyses in an automatically documented manner. These
activities will be integrated so that users can easily access a wide variety of
ecological data and analyses based on concepts such as taxonomy, habitat,
geography, and trophic relations. Graphical user interfaces developed in this
project will enable integrated analysis of data related to plant-herbivore
dynamics by drawing on plant abundance data from survey databases, identifying
associated local herbivores and their body sizes from online food web databases,
and analyzing contemporaneous time series of those herbivores drawn from
databases on global populations dynamics. The products of this project will
transform biology by creating new technologies used to introduce deeply
functional informatics "mash-ups" that synergize existing informatics resources
using more user-friendly integrative UIs. Broader impacts include an enhanced
infrastructure for research and education at the interface of computer and
natural sciences; increased roles for underrepresented students and researchers;
and wide dissemination and outreach through diverse media, meetings and
professional networks as well as curricular activities at multiple levels. The
project will be carried out in collaboration with the Pacific Ecoinformatics and
Computational Ecology Lab, University of Maryland, College Park, San Francisco
State University, the University of Arizona, and Microsoft Research. Further
information about this project may be found at the lab website:
http://www.foodwebs.org.