* 0850574
* Collaborative:Development of a Hydrogen Discriminating Low Temperature 1-D Nanocomposite Microsensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Ramki Kalyanaraman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 90,000.00

Project Abstract

The objective of this collaborative proposal is to realize fast, sensitive and
discriminating detection of hydrogen detection at room temperature using a novel
nanomaterial integrated microsensor. The approach is based on one dimensional
porous nanostructures and array architectures of conducting oxides. The
nanostructures will be prepared by sol-gel processing, electrospinning and fast
laser induced self-organization while the sensor platform will be prepared by
lithographic approaches. The intellectual merit of this work will come from the
application of fundamental scientific and engineering principles of
nanofabrication, materials chemistry and electronics to novel sensor design.
Specifically, understanding the relationships between one dimensional
nanostructure, its architecture, oxide chemistry, and electronic response will
permit a quantitative basis for design and fabrication of fast and sensitive
metal oxide semiconductor sensors at the nanoscale. The broader impact will come
from cutting-edge interdisciplinary research and education activities in science
and engineering across two institutions and neighboring schools involving
underrepresented undergraduates, graduates and K-12 students/teachers. This
project will ensure training of next-generation scientists and engineers in the
areas of critical national need. The training and educational programs will
equip the students with knowledge and skills for the integrated use of bottom-up
nanomaterial synthesis and top-down device design approaches. Considering the
recent public awareness on the need of clean alternative energy, the NSF support
for this hydrogen sensor research provide a novel scientific and engineering
springboard for the cost-effective design and fabrication of such sensors, that
are crucial for storage, transportation, and distribution of hydrogen as an
energy source.