* 0850103
* Cyberinfrastructure for Accessible and Reproducible Research in Life Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Ross Lazarus, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,342,193.00

Pennsylvania State University University Park is awarded a grant to extend an
existing software system, Galaxy (http://galaxyproject.org) that integrates
computational biology tools for experimental biologists to access sequence,
polymorphism and functional datasets. Analytic functions to be enhanced include
a set of tools allowing bench scientists to perform large-scale analyses with
whole-genome multiple alignments without ever leaving their web browsers; an
interactive statistical genetics tool kit for comprehensive analysis of data
generated from high-throughput genotyping experiments; an evolutionary analysis
toolset for detection of selection, recombination and other critical
evolutionary parameters, that can be applied directly to existing sequence and
alignment datasets; and novel approaches for improving reproducibility of
research in life sciences by implementing simple yet powerful analysis workflows
that can be constructed by example and explicitly. The project is a
collaborative effort with Brigham and Women's Hospital, Emory University, and
University of California, San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy bridges a
critically important gap between computational tools and users, by making it
trivial to modernize the interfaces of existing tools, freeing developers of new
tools from the need to develop interfaces from scratch, and facilitating tool
interoperability and complex analyses by seamlessly integrating diverse tools
and databases. Galaxy has two thriving communities of users: those who use the
public Galaxy instance to access a variety of tools and databases with nothing
more than a web browser, and those who take advantage of Galaxy framework?s
portability and minimal installation requirements to create their own Galaxy
instances and provide easy access to locally developed tools and private
data.&lt;br/&gt;