* 0850290
* Development of a Data Assimilation Capability Towards Ecological Forecasting in a Data-Rich Era
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yiqi Luo, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,079,450.00

The University of Oklahoma is awarded a grant to develop an Ecological Platform
for Assimilation of Data (EcoPAD) for data assimilation and forecasting in
ecology. EcoPAD will include components of (1) core computational algorithms
(e.g., ecological models) that are specifically designed to solve ecological
issues, (2) a variety of optimization techniques for data assimilation, (3)
various data bases that will feed into EcoPAD, and (4) diverse functions of
EcoPAD. The functions enable users to (i) estimate model parameters or state
variables, (ii) quantify uncertainty of estimated parameters and projected
states of ecosystems (e.g., carbon sinks in USA), (iii) evaluate model
structures, (iv) assess sampling strategies, and (v) conduct ecological
forecasting. EcoPAD will be developed, tested, and applied at three spatial
scales. First, EcoPAD will be developed against plot-level data from experiments
in the Duke Forest and Oklahoma prairies to examine its capability of extract
information on ecosystem responses to climate change. Second, the project will
develop EcoPAD at the AmeriFlux network of eddy-flux measurements in the North
America to examine its capability of forecasting diurnal, seasonal, and
interannual dynamics of net ecosystem exchange. Third, EcoPAD's capability of
forecasting future states of ecosystems and their services will be tested and
evaluated at regional and continental scales. EcoPAD has the potential to become
a powerful eco-informatics tool that assimilate data from measurement sensor
networks and to generate data products that will be useful for policy making on
resource management and climate change mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have integrated teaching, training, and learning through student
and post-doc training, integrated courses in ecological modeling, and outreach
to K-12 students and teachers. NEON and other sensor networks have been designed
to provide better ecological service to the society. Data assimilation and
ecological forecasting are key components for success of those networks. This
project will develop EcoPAD to extract information from massive data for
ecological forecasts, which can directly serve the society and be useful for
policy making. Results from this project will be useful for education of public
on ecosystem services. For further information see the PI's lab website at
http://bomi.ou.edu/luo/.