* 0850163
* Environmental Scholars:  A Scholarship Program in Environmental Chemistry, Biology and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Kelley Donaghy, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 02/28/2014
* USD 600,000.00

The Environmental Scholars program is offered by the State University of New
York - College of Environmental Science and Forestry (SUNY-ESF), a unique
college in the 64-campus SUNY system with a specialized mission of education,
research and public service related to developing and managing renewable natural
resources, understanding the structure and function of the world's ecosystems,
and maintaining and enhancing environmental quality. SUNY-ESF's research and
service programs are directed at creating new knowledge that has a positive and
influential impact upon the quality of life for all people. It is with these
issues in mind, that the Environmental Scholars program provides scholarships to
students that have shown significant scientific talent and for whom the
financial burden of a college education may be a deterrent to the pursuit of a
baccalaureate degree in the disciplines of chemistry, biology, engineering and
environmental science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholarships are given to three
cohorts of students - incoming freshmen, transfer students with three years of
academic courses remaining, and transfer students who have already achieved an
Associate's degree. The Environmental Scholars program pays careful attention to
the cohort experience, to the support services offered to the group, to the
opportunities provided to the students to investigate "the fit" of their
intended career path and to solid career counseling. Key program objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt; (a) select a small multicultural multidisciplinary cohort with
emphasis placed on recruiting students from traditionally underrepresented
groups in science (or at SUNY-ESF specifically);&lt;br/&gt; (b) create
opportunities for thoughtful and educational cross-cultural communication and
camaraderie;&lt;br/&gt; (c) offer support for the incoming students to get
through the traditional first semester hurdles of transition and
adjustment;&lt;br/&gt; (d) create an interdisciplinary collaborative learning
environment, through service learning, to help students investigate and reflect
upon their intended career path;&lt;br/&gt; (e) utilize faculty mentorship to
provide a connection to the college as a whole;&lt;br/&gt; (f) require a
discipline-specific capstone experience;&lt;br/&gt; (g) offer financial
incentives to students to achieve academic excellence that can be used toward
research programs, particularly those with field experiences; and&lt;br/&gt; (h)
offer courses in career development such as resume writing, etiquette and
interview skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through its efforts to provide a cohesive
program for the Environmental Scholars, the project leadership team expects to
gain and disseminate understanding of the types of programming that helps
students persist academically, refine their career plans and find success in
their chosen career paths and will further the goals of a campus that values and
fosters Inclusive Excellence, the integration of diversity and quality
initiatives to create a stronger and more durable educational experience.