* 0850581
* Parsing Law: Zoroastrians and Litigation in Late Colonial South Asia
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Mitra Sharafi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 05/31/2011
* USD 87,212.00

"Parsing Law: Zoroastrians and Litigation in Late Colonial South Asia" is a
project that examines the unusual relationship between one ethno-religious
community and colonial law. The Parsis, who followed the ancient Persian
religion of Zoroastrianism, migrated to India after the seventh-century conquest
of Persia by Arab Muslims. Under British rule, they prospered as an Anglicized
elite of intermediary traders and professionals. To a degree perhaps
unparalleled in the British Empire, Parsis turned to "outside law," rather than
to "inside: priestly or community authorities, to resolve key religious and
family-related disputes. The community's extreme state-oriented legalism--
exemplified not only by the large number of civil suits between Parsis, but also
by the many Parsi lawyers and judges involved in these cases--cut across the
class spectrum, as it did across the religious orthodox-liberal divide.
Historically and in the contemporary context, minority communities often avoid
state law, making the Parsi pattern unusual and distinctive. "Parsing Law" will
be the first scholarly examination of the colonial Parsi legal phenomenon. The
PI's archival research focuses upon English-language case papers and judges'
notebooks from the Bombay High Court and the Parsi Chief Matrimonial Court (both
in Mumbai) and the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (London), newspapers
and government records, and Gujarati-language Parsi sources. The project aims to
make an important contribution to the fields of Zoroastrian, South Asian, and
British imperial studies, as well as "Anglosphere" legal history. It will also
speak to scholars of diaspora and minority studies, law and religion, legal
pluralism, and the history of the legal profession.