* 0850976
* REU in Chemical Biology at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Gary Sulikowski, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2012
* USD 244,950.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry and Biological Sciences supports the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the Vanderbilt University
for the summers of 2009-2011. The program director is Gary Sulikowski who is
assisted by co-PI Michelle Sulikowski. This REU program is designed to introduce
students to the excitement and importance of research in chemical biology
through a mix of educational and research activities. Students will choose from
nineteen interdisciplinary research teams and will be co-mentored by faculty in
Chemistry and the College of Medicine. Research topics cover the continuum of
chemical biology and range from targeted drug discovery and natural product
synthesis to the use of mass spectrometry, computation and cheminformatics to
solve fundamental questions in chemical biology. Each group will require a
written report and a presentation at Vanderbilt's Undergraduate Research
Symposium. In addition to interdisciplinary seminars, a drug discovery symposia
and weekly lunch-based discussion groups on ethics, careers and professional
development, students will take field-trips and enjoy social activities such as
BBQ, baseball games and a trip to the water park. Twelve students, typically
rising sophomore and juniors with an interest in chemistry, biochemistry or
biology will be selected each summer. They strongly encourage applications from
undergraduate students that enhance the diversity of our program. Through
extensive mentoring and authentic research experiences, it is their goal to
impact students understanding of the research process and the interdisciplinary
nature of contemporary research. This site is co-funded by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.