* 0850267
* Society Without the State: Structural Adjustment  and Fair Trade Organizations in Dominica
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Mark Moberg, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 83,141.00

Dr. Mark Moberg, of the University of South Alabama, will conduct research on
local responses to changes in macro-economic policy. The research will be caried
out in the Eastern Caribbean country of Dominica where he will investigate the
role that Fair Trade banana farmers' associations have played in supporting
farmer incomes during the period of economic austerity that accompanied economic
structural adjustment policies. Fair Trade refers to a market-based approach,
based on promulgation of social and environmental standards as well as fair
pricing to improve the lives of developing country producers and promote
sustainability. During the 1990s, the dismantling of European banana market
preferences depressed the Dominican economy. By 2001, a seventy percent decline
in exports forced the country into structural adjustment and a sharp curtailment
of government services. Now all of the country's remaining banana farmers are
certified as Fair Trade growers, earning them a higher producer price as well as
special funds called "social premiums" for investment in local development
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will carry out participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, and a survey in two ethnically
contrasting farming communities on Dominica's Windward coast. He will determine
how local Fair Trade farmer groups choose to allocate social premiums, and
whether such initiatives can satisfy educational, health and infrastructural
needs no longer met by a contracting state sector. He will also assess how
individuals have responded to restructuring, including such possibilities as
increased reliance on ethnomedical traditions, organic methods of cultivation,
and traditional patterns of labor sharing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is
important because it will help to develop better social scientific theory to
understand the local impacts of engagement in the global economy over time. The
research also will add to what is known about the effects of Fair Trade
policies. Seen by many as a means of alleviating rural poverty in much of the
developing world, Fair Trade has grown dramatically in recent years. However,
little empirical research has addressed the role that Fair Trade producers'
groups play within economic restructuring. This project will determine the
extent to which Fair Trade-funded initiatives ameliorate the impacts of
adjustment and whether such initiatives are able to negotiate divisive loyalties
cross-cutting rural communities. Addressing such questions is essential if Fair
Trade is to be considered, as its advocates claim, an equitable and inclusive
mechanism of community development.