* 0850470
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Mathematical Sciences and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Jay Walton, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2013
* USD 314,100.00

The Department of Mathematics at Texas A&amp;M University proposes to support
fifteen students per year to participate in their eight week summer research
experience for undergraduates program in the mathematical sciences. Three
parallel summer programs are planned. The first program involves mathematical
biology with emphasis on applications to complex ecosystems, infectious and
other diseases. The second program involves the theory and application of
wavelets. Wavelets are the basis for state-of-the-art data compression
algorithms as applied to high-speed, high bandwidth communication, and audio and
video compression technologies. The third area involves computational algebra
and algebraic geometry. Applications include understanding the structure of
complex macro-molecules such as proteins and DNA, and to solving large systems
of polynomial equations which are ubiquitous in engineering and science
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participation will enhance their
training as future research scientists and mathematicians. Participants will
present their research findings to a locally held conference as well as being
encouraged to present them at national scientific meetings or publish them in
journals targeted to undergraduate research. In the selection of participants,
priority will be given to students coming from undergraduate programs offering
limited access to research opportunities and to students from demographic groups
underrepresented in the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.