* 0850690
* Collaborative Research: What do global surface drifters tell us about submesoscale processes?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Christopher Edwards, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2013
* USD 251,773.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent global census of surface
loopers (drifter trajectories with a definite sense of rotation) has revealed
some unexpected features of the distribution of structures at scales of the
submesoscale (R&lt;15 km; Griffa, Lumpkin, and Veneziani 2008). Three main
regimes have emerged: a) a prevalently cyclonic zonal band at 10&amp;#8722;20
degrees latitude; b) a prevalently anticyclonic zonal band at 30&amp;#8722;40
degrees and c) regions devoid of submesoscale presence corresponding to areas of
formation of great rings. The dynamical mechanisms behind this distribution are
not completely understood yet, one of the reasons being that small loopers can
be the signature of different processes, such as submesoscale eddies and
subinertial Ekman response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on the
submesoscale component, and investigates the implications of the findings for
submesoscale distribution in the open ocean. The question to be addressed is:
Are submesoscale processes in the world ocean characterized by a nontrivial
distribution in terms of polarity and abundance, modulated by the ambient large-
scale dynamical regimes in which they form? This question cannot be investigated
by means of Lagrangian data alone, and other global data sets or global
numerical models do not have sufficient spatial and temporal resolution to solve
submesoscale structures. Therefore very high resolution (up to 300 m) regional
models of key selected areas suggested by the drifters will be used to
investigate the Eulerian and Lagrangian dynamics. This will be complemented by
specific process studies in idealized configurations indicated by the regional
modeling results. The overall result will be an increased understanding of the
properties and distribution of open ocean submesoscale
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has a societal impact
because it contributes to the understanding of climate and biological processes
in the upper ocean. The results will be presented in graduate classes at UCSC
and RSMAS, and they will be part of outreach programs. Analysis algorithms
developed for the ROMS model simulations will be freely distributed to the
greater scientific community through the WikiROMS web-pages.