* 0850228
* Computation for Interdisciplinary Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* David Koetje, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2014
* USD 581,000.00

This project builds on efforts to integrate computational work across the
science disciplines, expand interdisciplinary student research opportunities and
internships, develop a new minor in computational science, and provide a new
computational and modeling laboratory. It brings together and coordinates
college services to support students interested in computational and
interdisciplinary science. The college attracts and mentors these students,
equipping them for graduate school or direct entry into the scientific
workforce. Scholarships provide significant incentives for academically talented
students with financial need to pursue this program of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Disciplinary depth and
interdisciplinary breadth are required to find solutions to complex,
contemporary scientific problems. The synergy that results from collaborative
efforts to address these problems and the satisfaction that comes from making
progress toward their solution are strong motivators for engaging in scientific
research. In particular, there is a growing need for scientists with significant
computational skills and for computer scientists who can collaborate with
researchers in other disciplines. This project increases the number of students
with the scientific and computational skills required to participate in the
scientific discoveries of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
availability of scholarships together with targeted recruiting and retention
efforts and curricular reforms (1) increases the awareness of the range of
opportunities available in computational science among our entering and early
career students, (2) encourages academically strong students to choose to work
in computational science, and (3) draws such students into in a strong summer
and academic-year research programs. These programs, in turn, produce students
well-prepared for further research and study or for direct entry into the
workforce. This program is specifically designed to increase the number of
students from underrepresented groups, both ethnic minorities and women, in CS
courses through expanded recruiting and visibility, an emphasis on cross-
disciplinary applications of computational skills, and intentional mentoring and
cohort experiences throughout the students' undergraduate careers.