* 0850319
* Linking Text Mining with Ontology and Systems Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Cathy Wu, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,040.00

Georgetown University is awarded a grant to conduct a series of BioCreative
Challenge Evaluations and Biocuration Workshops to address the current barriers
in using text mining tools in the biology domain. Specifically, three workshops
will be organized to bring together the biological research community and
developers of text mining tools for user requirement analysis, user-based
evaluations and standard development for tool integration. The specific aims of
the workshops are to: (i) define requirements and evaluation criteria that will
maximize utilization of text mining tools by the broad biological user
community; (ii) provide both system- and user-based evaluations, with metrics
that measure precision and recall (system-based), as well as the effect of text
mining on biocuration and knowledge discovery such as throughput and quality
(user-based); and (iii) adopt, develop and recommend community standards to
improve interoperability of text mining tools for data exchange and tool
integration. The outcome will be to bridge the gap in linking literature to
knowledge by focusing on biological use cases for database curation and
knowledge discovery. The deliverables from the workshops will consist of: (i)
text mining tools, including interactive and/or integrated text mining systems,
that are benchmarked and evaluated by BioCreative, (ii) literature corpora used
in the BioCreative evaluations, and (iii) scientific publications from these
workshops in special issues of high impact journals containing results,
evaluations and critical articles, including recommendations for community
standards for text mining. Georgetown will collaborate with the Mitre
Corporation in carrying out this workshop series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshops will connect the text mining and biological communities to develop
common standards and user requirements, with broad impact beyond the specific
text mining applications in this project. The project will provide
interdisciplinary research experience for students and researchers involved in
the project or participate in the workshops. The project will provide a research
and educational infrastructure for broad areas of biology, allowing text mining
systems to become an enabling infrastructure for biocuration and knowledge
discovery. Further information on the Biocreative workshop activities may be
found at http://biocreative.sourceforge.net/&lt;br/&gt;