* 0850677
* Collaborative Research: Photodegradation of Dissolved Organic Matter and its Contribution to Surface Water CO2 fluxes and the Carbon Cycle in a River Dominated Ocean Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* William Miller, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2013
* USD 188,413.00

Ocean margins are highly dynamic systems at the land-sea-air interfaces, and
they play a disproportionately large role in global carbon fluxes among these
reservoirs. River dominated margins receive large quantities of terrigenous
dissolved organic matter (DOM) and its chromophoric component (CDOM) that is
highly photoreactive and appears to be largely remineralized to CO2 in margin
surface waters. Despite the recognized importance of photochemical processes in
river dominated margins, the overall significance of photochemistry in surface
water CO2 fluxes remains uncertain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the University of South Carolina at Columbia and the University
of Georgia will develop regional-scale estimates of photochemical and coupled
photochemical-microbial carbon (including CO2 and CO) fluxes and removal of
terrigenous DOM and CDOM in surface waters of the northern Gulf of Mexico
margin. This ocean margin receives major contributions of terrigenous DOM (&gt;3
Tg C yr-1) and CDOM from the Mississippi River system. Specific objectives
include determination of apparent quantum yields (AQY) for the photoproduction
of CO2 and CO, the photochemical removal of DOC, and the coupled photochemical-
microbial removal of DOC. Experimentally determined AQYs will be used in
combination with field measurements, satellite imagery, and modeling to provide
temporally-integrated, regional-scale assessments of photochemically-mediated
carbon fluxes in the study region. The project will include improvement of
remote-sensing algorithms and the development of regional-scale models for ocean
margin carbon cycling. Once developed, this approach can be utilized to provide
similar assessments in other river dominated ocean margins. At sea, the project
will utilize a ship of opportunity and integrate with a currently funded study
investigating total CO2-fluxes and biological processes in the northern Gulf of
Mexico margin. This coordination of projects will provide an unprecedented
opportunity for understanding the fundamental physical, biological, and
photochemical processes controlling air-sea CO2 fluxes in a major river
dominated margin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Measuring carbon fluxes
(specifically CO2 and CO) in ocean margins and identifying the fundamental
factors driving these fluxes have been identified as of great importance by the
North American Carbon Program and Ocean Carbon and Climate Change programs. This
project will provide regional estimates of photochemical and coupled
photochemical-microbial carbon fluxes in surface waters of one of the major
river dominated margins of the North American continent. This project will
provide training, experience and support for a graduate student at each
institution. Both principal investigators teach undergraduate and graduate
classes that cover various aspects of the carbon cycle, and data collected from
this project will be used as specific examples in these classes. This approach
of incorporating information from active research programs into the classroom
has proven to be very effective for increasing student interest in science and
has encouraged undergraduate participation in research. &lt;br/&gt;