* 0850401
* When Ecphory Fails: Secondary Processes in Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Gary Wells, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 05/31/2015
* USD 407,138.00

Mistaken eyewitness identification from police lineups is the primary cause of
the conviction of innocent people. Improvements to lineups developed by
psychological scientists have benefitted the legal system. But, further
improvements require a better understanding of the role played by secondary
processes. Unlike the primary process (recognition memory) secondary processes
are slow, effortful, deliberative, verbalizable, and largely insensitive to
whether or not the culprit is in the lineup. These secondary processes include
inferences, deductions, elimination processes, relative judgments, and other
forms of reasoning. Secondary processes are hypothesized to be engaged when the
primary process fails and can lead to disastrous affirmative identification
decisions. Six experiments (total N=2400) are conducted in which people view a
simulated crime and attempt an identification from either a culprit-present or a
culprit-removed lineup. Each experiment is carefully designed to induce a
failure of recognition in one-half of the conditions so as to study the
engagement of secondary processes. Two experiments manipulate failure of the
recognition experience at the level of memory acquisition (e.g., giving some of
them a poor view of the witnessed event), two experiments manipulate failure of
the recognition experience at the level of memory storage (e.g., manipulating
the passage of time between viewing and the lineup), and two experiments
manipulate the recognition experience at the level of memory retrieval (e.g., a
grainy, low-resolution lineup task). The tendency of witnesses in culprit-
removed lineup conditions to shift identifications to fillers (rather than
making no identification) is predicted to be greatest in the conditions that
induce recognition failure. In addition, the verbalizations of participant
witnesses are studied to learn more about the nature of the secondary processes
that map into these identification errors. The findings can help us develop
better lineup procedures and better diagnose when mistaken identifications
occur.