* 0850749
* Equatorial Wave Reflection and Equatorial Warm Water Volume
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Allan Clarke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental to the dynamics and
prediction of El Niño and the Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the variability of
the equatorial Pacific warm water volume (WWV). Variations in this WWV both lead
and lag major ENSO indices by several months and recent research suggests that
the reflection of low-frequency ocean energy at the eastern and western Pacific
Ocean boundaries plays a fundamental role in the dynamics of the WWV mode. But
the reflection at the eastern Pacific Ocean boundary, particularly the decay of
the El Niño signal along the boundary south of the equator, is not understood.
This decay greatly reduces the energy that reaches the western boundary from the
eastern boundary and should profoundly affect the amplitude of the equatorial
WWV. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work's main goal is to observe and understand
the interannual flow near the eastern tropical Pacific boundary. Satellite
altimeter and coastal tide gauge data will be used to document and understand
the tropical eastern Pacific interannual coastal flow. In particular, theory and
satellite-estimated eddy variability will be used to test whether the alongshore
behavior of the interannual coastal signal, especially its decay south of 5S,
can be explained by energy loss due to eddies which are known to originate near
the boundary. As part of the analysis the dynamics of the low-frequency observed
equatorial currents will be elucidated and, in the eastern Pacific, their
possible utility in predicting ENSO will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;Over the years the PI
has incorporated his research results on ENSO in his course work and books and
he plans to continue this activity in this project. He will also mentor a female
junior scientist in conducting research and writing scientific papers.
Achievement of the goals in this proposal will lead to increased understanding
of ENSO which greatly influences agriculture, water resources, fisheries, the
number of hurricanes and wildfires, energy needs for heating/cooling and the
prevalence of famine and disease in certain regions.