* 0850448
* Efficient Analysis of Non-Linear and Non-Gaussian State-Space Representations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* David DeJong, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 06/30/2012
* USD 404,463.00

The investigators propose to develop numerical methods for achieving likelihood
evaluation and filtering in applications involving non-linear and/or non-
Gaussian state space models. The hallmark of these models is their
representation of the interaction of observable variables (typically observed
subject to measurement error) and unobservable state variables. The models serve
as workhorses in a broad spectrum of applications ranging from reduced-form
representations of, e.g., asset-return behavior, to representations of dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models amenable to likelihood-based
estimation and inference. The objective of filtering is to infer time-t behavior
of state variables given measurement of the observable variables through time t,
conditional on the specified model, but unconditional on the past behavior of
the state. Likelihood evaluation involves probability assessments regarding the
observable variables measured through time t, again conditional on the model but
unconditional on current and past behavior of the state. Both objectives require
the calculation of integrals necessary for eliminating the dependence of
inferences on realizations of the state.&lt;br/&gt;When the model in question is
linear and stochastic innovations are Gaussian, the integrals required for
achieving likelihood evaluation and filtering can be calculated analytically via
the Kalman filter. However, theoretical and empirical considerations often
necessitate extensions beyond linear/Gaussian frameworks. For example,
approximation errors associated with linear approximations of DSGE models can
impart significant errors in corresponding likelihood representations. Highly
accurate non-linear model approximations can all but eliminate associated
likelihood approximation errors, but the adoption of such model approximations
of course entails a departure from linearity. Departures from either linearity
or normality render required integrals as analytically intractable; their
calculation thus entails the use of numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the project is to develop numerical methods for achieving
likelihood evaluation and filtering that are straightforward to implement, and
that deliver accurate and numerically efficient approximations of targeted
integrals. The objective will be pursued through the implementation of efficient
importance sampling (EIS) techniques, which by design yield optimal global
approximations of targeted integrands. In the context of state-space
representations, implementation of EIS is complicated by the unavailability of
analytical representations of targeted integrands. Thus the objective of the
project ? development of the EIS filter ? amounts to the development of
techniques for overcoming this complication in a broad range of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results obtained to date
indicate that the EIS filter can deliver dramatic improvements in accuracy and
numerical efficiency over existing techniques. Results have been obtained from
applications to two models studied previously in the filtering literature for
which the EIS filter reduces numerical standard errors of targeted integrands by
several orders of magnitude relative to the particle filter, while entailing
reduced computational times. Moreover, likelihood approximations associated with
the EIS filter are continuous functions of model parameters, easing greatly the
problem of model estimation. These results suggest that by developing robust
algorithms for implementing the EIS filter in general state-space environments
(including those involving high dimensional state spaces and singular transition
densities), this project can broaden substantially the range of problems for
which the shackles of linearity/normality can be loosened.&lt;br/&gt;