* 0850532
* Workshops on Inquiry-Based Laboratory Teaching Methods Through the CfAO Professional Development Program, Winter 2009
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Lisa Hunter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scott Fisher
* 09/30/2009
* USD 49,602.00

The Professional Development Program (PDP) is designed to prepare science and
engineering graduate students for designing and teaching inquiry-based
laboratory modules. Led by Dr. Lisa Hunter (University of Hawaii), the PDP
includes workshops followed by a practical teaching experience, usually at the
college level. In addition to training for teaching, a major outcome of the
program is the innovative, inquiry-based laboratory units developed and taught
by PDP participants. Laboratory units developed through the PDP have been very
successful in Hawaii college courses and programs, and are an essential element
of the recently launched Akamai Workforce Initiative (AWI), which includes
curriculum development for a new electro-optics program at Maui Community
College. This award will support, in part, the workshops held within the PDP and
will ensure the inclusion of Hawaii-based graduate student participants in the
program, maintaining the momentum and educational partnerships established by
the NSF Center for Adaptive Optics, and now being transferred to AWI, managed by
the University of Hawaii, Institute for Astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PDP
is specifically designed to train the next generation of scientists and
engineers to teach in a way that engages students from all backgrounds in the
processes and practices of science. The integration of research and education is
an essential part of the PDP. Included within PDP are sessions on addressing
diversity and equity in the classroom. All PDP participants are required to
consider how they will engage all students in their teaching. In addition to the
overall focus on diversity and methods for broadening participation, this work
will have a significant impact on the Maui community. PDP participants will
teach in courses and programs that include significant numbers of Native
Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders, and other underrepresented groups.