* 0850060
* Quantile Regression and L1 Regularization
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Roger Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 05/31/2012
* USD 271,269.00

Quantile regression is gradually evolving into a comprehensive strategy for the
analysis of statistical models with univariate response, complementing the
exclusive focus of least-squares-based methods with a general approach to
estimating conditional quantile functions. This project would continue the
development of quantile regression methods, and intensify research on penalty
methods for density estimation. In addition to continued work on
survival/duration models and models with endogonous covariates, this research
includes:&lt;br/&gt;1. Penalty methods play an increasingly important role
throughout statistics. Penalties are increasingly recognized as a critical tool
of modern data analysis. The investigator and Ivan Mizero have been exploring
such methods for both quantile regression and density estimation. For densities,
total variation roughness penalties and related shape-constrained estimators
seem especially promising. A major thrust of this proposal is to broaden the
scope of this inquiry, producing improved algorithms, inferential capabilities,
better understanding of asymptotic behavior and extending the flexibility of the
available penalties.&lt;br/&gt;2. Panel data methods in econometrics are still
predominately the province of Gaussian random effects models, however there is
often a strong motivation in applications for also estimating conditional
quantile models. Growth curve data offers leading examples in biostatistics, and
program evaluation offers numerous examples in econometrics. Expanding upon the
close relationship between random effects estimation and penalty methods in
Gaussian settings, research is proposed on penalty approaches to quantile
regression estimation for longitudinal data, particularly focused on dynamic
panel models.&lt;br/&gt;3. Although there is already quite an extensive
literature on quantile regression methods for time-series, most of the attention
has focused on models in which lagged response exert a pure location shift
effect on the distribution of the current response. The investigator and Zhijie
Xiao have been investigating more general specifications, focusing initially on
a class of models that exhibit some features of persistent random-walk behavior,
while also exhibiting an episodic form of mean reversion. These models offer
considerable potential for broadening the scope of applied time series
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Conventional statistical methods,
since Quetelet, have sought to estimate the effects of policy treatments on the
average man. But such effects are often quite diverse: medical treatments may
improve life expectancy, but also impose serious short term risks; reducing
class sizes may improve performance of good students, but not help weaker ones.
Quantile regression methods help to explore these heterogeneous effects, as do
improved methods for density estimation. These methods have broad applicability
throughout science.&lt;br/&gt;