* 0850205
* Collaborative Research - Biochemically-Constrained Genomic Signal Processing (BioGSP): A Multi-Scale Interdisciplinary Approach to Regulatory Network Inference
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Adam Arkin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 127,427.00

Columbia University and the University of California Berkley are awarded grants
for the development of novel analytical tools that bridge interdisciplinary gaps
between engineering and biological sciences by facilitating a synergistic
integration of top-down statistical signal processing theory approaches with
bottom-up methods that characterize biological networks as collections of basic
biomolecular interactions. The former are the subject of the emerging
engineering discipline: Genomic Signal Processing (GSP), while the latter are
the domain of classical biochemistry/biophysics. The investigators recognize
that the number of putative signal processing mechanisms that needs to be
analyzed by GSP for a given biological system could be significantly reduced
when their consistency with biochemical/biophysical laws is demanded. The
resulting Biochemically-constrained GSP (BioGSP) approach is thus able to
produce results on par with traditional GSP methods, but is significantly more
efficient as well as assured to be in compliance with key molecular properties
of biological mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological systems consist of
molecules and molecular complexes, whose interactions comprise intricate
circuits and networks. Knowledge of their structure and function can lead to
powerful new ways of controlling biological mechanisms, which may potentially
enable new approaches to remedying faults in natural biological processes as
well as to engineering denovo synthetic biomolecular designs. Recent
advancements in experimental techniques have allowed us an unprecedented view of
how these systems are structured. However, detailed understanding their function
remains a challenge due, in large part to the scale and complexity of networks
involved as well as the nonlinear nature of biochemical interactions among the
various molecular species. This issue is particularly acute for genetic networks
- both because of their importance to biological systems development and
operation as well as due to the often complex regulatory patterns they employ.
Further information about the project may be found at the PI web sites at
http://www.ee.columbia.edu/~wangx/ and http://genomics.lbl.gov/index.html.