* 0850160
* COF STEM Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Nanette Veilleux, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 05/31/2014
* USD 586,262.00

The Colleges Of the Fenway (COF) STEM Scholars program provides twenty incoming
freshman who have committed to majoring in science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM) with four-year scholarships. The program offers research and
internship opportunities, career planning assistance, mentoring and peer
support. Students conduct summer research or participate in internships at
universities or companies in the area and meet regularly to share insights.
Students qualifying for scholarships meet the following requirements: financial
need, strong academic record, and a commitment to pursue a STEM major.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COF STEM Scholars project addresses the following
goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase the number of graduates from Boston area
high schools matriculating to the COF and majoring and graduating in STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a support network for students with the
goal of increasing their academic success and
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To broaden the students' career goals;
exposing them to nontraditional careers in STEM related fields, particularly
those in demand in the local area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide experiential
learning opportunities through work with faculty on research projects and
through co-ops and internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create a model for
leveraging the COF members' resources to work with this population of students
that can be continued in future years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colleges of the
Fenway (COF), a non-profit collaboration of six small colleges in the Greater
Boston area with a combined undergraduate population of nearly 12,000, have a
longstanding commitment to working with and providing opportunities to the
residents of greater Boston. This commitment comes in the form of scholarships
to students, volunteer work in the schools and local community agencies and
civic involvement strengthening the city as whole. Four of the six members of
the COF participate in this program: Emmanuel College, Simmons College,
Wentworth Institute of Technology and Wheelock College. The two that are not
participating do not have majors that fit the S-STEM criteria. Each college
brings unique strengths to this partnership, along with a proven track record of
working together through the COF. This program focuses the shared commitment of
the COF, which is to educate the students from the community in which the
colleges reside on increasing the number of those students who pursue
undergraduate education in the STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
targeted student population, the students in the Greater Boston area, ranks 13th
among the nation's school districts serving poor students, according to the US
Census Bureau. In school year 2006-2007, 71% of Boston public school students
qualified for the city's free or reduced price lunch program. Eighty-six percent
of Boston Public School students are classified as Asian, Latino, African
American, and Native American. Through the use of targeted high school
recruitment efforts a more diverse population of students succeed in STEM majors
and professions and these STEM graduates encourage others to do the same.