* 0850223
* The Hymenoptera Ontology: Part of a Transformation in Systematic and Genome Science
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Andrew Deans, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Dickerson
* 02/28/2013
* USD 1,411,508.00

Sawflies, ants, bees, wasps (Hymenoptera) comprise an extraordinarily diverse
lineage of insects, with more than 115,000 described species and likely
1,000,000 species yet to be discovered. These insects serve critical roles as
pollinators, parasitoids, herbivores, and as models for research on social
behavior, physiology, speciation genetics, and to explore parasite-host
interactions. The vast anatomical diversity exhibited by these organisms,
coupled with a large body of disparate research and the eccentricities of
investigators, yields numerous concurrent and only partially overlapping
vocabularies that describe Hymenoptera anatomy. Centuries of Hymenoptera
research, therefore, remain clouded by inconsistent terminology (for example,
'annellus' is used for two different head structures and for a part of the male
genitalia).

This project will bring Hymenoptera researchers together to build a consensus
structured vocabulary (the Hymenoptera Anatomy Ontology) that 1) enables
discovery of research results from publications, 2) empowers taxonomists to
efficiently describe/ diagnose species and 3) provide improved access to
information for policy makers, farmers, land managers and the general public.
Tools will be developed that allow collaborators to virtually build ontologies
for any group of species, while making these data useful to the research
community via a Web-based anatomical atlas and application programming
interface; all software will be open source
(http://purl.oclc.org/NET/hymontology).

Three postdocs and three students will receive training in an emerging field:
ontologies in evolutionary biology.