* 0850435
* Conflict Bargaining with Endogenous Distribution of Power
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Branislav Slantchev, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2011
* USD 133,700.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International crises
occur when two states confront each other with mutually incompatible demands. In
general, states will not make concessions unless they are convinced that the
alternative of fighting will be even more unpleasant. Crisis negotiations are
exchanges of threats designed to persuade the opponent that one has the
political will to use force if one's demands are not met, and that one has the
military capabilities to render war sufficiently unpleasant to the opponent
relative to the concessions demanded. These threats will not work unless the
opponent believes both of these requirements are met-that is, they must be
credible. The general conclusion from our studies of crisis bargaining is that
to achieve credibility, actors must take actions that they could not, or would
not, have taken unless they were serious about fighting. We have studied
numerous ways in which militarily strong actors can signal their resolve, and we
have learned that if one can, then one signals strength and resolve in a crisis:
it never pays to pretend to be weak. The logic is straightforward: if one feigns
weakness successfully, the opponent will not concede, and one would have to
fight a costly and risky war. Hence, there appears to be no reason to signal
weakness if one is strong. There are, however, instances in which opponents have
concealed their strength even though they preferred to achieve a diplomatic
solution (e.g., the Chinese prior to their intervention in the Korean War in
1950), and these are quite puzzling from our theoretical
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates conditions under
which a strong resolved actor might pretend to be weak during a crisis. It uses
game-theoretic mathematical models to study the relationship between pre-war
crisis bargaining and war-fighting. Among the questions to be explored are: how
the information states transmit and obtain during the crisis influences their
fighting strategies, how the pursuit of optimal fighting strategies might clash
with the pursuit of peaceful means of crisis resolution, how actors might
deliberately mislead the opponent into a false sense of superiority and risk
deterrence failure in order to obtain a military advantage, the conditions that
make such feints more or less likely, and the implications for the signaling
theories of crisis bargaining. The project aims to advance the theories of the
causes of war as well by advancing the notion that war should be seen as
interdependent investments in costly effort to persuade the opponent to concede,
with strategies chosen reflecting what one believes about the opponent's
political will and military capacity. This further develops the study of war as
an interactive process instead of an outcome that terminates political
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to improve international
relations theory, but it makes broader contributions. The development of the
war-fighting component of the model is meant to bring our theories of war closer
to what policy-makers and military officers seem to have in mind when they
design war plans. Although the theoretical development is technical, the results
must be communicated to a wider audience because of their implication for
policy-making.