* 0850959
* REU Site: Investigations in Combinatorics, Geometry and Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Rolland Trapp, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2013
* USD 189,864.00

The REU Site: Investigations in Combinatorics, Geometry and Knot Theory will
engage a group of eight undergraduate students in significant mathematical
research for eight weeks during the summers of 2009-2011. During the summer
program participants will increase their mathematical maturity and independence
by immersing themselves in research. They will choose a research topic
introduced by experienced faculty mentors, conduct background reading and
relevant literature searches, collaborate with their peers, consult with their
mentors, give formal presentations, make independent discoveries, design and
present a poster for their project, and write a journal-style paper. As a result
of these activities, participants will have had a comprehensive and cohort
research experience. After completion of their summer projects, student papers
will be posted on the program's website and/or submitted to professional
journals. Moreover, participants will be encouraged and supported in their
efforts to present their results both at their home institutions and at relevant
professional meetings. Being introduced to the mathematical community at large
in this fashion will further serve to prepare participants for careers in
mathematics.

One of the most effective ways to create and sustain a diverse, vibrant, and
prepared mathematical workforce is to engage talented students in meaningful
research experiences early in their careers. The overarching goal of this
program is to help achieve the goal of maintaining such a community of
mathematicians. The program's commitment to diversity, aggressive recruiting,
and broad dissemination will help ensure a continued diverse population enters
the mathematical community. Involving students in research and in the community
at large not only prepares them for careers, but also introduces them to the
exhilaration of doing mathematics. The final outcome of this program, then, is
more than the immediate advances and discoveries found in the context of summer
research projects. It is a new generation of diverse, prepared, enthusiastic,
and talented mathematicians who will be contributing members of the community
for years to come.