* 0850642
* Analysis of Coupling between Oceanic Kelvin Waves and Atmospheric Convection, and Its Impacts on Weather over the Tropical Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Paul Roundy, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2013
* USD 353,566.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The westerly wind phase of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) often triggers
oceanic Kelvin waves in the equatorial West Pacific Ocean. Occasionally these
waves are associated with eastward moving warm sea surface temperature (SST)
anomalies. The anomalously warm ocean destabilizes the atmosphere to
convectively coupled waves, and the associated enhanced deep convection
accelerates westerly winds to the west of the Kelvin wave crests; this, in turn,
amplifies the Kelvin waves. This pattern suggests that oceanic Kelvin waves and
atmospheric convection are coupled. Preliminary results indicate that this
coupling organizes high impact weather events across the tropical Pacific,
including westerly wind bursts and tropical cyclones. While such weather events
can occur within the MJO prior to the development of oceanic Kelvin waves, the
waves influence the further development of weather. Such coupling to the ocean
is not included in traditional views of the MJO. In this project the evolutions
of atmospheric structures associated with these convectively coupled oceanic
waves will be investigated, as well as their associations with high-impact
weather.

Observations of such coupled events will be analyzed to diagnose the details of
their three dimensional spatial structures in the atmosphere and their evolution
over time. Particular attention will be paid to the evolution of weather events
in the vicinity of the Kelvin waves, in order to determine how these events
participate in the coupling process. The approach is to prepare and analyze
composites of many events, to analyze individual cases, and to make a census of
the population of all events. Results will contribute to a synoptic-dynamic
model for the coupled events and their links with the associated weather.

This study will enhance our understanding of the interactions of oceanic Kelvin
waves with the MJO, some westerly wind bursts, and tropical cyclones.

Broader impacts of this project include the potential to predict the development
of coupled events along with their associated extreme weather. This work should
lead to further analyses of the potential connections between the intraseasonal
coupling and the evolution of El Nino. The project will support the work of a
beginning investigator and the training of a graduate student.