* 0850905
* Collaborative Research: Documenting N2 fixation in N deficient waters of the Eastern Tropical South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Dennis Hansell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 164,358.00

Several independent lines of geochemical and remote sensing evidence suggest
that dinitrogen (N2) fixation may be associated with surface waters downstream
of major oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) and in particular in the Eastern Tropical
South Pacific (ETSP). However, little direct evidence supports these inferences.
Besides substantiating these indirect assessments, documenting significant N2
fixation in the ETSP would provide insight into two longstanding controversies:
Is the marine N budget balanced, as implied by modeling and paleoceanographic
data, and if so, how are the processes that add and remove N spatially, and thus
temporally coupled? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project researchers at the
University of Southern California and the University of Miami will test the
hypothesis that fixation occurs in the ETSP at areal rates that equal or exceed
those previously documented in more well-studied regions such as the
oligotrophic waters of the sub/tropical North Atlantic. If scaled to the surface
area of ETSP waters, this could add an additional 10-50 Tg N per year of inputs
to the global marine N budget. They will undertake two cruises in the ETSP
during early and late summer in two consecutive years to assess the quantitative
significance of N2 fixation as a source of new N to surface waters using
complementary biological and geochemical tools. N2 fixation rates will be
evaluated on two temporal/spatial scales: daily/local (bottle 15N2 incubations
and floating sediment traps); and seasonal/regional (d15N budget using moored
sediment traps and water column TDN d15N). These estimates provide detailed
observations of potential N2 fixation during station occupation in two summer
seasons, when rates are expected to be greatest, as well as prolonged
observation over lower expected N2 fixation periods. A combination of these
different estimates will aim to determine if N2 fixation in this region can help
balance the marine N budget. If all goes as planned, this study will determine
the quantitative importance of N2 fixation in the ETSP, and whether these
previously undocumented rates can help resolve the marine N budget. Implications
include the ability of the marine N cycle to maintain homeostasis, and thus the
global C cycle on glacial/interglacial time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide research
experience and opportunities for a postdoctoral associate as well as a graduate
student. There will be direct interactions and opportunities for mentoring with
graduate students in the laboratory and on cruises. Also, the project will
routinely involve undergraduates as work-studies and participate in the USC
Geobiology REU Program. The proposed activities will be integrated with the work
of the NSF funded COSEE-West program to USC and UCLA. This Center involves a
network of oceanographic researchers, K-12 educators, education centers and the
general public in the greater Los Angeles area.