* 0850252
* Realizing UB's Readiness, Innovation and Commitment to STEM Student Support
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Joseph Gardella, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 01/31/2015
* USD 598,000.00

The University at Buffalo (UB), State University of New York proposes a project
entitled: Realizing UB's Readiness, Innovation and Commitment to STEM Student
Support. The plan is to develop a comprehensive scholarship and support program
for talented underrepresented students who wish to pursue a course of study in
science, technology engineering or mathematics (STEM) at both the undergraduate
and graduate level. Additional wrap around services include tutoring,
supplemental instruction in STEM gatekeeper courses, faculty mentoring research
opportunities service learning and paid internships. Twenty four-year $5,000
undergraduate scholarships and six two-year $10,000 graduate scholarship are to
be offered. The intellectual merit of the program is the interdisciplinary
alignment of UB's academic programs with research, service learning, academic
support and scholarships individually developed fro each student. A key
hypothesis is that it is not the lack of support services that limits student's
success, but rather the intentional or unintentional decision not to participate
in such programs. The broader impacts involve the integration of STEM mentoring
faculty with underrepresented STEM students in the development of expanded
learning communities (ELCs). The learning communities are to increase the
participation of all categories of underrepresented students, by providing an
extensive support network. The intent is that personalized mentoring will engage
more students particularly those who may be first generation college students.