* 0850421
* Nutritional, environmental, and genetic regulation of toxicity and growth in Dinophysis
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2013
* USD 747,360.00

The dinoflagellate genus Dinophysis is important from ecological, evolutionary,
and public health perspectives. In the former category, some members of this
genus derive their nutrition through a unique, multi-stage process requiring
cryptophyte and ciliate prey. Evolutionarily, the modification of cryptophyte
chloroplasts during feeding and their subsequent utilization for photosynthesis
provides a model system for investigations of plastid acquisition and evolution.
From the public health perspective, Dinophysis species are responsible for the
vast majority of diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP) cases. DSP is a syndrome
predominantly associated with consumption of shellfish that have accumulated
Dinophysis toxins. It is a major health and economic problem for many countries
and is among the most important and widespread of the harmful algal bloom
(HAB)-associated poisoning syndromes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades, many
aspects of Dinophysis physiology, toxicity, and genetics have remained
intractable due to our inability to grow and maintain these organisms in
laboratory cultures. As a result of a recent breakthrough, however, this
obstacle no longer exists and an array of important experiments and measurements
are now possible. The opportunities for major advances on multiple fronts are
significant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a
comprehensive study to investigate nutritional, environmental, and genetic
regulation of toxicity and growth in Dinophysis. Their overall hypothesis is
that toxin variability in Dinophysis is regulated not only by genetic
differences among Dinophysis species and strains, but also by differences in
ciliate and cryptophyte food availability and quality, and by environmental
influences as well. They will establish and genetically characterize a
geographically diverse culture collection that will include a variety of
isolates of Dinophysis, Myrionecta and other ciliates, and cryptophytes. Much of
this culture collection has already been assembled in advance of this
submission. The culture assemblage will then be used to investigate Dinophysis
and ciliate feeding selectivity, grazing rates, and growth. The next major
objective is to explore mechanisms underlying toxin variability in Dinophysis.
This will include analysis of geographically dispersed Dinophysis isolates fed
with an array of ciliates and cryptophytes, as well as an examination of the
role of environmental factors such as temperature, light, and nutrients in toxin
production. The research project will rely on a proven system and methods -
cultures of Dinophysis that have been growing at high rates in the PI's
laboratory many months, established experimental protocols, and sophisticated
toxin chemistry using state-of-the-art instruments and techniques. This project
will begin to answer longstanding questions in dinoflagellate physiology,
ecology, toxicity, and evolution while providing valuable information on a
significant public health and economic problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This project lends itself to undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
training. PI Anderson will support a PhD student on this project and will
involve several undergraduate interns in the study as well. Anderson typically
supports several Northeastern University interns who work in the laboratory for
6 months to obtain experience to guide education and career options.
Postdoctoral Scholar Juliette Smith will participate in the toxin analysis, on a
WHOI fellowship. The resulting culture collection will be shared with others
working in this field to accelerate scientific progress. Project results will be
broadly disseminated through scientific papers, presentations at workshops,
conferences, and seminars, and discussions with the media. Furthermore, since
the organisms being studied are responsible for a major form of shellfish
poisoning that affects countries throughout the world, this project has
significant practical implications that readily satisfy the criterion fostering
connections between discoveries and their use in the service of society.