* 0850718
* Collaborative Research:  Robust Predictions In Games With Private Information
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Stephen Morris, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 03/31/2013
* USD 233,332.00

In many economic environments the participants do not have the same
information&lt;br/&gt;about the relevant aspects of their situation. For
example, in a financial market each&lt;br/&gt;investor may have different pieces
of information about the underlying value of an asset&lt;br/&gt;or a company. In
product markets, each competiting firm may have private
information&lt;br/&gt;about its cost structure. In auctions, such as the
wireless spectrum auctions organized&lt;br/&gt;by the Federal Communications
Commission or the offshore oil tracts auctioned off by&lt;br/&gt;the U.S.
Department of the Interior, the bidders have private information about
their&lt;br/&gt;valuations and also some, possibly noisy, information about the
valuations of their&lt;br/&gt;competitors.&lt;br/&gt;The private information of
an agent, whether it is about his/her own valuations or the&lt;br/&gt;valuations
of the competing agents will determine the behavior and the strategy of
the&lt;br/&gt;agent. But in practice, the theoretical and/or empirical analysts
do not have a clear&lt;br/&gt;understanding of what the economic agents know
and, in particular, what they do or do&lt;br/&gt;not know about each other. The
missing and incomplete information si also highly&lt;br/&gt;relevant from a
policy perspective as the supervising or regulatory authority in
many&lt;br/&gt;markets face similar informational constraints.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
develop methods that allow predictions about the behavior of economic
agents&lt;br/&gt;and the reulting market allocations in such settings. These
predictions are robust to a&lt;br/&gt;large class of private information
structures by the agents. They identify conditions on&lt;br/&gt;the nature of
the interaction and the market under which it is possible to make
unique&lt;br/&gt;predictions about economic behavior. When these conditions are
not met, the PIs&lt;br/&gt;establish robust bounds on the distribution of
possible economic outcomes, especially&lt;br/&gt;the mean and the variance of
the outcomes. They use these bounds to predict the&lt;br/&gt;welfare impact of
information sharing in markets. They also use the bounds to
design&lt;br/&gt;robust mechanisms, such as auction and voting methods, that
perform well in many&lt;br/&gt;information environments.&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides an economic theory that can lead to practical solutions to
market&lt;br/&gt;and mechanism design problems. It also provides a theoretical
foundation for future&lt;br/&gt;work in econometrics aimed at testing models in
situations where the researcher does&lt;br/&gt;not know the market's information
structure.&lt;br/&gt;This research will have broader impacts for the many
different areas of social science&lt;br/&gt;that use game theory as a
fundamental tool. In addition, the project has direct&lt;br/&gt;implications for
antitrust policy, since whether or not to allow sellers to share
information&lt;br/&gt;is a question for price-fixing policy.