* 0850352
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Alternative Mating Strategies: "Following" in Male Olive Baboons (Papio hamadryas anubis)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Ryne Palombit, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2011
* USD 14,996.00

Behavioral ecologists have developed theory arguing that alternative mating
strategies allow individuals to maximize reproductive success by varying the
expression of traits in light of the individual's condition (e.g., body size or
dominance status) or environmental circumstances. Little is known, however,
about how individuals may pursue different strategies that depend upon varying
conditions. The primary mating strategy of olive baboon (Papio hamadryas anubis)
males is the well known sexual consortship. Such consortships are characterized
by close spatial proximity, male defense of his access to the female, and
relatively high rates of copulation between a male and estrous (fertile) female.
What is less often appreciated about this view of the olive baboon mating system
is that such consorting pairs are typically accompanied by a retinue of one to
eight 'follower' males. These males maintain variable proximity to the
consorting pair, interacting with both other 'followers' and the consorting
pair. &lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to examine the evolutionary
significance of the 'following' strategy. The first objective is to determine
the costs and benefits of alternative mating strategies for males. The second
objective is to examine the impact of male condition on the expression of
alternative mating strategies. The third objective is to determine if females
influence these strategies. Behavioral data will be collected on two habituated
groups of olive baboons in Laikipia District, Kenya for 18 months. Activity and
social behavior will be recorded during ten minute focal samples of consorting
pairs and any associated 'followers'. Synthesizing genetic paternity analysis
with these behavioral data will examine the benefits of
'following'.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there is a gap in our understanding of
alternative strategies: nonmammalian taxa are well studied and provide the
foundation of relevant theory. There are, however, very few relevant detailed
data from nonhuman primates which are of particular interest as this taxon
exhibits relatively greater degrees of behavioral flexibility than the
nonmammalian taxa. Therefore, the expression of alternative strategies in
nonhuman primates provides an opportunity to incorporate more meaningfully
behaviorally flexible taxa. In addition, alternative strategies are thought to
be important throughout human evolution and help explain variation in mating
behavior in contemporary human populations. Thus, there are compelling reasons
to scrutinize further the nonhuman primates, in order to expand a currently
limited base of animal models that facilitates understanding of the evolution of
such strategies.