* 0850730
* Changing Phytoplankton Trace Metal Requirements in a High CO2 Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Feixue Fu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 428,461.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past two decades, the
fundamental importance of iron and other bioactive trace metals in structuring
marine food webs and biogeochemical cycles has been realized. Even more
recently, over the past several years, the international ocean science community
has begun to mobilize in an urgent effort to understand the ecosystem-level
consequences of rising anthropogenic CO2 and acidification of the global ocean.
This project examines the intersection of these two major research themes, by
asking the question: How will the trace element requirements of marine
phytoplankton change in response to future increases in atmospheric
pCO2?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data generated by the investigators
suggests that changing pCO2 can indeed profoundly affect the cellular quotas of
Fe, Mo, Zn, Cd, Co and Mn in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic phytoplankton.
Trace metals play critical roles as enzymatic co-factors for processes that are
closely linked to the availability of CO2 such as carbon and nitrogen fixation,
photosynthetic electron transport, and nutrient acquisition. Therefore, it is
important to develop methods to quantitatively predict how algal metal
requirements will change in tomorrow's rapidly changing ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will take a three-pronged approach to
addressing this overarching question. Laboratory experiments will measure the
trace metal quotas of steady-state cultures of key phytoplankton functional
groups like diatoms, coccolithophores, Phaeocystis, and diazotrophic and pico-
cyanobacteria while varying pCO2 both alone, and together with other limiting
factors such as iron, temperature, and light. Field work in the Southern
California bight will provide measurements in trace metal stoichiometry of
natural phytoplankton communities over a seasonal cycle in relation to pCO2 and
other environmental variables -- this region is already experiencing some of the
largest increases in acidic upwelled water along the entire West Coast. This
observational and correlative study will be coupled with manipulative
experiments at the USC Catalina Island facility in which trace metal quotas of
the same natural phytoplankton communities can be measured in relation to pCO2
shifts under controlled incubation conditions. Together, these three
complementary approaches will enable the investigators to determine over a
variety of temporal and spatial scales how phytoplankton-driven trace element
biogeochemistry is likely to change in a future high-CO2
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include providing an opportunity
for a major career milestone for young lead investigator Fu, a female minority
investigator at USC, as well as opportunities for under-represented students
through the summer NSF-REU programs, senior research thesis programs at USC, and
a new initiative for student recruitment with the Society for Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science. The societal and scientific impacts of
this project include offering a novel perspective on the integrated responses of
ocean biology and biogeochemistry to ongoing anthropogenic change, with the
ultimate goal of better predicting future shifts in basic ocean resources and
potential feedbacks to global climate.