* 0850839
* Collaborative Research: Hypoxia and  the ecology, behavior and physiology of jumbo squid, Dosidicus gigas
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* William Gilly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 380,663.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the ecological
physiology of Dosidicus gigas, a large squid endemic to the eastern Pacific
where it inhabits both open ocean and continental shelf environments. Questions
to be addressed include: 1) How does utilization of the OML by D. gigas vary on
both a daily and seasonal basis, and how do the vertical distributions of the
OML and its associated fauna vary? 2)What behaviors of squid are impaired by
conditions found in the OML, and how are impairments compensated to minimize
costs of utilizing this environment? and 3)What are the physiological and
biochemical processes by which squid maintain swimming activity at such
remarkable levels under low oxygen conditions? The investigators will use an
integrated approach involving oceanographic, acoustic, electronic tagging,
physiological and biochemical methods. D. gigas provides a trophic connection
between small, midwater organisms and top vertebrate predators, and daily
vertical migrations between near-surface waters and a deep, low-oxygen
environment (OML) characterize normal behavior of adult squid. Electronic
tagging has shown that this squid can remain active for extended periods in the
cold, hypoxic conditions of the upper OML. Laboratory studies have demonstrated
suppression of aerobic metabolism during a cold, hypoxic challenge, but
anaerobic metabolism does not appear to account for the level of activity
maintained. Utilization of the OML in the wild may permit daytime foraging on
midwater organisms. Foraging also occurs near the surface at night, and
Dosidicus may thus be able to feed continuously. D. gigas is present in
different regions of the Guaymas Basin on a predicable year-round basis,
allowing changes in squid distribution to be related to changing oceanographic
features on a variety time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is of
broad interest because Dosidicus gigas has substantially extended its range over
the last decade, and foraging on commercially important finfish in invaded areas
off California and Chile has been reported. In addition, the OML has expanded
during the last several decades, mostly vertically by shoaling, including in the
Gulf of Alaska, the Southern California Bight and several productive regions of
tropical oceans, and a variety of ecological impacts will almost certainly
accompany changes in the OML. Moreover, D. gigas currently supports the world's
largest squid fishery, and this study will provide acoustic methods for reliable
biomass estimates, with implications for fisheries management in Mexico and
elsewhere. A related goal is to work with colleagues in Mexico on a squid
fishery management plan. Previous work involved collaboration with Mexican
colleagues, including training and research opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students from both nations. It also involved public
outreach efforts through television, print and web media. This charismatic
species provides an excellent means to connect climate change with ecological
effects, and outreach activities will continue with this theme. A new
international effort will establish a laboratory for research on squid at the
site of field work in Santa Rosalia, Baja California Sur, Mexico. The facility
will involve Mexican college students in marine research and implement local
educational programs.