* 0850816
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Cooperation, Altruism, and Human Warfare
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Robert Boyd, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2011
* USD 14,076.00

University of California in Los Angeles graduate student, Sarah Mathew, with the
guidance of Dr. Robert T. Boyd, will undertake research on the important
question: Why do humans cooperate in war when this means putting their
individual lives at risk for the benefit of their social group? This is called
the "collective action problem" by social scientists. Four explanations for such
cooperation are prominent in the literature: people cooperate to avoid
punishment, people fight to enhance their reputations as cooperators, people
fight to signal personal qualities to potential mates, and people fight in order
to benefit relatives. The researcher will test these competing hypotheses with
data to be gathered in 13 months of field work among the Turkana, a nomadic
pastoralist people of northwest Kenya. The Turkana practice large-scale cattle
raiding, which makes them appropriate for this research.

Data will be collected in the Turkana region by recruiting herders who visit the
town of Lokichoggio from nomadic settlements in the north Turkana territory. The
researcher will employ a mix of methods including, 1) in-depth semi-structured
interviews with warriors for behavioral data relating to the predictions, and
for an ethnographic understanding of raiding; 2) vignette studies to explore how
people respond to specific scenarios where individuals fail to contribute in a
raid; and 3) behavioral economic experiments for insight into how raiding
affects preferences for cooperation within one's own group.

The results of this study will elucidate how the collective action problem is
dealt with in pre-state warfare, and will thereby contribute towards
understanding the basis of large-scale cooperation in humans, more generally.
The research also will shed new light on the causes of human warfare.