* 0850106
* Into the Community: Changing Perceptions and Increasing Participation in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Susan Fox, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2015
* USD 586,500.00

This project awards scholarships based on student financial need and
demonstrated interest in pursuing a major in computer science or a minor in
computer science together with a major in another science field. The scholars
receive special mentoring by faculty about choices of careers in computer
science. They become part of a community of students in the sciences
specializing in IT: 1) by being part of a peer tutoring program for computer
science courses; 2) by presenting to other students what they learned from an
experiential learning activity, in the form of an internship in industry or
computing research with faculty, 3) by investigating possible IT careers through
attendance at career panels featuring alumni working in industry and non-profits
and additional industry representatives; 4) by attending computer science
conferences such as the ACM's Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in
Computing or the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in computing; and 5) by
participating in a K-12 outreach program where undergraduates develop "road
shows" of demonstrations appropriate for middle or high-school age students in
an effort to show that computer science can be fun, and a career in IT can be
interesting and benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
activities that the scholars undertake as part of their undergraduate experience
have been suggested by previous studies that examined the small participation of
women and underrepresented groups in computer science and by studies of the lack
of student interest in computer science as a field of study. Experiential
learning activities increase and sustain their interest in computer science. The
faculty mentoring, peer support groups, and electronic mentoring illustrate to
students that computer science is a profession they can pursue or that they can
effectively use computers in other scientific endeavors of their choosing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Women and students of underrepresented
groups are encouraged to join the scholarship program and participate in the
activities provided by the Mathematics and Computer Science Department. The
project activities make these students feel welcome and confident that they can
pursue a career that involves information technology. An added long-term benefit
is that the K-12 students who participate in the outreach activities led by the
scholars have a change in attitude about computing and see it as a fun and
interesting field to consider in college.