* 0850857
* Mechanisms controlling the production and fate of DOM during diatom blooms
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2014
* USD 689,579.00

Intellectual Merit: The residence time of DOM in surface waters of marine
systems is the main factor determining its contribution to the efficiency and
magnitude of the biological carbon pump. There is growing evidence that the
export of DOM from the surface ocean represents a highly efficient pathway for
the sequestration of organic carbon in the deep sea in some ocean regions.
Current estimates are that 20% of the carbon transported to depth by the
biological pump globally occurs via the export of DOC. Effective export of DOM
requires that the DOM produced by phytoplankton persist in surface waters until
vertical exchange processes transport the material to depth. The mechanisms
controlling the time scale for the accumulation and persistence of DOM in
surface waters are dominated by biological processes that influence the amount
and chemical character of the DOM produced and its consumption and decomposition
by microbes. This project addresses these two coupled biological processes to
examine controls on the accumulation of DOM during temperate diatom blooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diatom blooms are known to produce prodigious quantities
of DOM upon entering nutrient stress with a chemical composition that varies
with the type of nutrient limitation (Si or N). This variable composition likely
influences the nutritional value of DOM to microbes driving species successions
towards functional groups of heterotrophic prokaryotes that are best able to
metabolize particular forms of DOM. To date each side of this coupled system of
production/consumption has been examined independently. A few studies have
examined how limitation by different limiting nutrients affects the chemical
character of the DOM produced by phytoplankton, while others have focused on the
fate of DOM without detailed understanding of the mechanisms influencing its
initial chemical composition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
examine both sides of this coupled process simultaneously to see how different
forms of nutrient limitation drive the chemical character of DOM and the
subsequent microbial response which together determine the fate of DOM produced
during diatom blooms. The investigators will employ a combination of laboratory
and field based approaches to: 1) Investigate how limitation by either N or Si
impacts the chemical composition of the DOM released by diatom blooms. 2)
Determine how differences in the composition of DOM produced by diatoms
experiencing different nutrient stresses affects it susceptibility to
heterotrophic microbial processing through changes in the productivity, growth
efficiency and community structure of bacterioplankton.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on diatom blooms for two reasons.
Diatom blooms are a regular feature in regions of the ocean where DOC export is
known to be significant, i.e. such as the North Atlantic, making the fate of the
DOM produced during blooms a potentially significant mechanism of C export. In
addition, the direct release of DOM from phytoplankton is the best studied of
numerous DOM production process providing the background for formulating
hypotheses on how changes in DOM production and composition affect the bacterial
response that drives its consumption. Preliminary data indicates that waters of
the Santa Barbara Channel, California are an ideal model system for conducting
this research because the spring diatom bloom is sufficiently predictable and
amenable to the types of manipulations required for these studies, and ambient
DOM concentrations are low for coastal waters allowing small changes in DOM
concentrations to be resolved in both laboratory and field
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will contribute
to the greater scientific goal of understanding the role of upper ocean food
webs in carbon cycling. The findings will improve our basic understanding of DOM
dynamics aiding modelers in the development of improved representations of key
processes in ecosystem models. The project will enable the education of the next
generation of biological oceanographers by training graduate students, and it
will be leveraged to introduce oceanography into the curriculum of local K- 12
students to make them aware of the importance of the oceans to their lives and
of the possibility of oceanography as a career choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;