* 0850198
* Broadening Opportunities for Nontraditional Graduate Students in Biomolecular Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* F. McNabb, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 05/31/2015
* USD 506,373.00

The growth in biotechnology and its impact on agriculture has created a need for
a highly trained workforce of graduate-level scientists. This S-STEM project at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VT) is addressing that need
by offering scholarships and educational opportunities in biomolecular science
to academically talented, financially eligible graduate students. The project
focuses on nontraditional graduate students, identifying them as a demographic
group that faces a number of road blocks (e.g., time, resources, and perceptions
about limited career opportunities) that make it more difficult to pursue
graduate degrees, particularly in the agricultural biosciences. The VT S-STEM
program is providing scholarships of $10,000/year to each of fourteen graduate
students, representing a total of 44 scholarship years. Students are being
recruited through a number of existing programs at VT (for example, Graduate
School programs, and MAOP, the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences Online
Master's Program) and through websites and individual contact by faculty, and
are selected for the S-STEM program based on academic ability, need, and
interest. The scholars are being mentored by faculty in the Biochemistry and
Entomology departments, many of whom were hired as part of a collaborative team
for VT's biotechnology initiative. In addition to scholarships and academic
training, the S-STEM scholars have opportunities for real-world experience
through internships at two agricultural biotechnology companies. Scholars are
also exposed to an extensive support system that provides personal and career
development support to ensure their academic success and competitiveness for
jobs in biotechnology. The project team is also assessing the degree to which
their S-STEM program enhances academic and professional development and improves
the appeal of agriculture as a career among nontraditional students. This
graduate level S-STEM program complements an existing S-STEM project at the
institution, which focuses on undergraduate biotechnology students.