* 0850175
* Observations and Analysis of Deep Equatorial Variability in the Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* J. Thomas Farrar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2015
* USD 420,259.00

More than 30 years have passed since equatorial deep jets were first observed in
the Indian Ocean. In the intervening decades, seeming long-lived zonal deep jets
have also been observed/inferred in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, along with
variability at shorter period (most notably, meridional motions on the equator
at roughly monthly timescales). Both analytical and numerical modeling have been
applied to investigate the dynamics of deep equatorial motions and several
theories for have been forwarded, however none have proven completely
satisfactory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic characterization of the deep
variability in the Atlantic is hampered by limited observations. High vertical
resolution ship observations are available at intervals of 6 months or longer;
temporally-continuous moored time series from discrete sensors fail to resolve
the high wavenumber character of the near-equatorial motions. This project will
collect the most extensive measurements of deep equatorial Atlantic variability
thus far. It is a joint U.S.- German study of deep ocean variability in the
equatorial Atlantic in conjunction with an existing upper ocean moored
measurement effort funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research. The new data will be key to evaluating existing theories of deep
equatorial motions (perhaps motivating new ideas) and validating numerical
models. Beyond scientific interaction, this project will also facilitate the
sharing of technical mooring procedures between WHOI and IFM-GEOMAR
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moored Profiler instruments will be prepared by
both Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and The Leibniz Institute of Marine
Sciences at the University of Kiel (IFM-GEOMAR) technicians and mounted on 5
separately-funded moorings along 23W between Lats. 2N and 2S and programmed to
repeatedly sample between approximately 1000 and 3500 m depth for a 1.5 year
period (November 2009?spring 2011). The combined observing system (existing
upper ocean moored ADCP and discrete T/S sensors with added deep Moored
Profilers) will return at lowest-common-denominator: 16-m vertical resolution
velocity profiles at 4-d interval from the surface to 3500 m depth and T/S
information at ~10 levels through the upper ocean increasing to ~1 m vertical
resolution at depth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired data will be jointly
processed and analyzed by investigators from WHOI and IFM-GEOMAR in conjunction
with available remote sensing data and numerical model output. The data will
also be shared with fellow North American investigators who have studied deep
equatorial variability in the past; these scientists will be invited to
contribute to the analysis effort&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research goal is
to develop a better understanding of the dynamics of the deep equatorial
Atlantic variability and the effects of these motions on the ocean general
circulation. One particular focus of the analysis will be the relationships
between the Atlantic Deep Western Boundary Current and the equatorial deep jets,
in particular, communication of Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
variability between hemispheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
study will be better understanding of processes important for climate dynamics,
exchange of ideas and practical information between the US team from WHOI and
German team from IFM-GEOMAR, and enhancing the early career of the CoPI. The
acquired data will also be shared with other investigators who have studied deep
equatorial variability in the past; these scientists will be invited to
contribute to the analysis effort.