* 0850549
* National Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems Research Directions for Transportation:  Aviation, Automobiles and Rail
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Radha Poovendran, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports a National Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) Research
Directions for&lt;br/&gt;Transportation: Aviation, Automobiles and Rail. The
workshop is to be held in Seattle, Washington, November 18-20, 2008, with
sponsorship from the NITRD High Confidence Software and Systems interagency
Coordinating Group. The purpose of the meeting is to identify common needs and
research challenges that must be addressed to support the healthy future of
constituent transportation sectors (e.g., aviation, automotive, railway) and for
the collective transportation sector as a whole. All sectors share the
characteristic that future vehicles will interact with other vehicles and with a
dramatically changing infrastructure in a way that is fundamentally cyber-
enabled. Cyber-physical systems are systems in which networked, real-time,
embedded control is pervasive at all levels of integration, and there is a
continuum of autonomy and authority shared by humans and systems. When viewed as
cyber physical systems, future vehicle and transportation system designs can
lead to improvements in safety, security, energy-efficiency, control, and
maintenance of such systems. This national workshop will help to facilitate the
identification of common as well as distinct research needs of the sectors and
the research challenges that will be identified by viewing these large
distributed systems, with heterogeneous constituent vehicular systems, as
dynamic cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;