* 0850858
* The Bilingual Jury: The Inclusion of Non-English Speaking Jurors and its Effect On Jury Deliberation and Jury Verdicts
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* James Richardson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 04/30/2013
* USD 249,499.00

A growing number of American citizens do not know English well enough to serve
on a jury, which has implications for a system of justice committed to trial by
a jury of peers. New Mexico is the only state where non-English speaking (NES)
jurors routinely serve on juries, but no research examines how multiple
languages between jurors affect jury decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research examines the impact of multiple languages among jurors on jury
deliberations. Available social-psychological literature allows starkly
different predictions. Some research suggests that NES jurors may undermine jury
deliberations; other research suggests that NES jurors enhance the quality of
deliberations. Further, language differences (esp. English vs. Spanish) tend to
mark differences between ethnic groups; thus, inclusion of NES jurors may either
increase or reduce biases against minority defendants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the cooperation of the Supreme Court of New Mexico, competing predictions are
tested in a mock jury study using jury-qualified citizens. The study varies the
absence or presence of a Spanish-speaking juror who requires simultaneous
translation by a professional interpreter. Second, the study compares majority
Anglo or Latino mock juries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results will have
implications for jury systems across the United States. If NES jurors do not
compromise the jury decision-making process, other jurisdictions may follow New
Mexico?s model. The inclusion of NES jurors would ensure that defendants are
tried by a jury truly representing their community?an important issue in states
with high NES populations. However, if this research identifies problems
associated with the inclusion of NES jurors, New Mexico may seek ways to
overcome any shortcomings in jury decision processes. Other jurisdictions may
learn how best to include NES jurors, if they desire to do so.&lt;br/&gt;