* 0850606
* Monopsony in the Labor Market: Quasi-Experimental Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Jordan Matsudaira, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 175,367.00

Recently, there is renewed interest in economics in monopsony models that begin
from the premise that the labor supply curves to individual firms are upward
sloping rather than infinitely elastic as in models of perfectly competitive
markets. Monopsony models imply that firms have some power to reduce workers'
wages below competitive levels due to frictions that make job switching costly,
and can lead to very different predictions about the effects of important labor
market policies such as minimum wage floors. The empirical relevance of
monopsony models remains quite controversial, however, due to a lack of quality
evidence. This project directly estimates the labor supply elasticity to
individual firms' the key parameter distinguishing between competitive and
monopsonistic models of the labor market. Due to well-understood simultaneity
biases, the literature has attempted to estimate this parameter only a handful
of times with mixed results. This project makes use of a novel identification
strategy to overcome this challenge that exploits a series of regulations that
established minimum nurse to patient ratios in California nursing homes. The
minimum staffing legislation induced firms with low initial staffing levels to
hire more nurses to comply with the law, while leaving unaffected firms that
were already in compliance with the legislated mandates. The essence of this
research design is to examine the extent to which firms that were forced to hire
more workers had to raise their wages relative to their competitors' wages in
order to attract the additional labor. If wages rose among firms that had to
hire more labor relative to wages among those that did not, then this is
evidence of the upward sloping supply curve implied by monopsony models. This
project tests this basic prediction for various subgroups of workers and firms
to gain insight on potential sources of monopsony power.

This study provides the most compelling evidence to date on the key parameter
that distinguishes between monopsony and perfectly competitive models of the
labor market. There are only three studies that have previously attempted to
estimate the labor supply elasticity to firms using a research design with
plausible identifying assumptions. This analysis of a transparent natural
experiment provides several internal validity checks and can therefore provide
information on the credibility of the inferences made. Further, by replicating
the analysis among workers of different skill and among firms located in urban
versus rural areas, this project provides information about the potential
sources of monopsony that has remained unexplored by the literature. Broader
Impacts: This debate is not merely of academic interest. Which model more
accurately describes the labor market has broad reaching implications for nearly
all ex ante evaluations of labor policy. To name a few important examples,
theoretical statements about the desirability of minimum wage floors, the
sources of race and gender pay gaps, and the causes of increased wage inequality
are all sensitive to assumptions about whether the labor market is assumed to be
perfectly competitive or monopsonistic. Moreover, the analysis will shed light
on the impact and costs of an important policy in vogue among state governments
seeking to improve the quality of health care provision in nursing homes and
hospitals.