* 0850548
* Implications of an Invasive Forest Pathogen for Alpine Treeline Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Diana Tomback, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 439,006.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This multidisciplinary project focuses on how an introduced
disease, white pine blister rust, can alter ecosystem function through the
mortality of whitebark pine, a keystone and foundation species of subalpine and
treeline communities of the western United States and Canada. Blister rust is
causing whitebark pine to decline across much of its range; this decline has
undermined mountain biodiversity and ecosystem services. This research will
investigate the combined impacts of whitebark pine mortality and climate change
at alpine treelines. To do so, it employs a novel research approach that
synthesizes complex interactions among vegetation, climate and pathogens. The
researchers will analyze geographic variation in the role of whitebark pine and
blister rust incidence at treelines in the American and Canadian Rocky Mountains
by employing spatial analysis to model blister rust incidence and distribution.
The researchers will also use natural experiments to reveal how the mortality of
whitebark pine may affect ecosystem function. A primary outcome of this project
will be a spatially explicit predictive model that integrates theory with
empirical observations to determine if and how exotic disease will alter
mountain landscapes and confound regional climate change predictions for the
treeline ecotone and other mountain ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
is the first systematic investigation of the implications of exotic disease upon
alpine treeline dynamics. As such, it is a pioneering contribution to the new
field of landscape pathology. The research will shed light on how an exotic and
invasive disease, coupled with the impacts of climate warming, can alter the
structure and function of a critical global ecosystem through mortality of a
keystone and foundation species. By assessing the role of species interactions,
such as pathogen-host and nurse species interactions, this study will advance
current bioclimatic models that predict geographic range and ecosystem
composition in future climates. Project results will guide development of
mitigation and management techniques, and will serve as a basis for educating
the public in national parks and forests. This project will provide educational
opportunities for several graduate and undergraduate students, including those
from underrepresented groups, who will participate in field work in Montana and
data analysis. &lt;br/&gt;