* 0850853
* GDBase:  An Engine for Scalable offline Debugging
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Daniel Stanzione, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 03/31/2010
* USD 302,142.00

Debugging at large scale is a constant challenge in the operation of leadership
class systems. While there has been substantial attention paid to parallel
debugging in general in both the research and commercial arenas, most parallel
debuggers rely on a visual motif for conveying information about program
execution and communication. These approaches tend to be invaluable for
understanding and debugging program function at tens of tasks, but are simply
not suitable for finding elusive problems that occur at tens of thousands of
tasks. Even if the interfaces were useable at that scale (and licenses were
available), current iterations of many commercial debuggers fail to function
properly beyond 2,048 cores. The challenge of debugging at large scale is
exacerbated by the normal mode of operation of very large systems. These systems
tend to run 24x7 in a batch mode intended to maximize system utilization and
throughput. Negotiating the large blocks of time to operate a substantial
fraction of the system in an interactive mode is difficult at best, and cost-
prohibitive at worst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
investigators will lay out the design for the GDBase debugging framework. GDBase
is designed to attack three of the key problems of debugging on the largest
systems.&lt;br/&gt;1.) Lack of Scalability - most commercial debuggers are too
heavyweight to launch or provide a useable interface at many thousands of cores.
GDBase has been tested to 12k cores. In our testing, the commercial DDT debugger
fails after about 2k.&lt;br/&gt;2.) High Cost of use - GDBase runs jobs through
the production batch systems with no need for long periods tying up large
fractions of the machine for interactive debugging runs and no need to lower
utilization through fixed time reservations that prevent other jobs from
running.&lt;br/&gt;3.) Information overload - Rather than a graphical interface
that fails to scale, or gigabytes of printf text, all debugging information is
stored in a relational database that can be mined later by a number of analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the
novel approach taken to tackle scalable debugging. GDBase incorporates a
lightweight, offline architecture for data collection inspired by performance
analysis tools, a database repository for vast quantities of debugging
information and cross-run analysis, and an API to create new agents for
providing a variety of interface and analysis tools. The broader impacts of this
proposal are the ability to lift productivity across all domains that develop
applications for large scale cyberinfrastructure. GDBase will also make large
scale debugging more widely available, and will be incorporated in a range of
training and education activities.