* 0850705
* SHINE: Solar Wind Magnetic Field Discontinuities and the Role of Alfvenic Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Bernard Vasquez, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/28/2014
* USD 181,316.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) will investigate the relationship between
magnetic field discontinuities and the dissipation of turbulence in the solar
wind, using a new method to accurately identify even small discontinuities in
the solar wind. In a small preliminary study, this new method found numerous
discontinuities with thicknesses consistent with ion kinetic scales, and these
could be locations that dissipate the turbulent cascade energy. The PI will
extend this initial study to all Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) spacecraft
data from March 1998 to the present, covering an entire solar activity cycle.
The PI will evaluate the statistical properties of any discontinuities that are
found and compare them to properties of turbulent fluctuations at the inertial
dissipation range spectral break. He will also compare discontinuity frequency
and other properties with local estimates of the turbulent cascade rate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will help describe how small scale structures
arise and contribute to heating the solar wind, as well as constrain the
mechanisms responsible for the dissipation of turbulent fluctuations and the
heating of ions in the solar wind near 1 AU. The PI's work will address
fundamental physical processes that determine the development and evolution of
the solar wind in the inner heliosphere and how small-scale processes in the
solar wind couple to large-scale dynamics. This project is important for
modeling the energization of the ambient solar wind through which coronal mass
ejections (CMEs) must travel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissipation of the turbulent
cascade is believed to be an important source of energizing the solar wind near
Earth, and potentially from the corona to the outer heliosphere. The PI
therefore expects this research to provide new approaches for
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) solar wind simulations and to enhance the accuracy of
space weather forecasting. This research program will include the training and
participation of both undergraduate and graduate students at University of New
Hampshire.