* 0850663
* Spume Droplet Source Function:Measurements and Theory
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Fabrice Veron, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2012
* USD 208,307.00

The coupled air-sea boundary layers play an important role in the fluxes of
momentum, mass, heat, and moisture between the ocean and the atmosphere and sea-
spray is involved all these air-sea transfers. Indeed, while suspended in the
air, even for a short time, water droplets have time to exchange significant
amounts of heat, moisture, and momentum with the atmosphere. In fact, evidence
suggests that a significant amount of the air-sea heat flux is carried by the
sea-spray. However, there is still no consensus as to the range of wind speeds
over which sea-spray effects cannot be neglected. Furthermore, because of their
mass and surface area, the larger so-called spume droplets have the largest
potential for exchanging momentum and heat with the air. Yet, these large
droplets generally fall back shortly after being generated and remain within a
wave height of the surface thereby evading traditional "fixed" measurement
techniques. In addition, the detailed physics of their generation mechanism is
not yet know, thereby preventing adequate modeling. The project is concerned
with the source function and generation mechanism for these large droplets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better knowledge about the generation of large water
droplets at the surface of the ocean, which may have the potential impact on the
overall balance of the multiple transfers between the atmosphere and the ocean
is needed. This might be especially significant in high wind speed regimes such
as hurricanes. While this work deals with specific aspects of small-scale air-
sea interaction, it has much broader impacts and societal benefit beyond the
scientific community. The broader impact of this research will include an
improved understanding of the coupling of the oceans and the atmosphere, which
will lead to better coupled models of weather and climate. Our ability to
predict seasonal fluctuations and secular climate change has an important impact
multiple industries and markets, as well as national disaster and threat
preparedness. Ultimately, good national and international environmental policy
relies on a solid scientific basis for decision making, and the work will
contribute to that effort. Results from this research will be disseminated in
professional journal publications and conferences, and, where appropriate, more
popular avenues of publication. For example, the PI participates in multiple
outreach programs involving visits of the unique Air-Sea Interaction facility at
the University of Delaware, Lab demonstrations, and teaching during a
residential summer camp designed to provide a college-like experience to high
school juniors and seniors.