* 0850709
* Characterizing Atlantic Tropical Cyclone Genesis Using Special PREDICT Measurements and Satellite Observations/Products
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Christopher Velden, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anna Hallar
* 08/31/2013
* USD 375,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed PRE-Depression
Investigation of Cloud-systems in the Tropics (PREDICT) is a focused
observational field campaign to investigate both the structure and evolution of
tropospheric wave-like disturbances in the tropics and sub-tropics and the
subsynoptic- and mesoscale processes operating within the waves that contribute
to the formation of tropical depressions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of
tropical cyclones remains one of the great, unsolved problems in meteorology. It
inherently requires study of multiple scales of atmospheric motion from cloud
particles to synoptic-scale waves. PREDICT is distinguished from previous
efforts related to tropical cyclone formation by (a) new dynamical hypotheses to
be tested; (b) nearly continuous aircraft observations; (c) the region of study;
(d) advanced sensors and facilities. Its intellectual merit is that it will test
hypotheses concerning tropical cyclone genesis using this unique data set. The
contribution by the team of investigators associated with this specific part of
PREDICT will be to provide timely and unique satellite-based products that will
help investigators define environmental parameters associated with tropical
cyclone genesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: While there is evidence
that tropical cyclone forecasts have improved in recent years, deterministic
genesis prediction is still a very difficult problem. As prediction is required
on longer time scales for emergency management and short-term mitigation,
prediction of genesis becomes more important. Mechanisms of genesis are crucial
to understand in order that processes leading to simulated genesis in weather
and climate models can be adequately evaluated. PREDICT will improve our ability
to anticipate genesis, by arming forecasters with conceptual tools regarding the
process.