* 0850213
* CS Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2009,12/31/2015
* William Walden, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Krupczak
* 12/31/2015
* USD 598,000.00

This S-STEM project broadens the participation of underrepresented minorities
and women by providing financial and academic support leading to 17 students
obtaining their Bachelors degrees in Computer Science. Scholarships are awarded
to 9 freshman and to 4 community college students transferring in as juniors,
with four more community college students when the first 4 graduate.&lt;br/&gt;A
network of mature organizations with proven track records provides academic
support for underrepresented minority and female CS Scholar students. These
organizations offer tutoring, career guidance, scholarships, access to
internships, and university research opportunities for CS Scholars. CS Scholars
benefit from a special summer preview orientation, regular cadre activities to
foster a group identity, and a CS Scholars lounge of their own adjacent to the
CS labs. CS Scholars are paid to return on visits to the high schools from which
they came, serving as role models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: CS
occupations are vitally important and include occupations with rapidly
increasing demand. While the population in the US is becoming more ethnically
and racially diverse, computer science is becoming less diverse, with fewer
women. To meet the demand for skilled CS workers, it is essential that we as a
nation reverse this trend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: CS Scholars
increase by 17 the number of African Americans, Hispanics, and women in CS.
While being mentored by existing upper-level CS undergraduate students, CS
Scholars serve as role models to approximately 1,000 high schools students per
year. School visits and presentations are part of existing collaborations with
area high schools and community colleges. CS Scholars are encouraged to
participate in existing research programs. Four CS Scholars are given the
opportunity to travel to national conferences.