* 0850024
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Dune Undergraduate Geomorphology and Geochronology (DUGG) Project in Wisconsin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* J. Elmo Rawling, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/28/2013
* USD 282,838.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address how and why
dunes formed in various environments in the state of Wisconsin. The goals of
this project include providing students with significant earth science field and
laboratory training including: field reconnaissance, hypothesis generation, site
selection, ground penetrating radar, sediment sampling, laboratory analysis and
the dissemination of their results. In addition to its primary role of
undergraduate training, the DUGG project is important because the geologic and
climatic factors responsible for dune formation in the Upper Midwest remain
poorly understood. Historically, these deposits have not been studied in detail
because few datable materials are found within them. However, advances in
Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) dating techniques, which can directly
estimate when dunes were last active, are greatly improving our ability to
estimate when the region's dunes formed . DUGG students will not only contribute
to our understanding of the region's dune history, but also provide minimum age
estimates for deglaciation, abandonment of glacial outwash plains, drainage of
proglacial lakes and the development of the western Lake Michigan shoreline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DUGG uses current pedagogic models that will benefit
society because it enforces 21st century skills to prepare students for the
transition to a post-industrial knowledge society and project-oriented world.
The proposal includes funds for students to attend regional and national
meetings for dissemination of their results and external assessment of the
project by the Council of Undergraduate Research. In addition to undergraduate
training in Earth Science, the DUGG project will aid in understanding how
landscapes respond to climate change. Dune sediments are ideally suited for the
dating technique employed in this project and understanding their recent
geologic history will help predict how they might respond to current and future
climate changes. Importantly, students will be responsible for dating sediments
they sampled in the field, allowing them to experience how a modern sediment
dating laboratory operates. In addition, dunes are a component of the broader
landscape and understanding when they formed will help bracket the development
of other landscape features and geologic events. This is particularly important
for better understanding both the collapse of large ice sheets that covered
Wisconsin in the recent geologic past and the evolution of Lake Michigan's
shoreline.