* 0850461
* Interdisciplinary Scientific Conference in South Africa  to Support the South African PhD Project
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Vaughan Turekian, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2012
* USD 240,004.00

Institution: American Association for the Advancement of
Science&lt;br/&gt;Title: Interdisciplinary Scientific Conference in South Africa
&lt;br/&gt;to support the South African Ph.D. Project&lt;br/&gt;Ref.: Vaughan C.
Turekian&lt;br/&gt;HRD 0850461&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) will support the National Research Foundation?s (NRF) South African Ph.D.
Project by serving as a key collaborator in planning an interdisciplinary
science and engineering capacity building conference in South Africa for the
NRF?s Ph.D. students worldwide. The conference will provide opportunities to
forge relationships between South African scientists and students, their
counterparts at NSF CREST institutions in the U.S. and other members of the
larger science communities in the U.S. and beyond. This NSF award will enable
AAAS to support the intellectual development of the conference and travel by
U.S.-based scientists and students to the meeting in South Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AAAS will serve a key collaborator in planning the
scientific conference, developing the framework for the meeting, and through an
advisory role, helping to build long term capacity to organize and conduct such
meeting ? conveying best practices in the organization and execution of an
interdisciplinary scientific conference and providing adaptable templates for
conference materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed conference will provide significant educational and professional
development experiences for the participating students from South Africa and the
United States while providing in-person contact between U.S. and South African
scientists that could facilitate future scientific collaborations among and
between the participating scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference should significantly enhance the
educational and professional development of the participating U.S. and South
African students as well as facilitate the development of both institutional and
faculty research collaborations between the participating U.S. and South African
institutions and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;