* 0850636
* Swapping Regulation for Litigation: The Effects of Workers' Compensation Opt-Out on the Injury Claims of Large Multi-State Firms
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Alison Morantz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 02/28/2011
* USD 207,974.00

The "great compromise" of workers' compensation, whereby workers relinquished
the right to sue their employers in exchange for limited no-fault occupational
injury insurance, was one of the most significant tort reforms of the 20th
Century. Yet because workers' compensation coverage is compulsory and universal
in most U.S. states, few scholars have compared its consequences to those of
tort liability. Methodologically, the problem is that there is no readily-
identifiable "control group" against which to compare the behavior of affected
workers and firms. However, one state--Texas--offers a unique laboratory in
which to undertake such comparisons. Under Texas law, employers may opt out of
workers' compensation and forfeit tort immunity. This phenomenon, called
"nonsubscription," has been on the rise since the 1990s among large firms.
Interestingly, despite having no legal obligation to do so, most large
nonsubscribers furnish their workers with occupational injury plans that
substantially replicate the benefits provided through workers' compensation.
This study, the first stage of a planned multi-part investigation into Texas
nonsubscription, will examine how nonsubscription affects the frequency, cost,
and duration of large firms' occupational injury claims. The key methodological
challenge that any study of this type must confront is selection bias. Since
firms are not randomly assigned across sectors, firm-level disparities between
subscribing and nonsubscribing firms may reflect unobservable differences
between firms. To minimize the potentially confounding effects of firm-level
self-selection, this study has obtained highly granular data from a diverse
group of large nonsubscribers that operate homogenous facilities in many U.S.
states. To exploit variation across states, the study compares workers in the
Texas facilities of each nonsubscriber to employees in its non-Texas facilities.
Meanwhile, for those firms that have retained data from the period prior to
nonsubscription, the investigator also will compare trends before and after each
firm's date of opt-out.