* 0850745
* Flight-Worthy Condor: Enabling Scientific Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Todd Tannenbaum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 2,700,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dependable and effective access to
large amounts of sustained computing power is strategic to scientific discovery
in a vast range of disciplines. An ever expanding number of science communities
worldwide rely on Condor software tools to harness the power of shared computing
resources. Closer to home, over 100 US universities have installed these tools
on their campus, and downloads of the &lt;br/&gt;software surpass 2,000 per
month. From fulfilling a strategic role of managing high-energy physics
computing resources at Brookhaven and Fermi National Labs to enabling research
computing at smaller under-represented institutions, Condor technology
represents the culmination of 20 years of distributed computing research. The
efforts outlined in this proposal allow the research contributions of this
software to continue, and strengthen the momentum to enable academia and
industry to leverage the power of effective distributed computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed effort lies within
the novelty of the distributed mechanisms implemented and the software
engineering challenges the team faces in developing, maintaining and supporting
nearly one million lines of code in an academic setting. As a leading provider
of open-source distributed computing capabilities, the software plays an
important role as a primary ?building block? in many campus grids as well as
community, national and international cyber-infrastructure initiatives. The
size, complexity, diversity and quality assurance requirements of the software
also lead to challenges in the area of software engineering and integration.
Daily builds and testing, version control, software tracking and distributed
troubleshooting of multi-layer software stacks are examples of the ongoing
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this effort are
interdisciplinary and span both academia and industry. Researchers who use
Condor tools are able to greatly increase their computing throughput, and
consequently increase the size and complexity of the problems they study. The
software is widely used in many compute-intensive disciplines, including Art,
Biotechnology, Economics, Chemistry, Medical, High Energy and Nuclear Physics,
and Computer Science, and has been adopted by both universities and government
labs. Furthermore, the software plays a critical role by managing the majority
of the compute resources for the US Large Hadron Collider experiments, as well
as serving 250 LIGO scientists studying gravitational waves. Condor technology
fuels new commercial offerings, such as Red Hat's MRG and Cycle Computing's
CycleServer in the past year. These technologies are also used for mission-
critical tasks in industry; e.g., Micron Technology uses Condor on 15,000 CPUs
worldwide to validate memory chip manufacturing, J.P. Morgan uses Condor on
5,000 CPUs for real-time financial portfolio analysis, and Disney's fully
animated film "The Wild" used Condor to render more than 70 million frames.
Because the high throughput computing capabilities we offer effectively harness
even desktop machines running &lt;br/&gt;Windows, it enables students and
scientists at underrepresented institutions to pursue research and instruction
requiring considerable computing in the absence of access to traditional high-
end computing facilities. This proposal directly funds five students, and
through GLOW it will provide an excellent training &lt;br/&gt;environment to new
generations of interdisciplinary professionals.