* 0850516
* Robotic Locomotor Training and Muscle Atrophy in the Rat Model of Spinal Cord Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jeffrey Nessler, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2012
* USD 297,757.00

0755702&lt;br/&gt;Nessler &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic Locomotor Training and
Muscle Atrophy in the Rat Model of Spinal Cord Injury&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will investigate the effects of a robotic gait training algorithm on the
preservation of lower extremity muscle mass and strength, and the molecular
mechanisms involved in skeletal muscle atrophy/hypertrophy in the rat model of
spinal cord injury (SCI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives for this
project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a novel version of the rat stepper
that includes force sensors to measure interaction forces between the device and
the animal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Examine the effects of using a robotic
training algorithm to increase plantarflexion torque during stance in spinal
cord injured rats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Examine the effects of eight weeks of
robotic gait training on hindlimb muscle mass, crosssectional area, and the
atrophy/hypertrophy molecular signaling cascades following
SCI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Locomotor training will be performed using a specially
designed, robotic gait device, patterned after a previous model developed by the
PI (i.e. the 'rat stepper'). Select modifications to this device will make
possible the measurement of interaction forces between the animal and the robot,
as well as muscle forces generated during stepping. Muscle strength will be
measured in vivo as the animal steps in the robotic device using inverse dynamic
techniques. In vitro measures of muscle function will include muscle mass,
cross-sectional area, and molecular signaling cascades related to skeletal
muscle atrophy/hypertrophy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SIGNATURE
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Marshall M. Lih&lt;br/&gt;Senior Advisor,
CBET&lt;br/&gt;Interim Program Officer, RAPD