* 0850404
* Values and Finance: A Study of Socially Responsible Investing
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Harrison Hong, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2012
* USD 171,908.00

The proposal will study the economics of socially responsible investing (SRI).
Socially responsible investors are motivated not only by returns but also trade
off concerns about values (e.g. ethics or concern for the environment)
associated with their investments. As a result, these investors discriminate
against (support) the shares of companies they deem irresponsible responsible)
as a means of encouraging firms to change policies. SRI has been met in the
market place by manager-initiated programs, broadly known as corporate social
responsibility (CSR), designed to maximize not only shareholder value but also
the welfare of other stakeholders (e.g. workers and neighbors). SRI can be
thought of as a market-driven initiative to provide firms with incentives to
internalize externalities. There is little research on the demand for SRI, the
supply of CSR and efficacy of SRI in influencing stock prices and bringing about
changes in firm policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is comprised of
three papers. The first paper measures the importance of political values on the
demand for SRI using data on the political contributions and stock holdings of
US mutual fund and hedge fund managers. The idea is that Democratic values are
more pro-SRI than Republicans values. As such, the main hypothesis is that
managers who donate to Democrats (presumably sharing Democratic values) under-
weight (relative to non-donors or Republican donors) stocks that are deemed
socially irresponsible (e.g. tobacco, guns and defense, natural resources). This
study also examines whether these values imply that Democratic managers are more
long-termist with their socially responsible stocks. The second paper examines
the asset pricing implications of SRI using an international crosssection of
stocks with commercially available scores for their corporate social
responsibility. The PI will test three hypotheses. First, do institutional
investors tilt towards socially responsible stocks or do they just avoid
irresponsible ones? Second, if there is indeed a tilt, do socially responsible
companies receive a higher stock price? And third, if SRI investors are more
long-termist, then are these firm's stock prices more stable in the sense of
being less sensitive to poor performance? The third paper examines the
determinants of CSR activities through the lens of three distinct economic
channels. The first is that CSR is a firm's attempt, like investor relations, to
improve its cost of capital. The key prediction is that firms (particularly
equity dependent ones) which suffer a decrease in stock price or exit of
institutional investors respond with an increase in CSR activities. The second
is that SRI influences CSR behavior through a media and agency channel---
managers want to avoid the bad press of corporate social irresponsibility. The
key prediction here is that firms with more lax corporate governance (or greater
agency issues) are more likely to be socially responsible and this effect ought
to be larger for firms that are in the media spotlight. The third is that
manager political values themselves matter. This hypothesis, akin to money
managers, is that Democratic CEOs are more likely to support
CSR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merit of the proposal largely rests on two
grounds. First, SRI is growing in importance around the world. Critics worry
that governments are using the SRI-CSR nexus as a means to avoid the regulation
needed to deal with difficult environmental and social concerns. CSR is also a
dramatic change from the paradigm of maximizing shareholder value. Such concerns
require a careful analysis. Second, SRI provides a rich context with which to
conduct novel economic analysis on an important topic in economics: the effect
of social norms and values on markets.