* 0850981
* Regulation of Seed Germination by GA signaling genes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Camille Steber, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 01/31/2014
* USD 435,000.00

This project examines how the plant hormone gibberellin (GA) regulates seed
germination, dormancy, and after-ripening. Besides being a major food source,
seeds propagate, store, and disperse plants. Seeds are like lifeboats for
embryonic plants. It is essential that seeds germinate only under conditions
that will allow the seedlings to thrive and the species to survive. Thus seed
germination is exquisitely regulated by the balance between two plant hormones,
abscisic acid (ABA) and GA. During embryo maturation ABA triggers a condition
called seed dormancy which prevents seed germination, even under favorable
conditions. Dormancy is relieved by a period of dry storage or afterripening.
This requirement for after-ripening assures seed dispersal over time as well as
space. GA stimulates seed germination and has been implicated in after ripening.
Plants such as Arabidopsis and tomato have an absolute requirement for GA
synthesis to germinate. This project uses Arabidopsis to determine how the GA
signal is perceived leading to germination. Germination is repressed by DELLA
transcription factors. In Arabidopsis, GA stimulates germination by triggering
destruction of the DELLA RGL2 protein. This destruction requires the GA receptor
GID1 and the F-box protein SLY1. Interestingly, germination can occur in sly1
mutants that produce high levels of DELLA protein when seeds have been after-
ripened a long time or when the GID1 receptor is over-produced. This suggests
that a new mechanism controls seed germination and implicates the GA receptor.
Three mechanisms will be tested: 1) DELLA-repression is bypassed by a parallel
pathway; 2) DELLA is inactivated by interaction with the GID1 receptor; and 3)
DELLA is inactivated by phosphorylation or ubiquitination. Elucidating these
mechanisms will benefit society by providing molecular genetic methods to
improve crop seedling establishment, yield, and resistance to preharvest
sprouting in cereals like wheat. Knowledge about seed biology will be
disseminated through annual presentations to Washington wheat growers and
elementary schools. The project will promote education through training a
postdoctoral fellow, an undergraduate and graduate student.