* 0850871
* Aspen Global Change Institute (AGCI) Interdisciplinary Science Workshop: Decadal Climate Prediction; Aspen, CO; June 22-28, 2008
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* John Katzenberger, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2009
* USD 49,647.00

A compelling issue that emerged from the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate
Change (IPCC) Assessment Report, AR4, in 2007 was the interest in "short term"
climate projections out to about 2030. This is a time frame of interest for many
decision support activities and impacts, but is not explicitly addressed with
current models and experiments. Any short-term climate information currently
provided is simply taken from relatively coarse grid global coupled climate
models in the early stages of 21st century simulations that began in the late
1800s and are run to 2100 and beyond. While this provides some information
regarding the response of the climate system to external forcing on near-term
time scales, it has recently been recognized that a different type of experiment
using models with higher spatial resolution and possibly an observed initial
state could provide better regional climate change information for decision
support and other applications over the next few decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Aspen Global Change Institute (AGCI) session in the
summer of 2006 first proposed an experimental design for the next round of
coordinated climate change experiments that explicitly included short-term
climate predictions to be performed for assessment by the international climate
modeling community. Since then this has been taken up by World Climate Research
program (WCRP), International Geosphere/Biosphere Program (IGBP) and the IPCC,
with the WCRP's Climate Variability and Predictability Program (CLIVAR)
targeting decadal prediction as the next big research challenge for the climate
modeling community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGCI session in 2008 takes up
where the 2006 session left off, and carries this concept to the next level by
tackling not only the formidable science issues involved with designing and
running short term climate projections (now more commonly referred to as
"decadal prediction"). The session also addresses the important issues of the
utility and application of this information for decision support and impacts
research. The organizers invited U.S. and international experts from modeling
groups doing research in decadal prediction, as well as representatives from the
decision support and impacts communities who would use this information. Output
from this session will be a white paper summarizing the current state of
knowledge on decadal prediction, the degree of success one could expect from
such experiments, possible solutions to the scientific challenges involved with
this problem, and an assessment of how this type of climate change information
could be used for decision support and impacts analyses the next few decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include, primarily, the large value of
decadal prediction for societal adaptation planning for near term (on
generational time scales) climate change.