* 0850443
* International Research Experience For Students - Ireland:  Applications in the Chemical Separations Sciences
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

OISE 08-50443&lt;br/&gt;Frank Gomez&lt;br/&gt;California State University ? Los
Angeles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
International Research Experience for Students (IRES) activity links a team at
California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA) led by Frank A. Gomez with
counterparts from Dublin City University (DCU) in Dublin, Ireland. Principal
Investigator Gomez will work with DCU partners, Miroslav Macka and Brett Paull,
to manage a balanced, team-based approach that provides undergraduate and
graduate-level students with a solid background in chemical separations
applications. This will be accomplished by examining problems at the interface
of chemistry and related disciplines with the goal of demonstrating the
interdisciplinary nature of science and the value of international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Annually, this IRES program will provide
research experience for two U.S. undergraduate students and two graduate
students who will travel to Dublin to work with U.S. and Irish mentors. The
program will focus on developing highly trained students for careers in the
chemical separations sciences involving capillary electrophoresis (CE) and
microfluidic lab-on-a-chip development via a comprehensive program involving
research, seminars and workshops, and faculty advising and mentoring. The
results should lead to the development of new techniques used for molecular
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Ireland IRES collaboration fulfills
the program objective of developing global scientists and engineers by enabling
experts in the United States and Europe to combine complementary talents and
share research and education resources in an area of strong mutual interest and
competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S. students, including
students recruited from community colleges, to international expertise on
separations' systems, an area relevant to the pharmaceutical and medical
sectors. The educational value of the IRES rests with the students' involvement
in their mentors' cutting-edge research and early career exposure to the
benefits associated with international cooperation on environmental and
pharmacological problems.