* 0850840
* Using Neurometric Data To Measure Economic Values in Private and Social Exchange Situations
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Colin Camerer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 06/30/2012
* USD 671,995.00

&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Firms, governments, and scientists are
constantly striving to figure out what goods and services people want most and
quantify their worth. The main technique used to do this in economics is to
statistically analyze data on what people have bought before, in order to guess
how purchases might change if people have more to spend, if prices rise or fall,
or if similar products are introduced. However, this method is of limited use in
forecasting the value of brand new products, and goods that are not traded in
markets (particularly public goods which benefit everyone, such as clean
air.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When people are choosing, a complex cognitive and
biological process underlies those choices. The proposed research uses empirical
tools from cognitive neuroscience to measure aspects of these processes when
experimental subjects make actual choices of consumer goods. Measures will
include brain imaging, eyetracking of visual attention, and speed of responses.
The goal is to use these measures to infer what people value, in order to
understand the neural foundation of choice and to predict actual choices more
accurately than other measures can.