* 0850891
* Agulhas Current Time-series (ACT): Towards a multi-decadal index of Agulhas Current transport
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2016
* Lisa Beal, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2016
* USD 3,500,630.00

Among the world's western boundary currents the Agulhas Current has a uniquely
global significance. Its variability has been linked upstream to tropical Indian
Ocean Dipole events which are largely coupled to Pacific winds and ENSO (El
Nino- Southern Oscillation). Downstream, it feeds an inter-ocean transport of
warm and saline waters into the South Atlantic which directly impacts the
strength of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation. This makes the
Agulhas Current an effective link between the Indian and Atlantic tropical
arrays of the Global Ocean Observing System. It is of significance not just to
Indian Ocean variability, but to global
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this project is to
build a multi-decadal time series of Agulhas Current Transport (ACT). This will
be done in a manner similar to what was started in the mid nineties for
monitoring Kuroshio transport via satellite altimeter. The first phase of ACT
requires deployment of an array of instruments across the Agulhas Current and
along an altimeter (TOPEX/Jason) ground track, to obtain a three-year time
series of transports via in situ measurements. The second phase involves
calibrating the along- track altimeter data with these measured transports to
produce a time series of Agulhas Current transport from 1992 and into the
future, for as long as altimeter missions continue to along this track. Jason-2
has just been launched (June 2008) ensuring a continuing time series through
2012. This twenty-year time series will provide an important climate index for
the Indian Ocean, which can be compared to other climate indices and to the
Florida Current and Kuroshio time series. The importance of understanding
climatic variability on decadal time scales has come to the forefront over the
last decade with the need to distinguish natural modes of variability of the
atmosphere/ocean system from anthropogenic changes. In response, the
international oceanographic community, particularly through the CLIVAR (Climate
Variability and Predictability) program, have developed a collaborative plan for
a global ocean observing system, consisting largely of tropical moored arrays,
sub-surface floats, repeat XBT (eXpendable BathyThermograph) sections, and
satellite data. The CLIVAR Indian Ocean Panel recognizes that western boundary
observations of the Agulhas Current are an important and missing element to this
observing system. Both the Kuroshio and Gulf Stream transports are continuously
monitored, providing a link from tropical to mid-latitude variability in their
basins. However, there is no monitoring capability for the Agulhas Current,
which has links not only to the tropical Indian Ocean, but also to Pacific
variability through the Indonesian throughflow and Tasman leakage, and to the
Atlantic via Agulhas Rings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
project concerns the societal value of monitoring a current that has climate and
marine impacts on Africa, a region lacking the capacity to monitor the current
themselves. African scientists and students will benefit from active
participation in the project, in particular through participation on cruises and
via a student exchange between the University of Cape Town and the University of
Miami. These collaborations will build local oceanographic experience and
knowledge. Finally, the ACT array itself, and subsequent long-term time series
of Agulhas transports, will allow a broad assessment of the relationship of the
Agulhas to other observed climate indices, making an important contribution to
the Global Ocean Observing System by building long-term regional capacity.