* 0850980
* Collaborative Research: A Subjective Model of Temporal Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Haluk Ergin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 201,644.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project develops and analyzes a new model in economic theory. The goal is
to model individual preferences in a simple model where information may arrive
in two stages. We introduce two general classes of representations, one for
individuals who prefer the uncertainty to resolve early and another one for
those who prefer the uncertainty to resolve late. The general representations
can be interpreted as if an action (unobservable to the modeler) is taken by the
individual (or by the malevolent nature, depending on whether the preference is
for early or late resolution of uncertainty) between the two periods. It is well
known that an individual may prefer to have uncertainty resolve at an earlier
date in order to be able to condition her future actions on the realization of
this uncertainty. For example, an individual may prefer to have uncertainty
about her future income resolve earlier so that she can smooth her consumption
across time. Suppose an individual has the possibility of receiving a promotion
with a substantial salary increase several years into the future. If she is able
to learn the outcome of that promotion decision now, then even if she will not
actually receive the increased income until a later date, she may choose to
increase her current consumption by temporarily decreasing her savings or
increasing her debt. On the other hand, if she is not told the outcome of the
promotion decision, then by increasing her consumption now, she risks having
larger debt and hence suboptimally low consumption in the future. In this
example, changing the timing of the resolution of uncertainty benefits the
individual by increasing her ability to condition her choices on the outcome of
that uncertainty. Our representation result can be seen as a converse of this
observation: Whenever the individual exhibits a preference for early resolution
of uncertainty, it is as if she takes a (unobservable) subjective payoff-
relevant action between the two periods.

Subjective versions of well-known decision theoretic models are shown to be
special cases of our general representations. Therefore, this research creates a
unifying framework for a variety of existing models. It improves the
understanding of the extent of uniqueness in the subjective versions of these
models and allows for a rich class of preferences for timing of resolution of
uncertainty. Understanding the uniqueness properties allows us to unambiguously
tie the parameters of our representation to choice behavior, making the
representations amenable to comparative statics and other applications.
Understanding and distinguishing between a rich class of preferences for timing
of resolution of uncertainty is important in applying these models to
macroeconomics and financial economics, where even simpler models of preference
for timing of resolution of uncertainty have already proved quite useful.

This research has broader impact; the new models developed with this award will
help to incorporate new insights from behavioral economics into related
disciplines, including financial economics and decision science.