* 0850738
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: From Citizen to Minority: Legal Reform and 'Double- Conversion' in Turkey
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Ceren Ozgul, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 04/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

In the past ten years unprecedented numbers of Muslim citizens of Armenian
descent have sought the arbitration of secular legal authorities of Turkey to
convert to Christianity, the religion of their ancestors. This project examines
the legal implications of this act of "double-conversion" that marks both
religious conversion from Islam to Christianity, and conversion from a majority
status to that of a religious minority. Turkey provides a highly significant
context for the study of the secular legal regulations of religion since the
religious affiliation of every citizen is registered on national identity cards.
Investigating the complex interaction between the claims of religious minorities
about religious belief and the application of law and bureaucratic regulations
of the secular nation-state, this project on religious conversion and legal
reform in Turkey researches the following question: In what ways does the
secular state determine and maintain legal and religious conditions under which
conversion to a minority religion can take place? Through an ethnographic
investigation of conversion as a historical and political phenomenon that is
indicative of a novel place for religion in secular civil law and bureaucratic
regulations, this research contributes to ongoing debates for a more
differentiated understanding of how the twin concepts of religion and the
secular are produced through specific legal and regulatory measures within
concrete historical and political circumstances. Methods include participant and
non-participant observation, collecting life histories, and semi-structured
interviews in a variety of sites such as churches and courtrooms as well as
close readings of court records. The project expands on recent studies of
secularism through the framework of legal anthropology by focusing on the
question of how legal professionals as well as religious converts embrace
different discourses of belief, legal reform and religious rights as they
situate themselves in relation to state and law.