* 0850631
* Behavioral Responses to Taxation: Evidence from Field Experiments and Tax Policy Variation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Emmanuel Saez, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 243,196.00

The objective of this proposal is to estimate behavioral responses to taxation
and transfer programs using four novel designs: (1) Use a randomized field
experiment with a large tax preparer in the United States in order to estimate
the effect of information about a large transfer program--the Earned Income Tax
Credit--on the subsequent earnings behavior of recipients. (2) Use a randomized
field experiment carried out by the tax administration in Denmark in order to
analyze the effects of tax audits and announcements about future tax audits on
tax compliance. (3) Use a cohort based payroll tax reform in Greece where the
ceiling on payroll taxes was significantly increased in 1992 (but only for those
starting to work in 1992 and after) to estimate the long-run incidence of
payroll taxes on earnings and labor supply behavior (4) Use the very large
variation in estate tax rates by degree of relationship in continental European
countries (such as France) vis-Ã -vis English speaking countries (such as the
United States) to estimate the effect of estate taxation on wealth accumulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential intellectual merit of the proposed activity
is to significantly advance our knowledge of empirical behavioral responses to
taxes and government transfers. Such an understanding is crucial to evaluate the
costs and benefits of government tax and transfer policies and hence to help
policy makers design better tax and transfer systems. The proposal offers four
innovative research designs in order to make progress on this question. The
first two of the designs involve analyzing large randomized field experiments,
while the remaining two exploit variation created by actual tax laws.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of information on behavioral responses to
taxation has hardly been explored before and could be a significant determinant
to the size of the responses. If such effects are large, the government could
increase information of programs designed to promote certain behaviors at a
modest cost. The Earned Income Tax Credit information experiment offers a
pioneering attempt in that direction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tax enforcement is
critical for successful tax implementation. Tax enforcement efforts are most
often kept secret by tax authorities making them particularly difficult to
analyze. The Danish tax administration carried out a large randomized tax audit
field experiment and will give us full data access for the analysis. This
partnership offers a unique opportunity to evaluate rigorously the effects of
tax enforcement as well as test specific enforcement strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluating the incidence effects of payroll taxes as well
as the labor supply responses to earnings taxation in the long-run is
notoriously difficult because studies comparing outcomes before and after a tax
reform measures only the short-term response to taxation. The cohort based
payroll tax reform in Greece is an unusual policy experiment because it creates
two groups of workers in the same labor market which face permanently very
different payroll tax schedules based solely on their date of entry in the labor
force. The Greek Social Security Administration has been willing to supply
exhaustive administrative data to study this reform. Finally, the response of
wealth accumulation to estate taxation is central in the policy debate on the
estate tax. Using variation in tax rates based on the relationship degree (in
some countries but not others) offers a novel way to make progress on this
difficult empirical question. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact resulting
from the proposed activity is to develop a model for partnerships between either
a government tax agency (as in the case of the Danish tax enforcement project or
the Greek payroll tax reform) or a private company (as in the case of the large
tax preparer for the Earned Income Tax Credit information project) that could be
fruitful both for advancing scientific knowledge but also for improving the
design and the practical implementation of tax and transfer policies. In the
case of the Earned Income Tax Credit project, we are also planning on trying to
develop a partnership with the US Internal Revenue Service for additional data
access. Access to company or government large administrative databases as well
as the possibility to run field experiments is likely to become more and more
prevalent. A broader goal behind this NSF grant application is to promote the
experiences for data access for research purposes from the most advanced
countries such as Scandinavian countries in order to improve data access in
countries such as the United States where access for research is currently more
restricted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;