* 0850708
* Summer Workshop Series in Macroeconomic Theory and Dynamic Economic Modeling (Minneapolias-MN, July 2009-2011)
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Nancy Stokey, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2012
* USD 99,990.00

This proposal requests funding for a series of workshops to be hosted jointly by
the University of Minnesota and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis during
the summers of 2009, 2010 and 2011. Each workshop will meet for four days,
concentrating on theoretical issues in macroeconomics and dynamic economic
modeling. These workshops continue the series sponsored by the NSF at the
University of Minnesota during 2000-08 and at Northwestern University during
1990-99.&lt;br/&gt;Specific topics for the three years will vary, depending on
research interests of the participants. Topics in recent years have included:
international trade and finance, heterogeneity and inequality, labor market
behavior, financial markets, housing markets, development and financial
integration, monetary policy, fiscal policy, long run growth, and macroeconomic
consequences of contracting frictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
of the Research: This workshop series brings together the best junior and senior
researchers in theoretical macroeconomics. As such, it is a useful device for
new, young researchers in the area to meet and get detailed comments from their
senior colleagues to guide their future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact of the Research: The research presented in this conference series focuses
on many of the fundamental questions facing macroeconomic policy makers
currently (the design of the tax system and monetary policy, the importance of
reputation, etc.). Thus, it will have a broad impact on the future design of
macro policy both in the U. S. and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;