* 0850350
* Air-Sea Exchange in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Janet Sprintall, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2013
* USD 384,211.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Southern Ocean, air-sea fluxes
play a critical role in transforming water at the ocean surface. They determine
how water properties change when water is carried northward by surface Ekman
currents as part of the meridional overturning circulation. They also determine
the properties of Intermediate and Mode Waters that descend to mid-depth from
the northern flank of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, carrying with them
fingerprints of their contact with the atmosphere. A number of gridded air-sea
flux products are available from numerical weather prediction (NWP) models or
detailed analyses of satellite and in situ data. These products differ
substantially, often by 50 Watts per square meter or more in the time-averaged
mean. In addition, the existing flux products are not accurate enough to explain
fully the observed seasonal to interannual variations in the mixed-layer heat
content. Moreover, while air-sea fluxes are thought to vary over small spatial
scales associated with mesoscale ocean features such as fronts or eddies, small-
scale variations are typically not resolved in air-sea flux
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research project will
investigate the mixed-layer heat budget and water mass transformation in the
Southern Ocean. The work is predicated on the hypothesis that improving air-sea
flux estimates is an essential step towards an improved understanding of
Southern Ocean mixed-layer processes. Heat and freshwater flux estimates will be
used to evaluate three key ideas: (a) Surface water mass transformation in the
Southern Ocean can be explained primarily through air-sea heat and freshwater
fluxes, without requiring that any subsurface processes be invoked. (b) The
upper ocean heat balance should close, both regionally and on a system-wide
scale. Seasonal to interannual variations in upper ocean temperature should be
explainable largely by air-sea heat fluxes, with horizontal advective processes
making up most of the difference. (c) Small-spatial scale, rapid variations in
surface fluxes are significant, contributing much of the existing uncertainty in
air-sea heat and freshwater fluxes, and resolving these small-scale fluxes will
reduce the uncertainties in upper ocean heat budgets. In essence, these three
hypotheses translate into a single concept, that improving our estimates of heat
fluxes should improve our physical understanding of the climate-scale processes
that occur in the Southern Ocean. Processes that matter on the scale of the
Southern Ocean will be evaluated by considering two metrics of air-sea flux
performance: the closure of a time-evolving mixed-layer heat budget and time-
averaged balance between northward Ekman advection and water mass conversion
driven by air-sea fluxes. A suite of existing flux products will be evaluated,
and a new, hybrid flux estimate will be developed by testing possible parameters
to find an optimal set of satellite and numerical weather prediction products to
feed into the bulk algorithms used to compute air-sea fluxes. On a regional
scale, shipboard meteorological data will be used to assess the small-scale
structure of air-sea fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Braoder Impacts: The project
will provide partial support in order to train one postdoctoral researcher in
the important area of air-sea exchange. Estimates of Southern Ocean air-sea heat
and freshwater fluxes derived as part of this research will be released via a
website. Research findings will help to lay the groundwork for future advances
in air-sea fluxes and their role in climate.