* 0850963
* Support for the U.S. GEOTRACES Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2013
* USD 738,580.00

This award will provide three years of funding to sustain the operation of the
U.S. GEOTRACES Project Office at the Lamont-Dougherty Earth Observatory ,
thereby supporting the U.S. contribution to the international GEOTRACES program.
GEOTRACES is an international program designed to study the global marine
biogeochemical cycles of trace elements and their isotopes (TEIs). Trace
elements and their isotopes play important roles in the ocean as nutrients, as
tracers of processes now and in the past, and as contaminants. Their
biogeochemical cycling has direct implications for research in such diverse
areas as the carbon cycle, climate change, ocean ecosystems, and environmental
contamination. GEOTRACES promises clear benefits to each of these areas by
significantly advancing knowledge of the marine biogeochemical cycles of TEIs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During its first two years of operation, the primary
activity of the Project Office, measured in terms of time and effort, has been
to support GEOTRACES meetings and workshops. Seven GEOTRACES meetings and
workshops were supported during the past two years, and three more are being
planned for Fall 2008, before the end of the current funding period. The second
major activity of the Office has been to support communication and outreach by
developing and maintaining the GEOTRACES web site &lt;www.geotraces.org&gt;, by
creating and maintaining GEOTRACES e-mail lists, and by using both of these
vehicles for disseminating information about GEOTRACES.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal activities of the Project Office over the next
three years, will be: (1) Support of meetings and workshops; (2) Transferring
certain activities to an International Project Office (IPO); (3) Supporting
several steps associated with the implementing US GEOTRACES cruises, including
serving as an interface between cruise scientists and the Biological and
Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office in Woods hole; and (4) Enhancing
the GEOTRACES web site to streamline access to information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Project Office supports a broad range
of activities for the US GEOTRACES program, as well as supporting a number of
activities for the international GEOTRACES program. GEOTRACES, with support from
the Project Office, serves as a focal point for the Chemical Oceanography
community, providing a sense of identity and direction. This is healthy for the
community, as well as for individual scientists, many of whom feel that the
field will benefit from having the first major coordinated program since
GEOSECS. The Project Office also serves the broader community by acting as a
point of contact with other programs sharing similar objectives. Within the
U.S., there has been increasing interaction over the past year between GEOTRACES
and the Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry program, with some investigators now
calling for an OCB process study to be coordinated with a GEOTRACES section.
Within the international arena, the PI interacts regularly with the IMBER and
SOLAS programs, exploring the benefits of partnering in research with each at
some point in the future. Coordinating activities among research programs offers
substantial payback in terms of new opportunities for interdisciplinary
research.