* 0850756
* REU Site at Syracuse University: Undergraduate Research Experience in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Michael Sponsler, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2012
* USD 247,800.00

This chemistry REU program at Syracuse University (SU) will include at least 15
students per year in 2009-2011, with 10 funded by NSF and 5 or more funded by SU
or SU-associated NSF or NY State grants including LSAMP, AGEP, McNair, or CSTEP.
The entire Department of Chemistry faculty will participate as mentors in this
ten-week summer program, which is designed to maximize laboratory time while
providing valuable scientific and social experiences outside the laboratory.
Students will participate in weekly luncheon meetings, in which they will first
hear faculty presentations and later present their own research; an interactive
ethics seminar; a chemistry careers workshop; and hands-on workshops in both
computational chemistry and glassblowing. In addition to their oral
presentations, students will also present posters at a campus-wide poster
session and contribute articles to a CD compilation. The additional inclusion of
11-12 Austrian undergraduate students (supported by the Technical University of
Graz in an iREU exchange program) will provide significant international
exposure to all participants, and the participation of high school teachers
(supported by SU) will also bring important new perspectives to the program,
from which all participants will benefit. With support from LSAMP, AGEP, McNair,
and CSTEP programs at SU, minority students will be well represented in the
program.