* 0850533
* Specification Analysis of Continuous-Time Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Yacine Ait-Sahalia, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 232,283.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop a range of specification tools for
continuous-time models sampled at high frequency. Continuous-time stochastic
processes known as semimartingales are effectively, up to technical conditions,
the largest class of models that can be used to represent asset prices while
still precluding arbitrage opportunities. As a result, they form the foundation
of most theoretical asset pricing models. While these models have been widely
studied in the probability literature, relatively few econometric and
statistical procedures exist to determine the relative importance of different
components of the model, test for their very presence, or look into some of
their finer characteristics, such as the degree of activity of
jumps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semimartingales have different components: a
possibly stochastic drift, a continuous martingale part which is the integral of
a possibly stochastic volatility process with respect to a Brownian motion, and
jumps, with a possibly stochastic Lévy measure. Ultimately, the objective of
this proposal is to develop a nearly complete menu of specification tools for
discretely-sampled semimartingales, and apply them on high frequency
data:&lt;br/&gt;_ Which component(s) of the model should be included, given that
some other components are already present;&lt;br/&gt;_ Which component(s) of the
model can be distinguished from which existing components, and under
what&lt;br/&gt;restrictions on the nature of the component(s);&lt;br/&gt;_ What
are some of the finer characteristics of the jump components, such as the degree
of activity of jumps, whether they have finite or infinite activity,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: While many of the examples and
motivation for the work that are described in this proposal come from economics
and finance, this proposal is fundamentally about developing methodologies that
are applicable to generic semimartingales. Semimartingales are some of the most
common tools from probability used to model stochastic processes. One can hope
that some of the econometric and statistical methods developed here can find
applications in physics, engineering or seismology, which are all fields where
observations are also available at very high
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research and education
by working closely with students and funding them in the form of summer research
assistantships, creating datasets and developing publicly available computer
code (both made available through the web, as has been the case for past
projects) for each of the main research endeavors funded by this proposal.
Various research findings and examples will be simplified and taught in both
undergraduate and graduate courses. In particular, they will be used in
supervising undergraduate senior theses and Ph.D. theses. Postdoctoral fellows
and underrepresented groups will be trained as a part of the research covered by
this proposal. The results will be disseminated broadly through presentations at
seminars, conferences and professional association
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project involves collaborations
with colleagues in different disciplines (economics, statistics, probability)
and academic institutions in the U.S. (Per Mykland, a statistician at the
University of Chicago, Joon Park, an economist at Texas A&amp;M University, Lan
Zhang, a statistician at UIC) and abroad (Jean Jacod, a probabilist at
Université Paris VI).&lt;br/&gt;