* 0850505
* Collaborative Research: Dispersal and Life History Dynamics in Benthic Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Susan Goldstein, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2013
* USD 166,159.00

&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dispersal and connectivity
are fundamental processes known to underpin the health and stability of marine
populations and communities. Effective dispersal and recruitment facilitate
recovery from a variety of environmental perturbations and allow populations and
communities to respond to environmental change operating over a range of
temporal scales. This project will study to examine key aspects of dispersal,
connectivity, and life history dynamics in benthic foraminifera, a well-defined
group of protists that are abundant and diverse in nearly all marine settings.
Foraminifera are largely heterotrophic, important in carbon cycling, sensitive
to environmental conditions, and their rich fossil record provides insight into
processes functioning over the span of historical to deep time. Dispersal and
connectivity patterns are not well understood, particularly in benthic
representatives of this group. Recent studies, however, suggest very broad
connectivity patterns in deep-sea settings yet different dispersal capabilities
among closely related species of at least one coastal foraminiferal genus. The
overarching goal of this project is to characterize the dispersal patterns and
capabilities of coastal to bathyal benthic foraminifera and to relate these
patterns to their life history dynamics, ability to respond to different
environmental conditions, and the extent of population connectivity as reflected
by the presence or absence of cryptic phylotypes in otherwise broadly
distributed morphospecies. The PIs will utilize coastal to bathyal study sites
off the Northeastern US and coastal sites in Georgia (SE US) and use
interdisciplinary methodology for experimental manipulation of the foraminiferal
propagule bank (juveniles present in sediments derived from both local and
distant sources); morphological, epifluorescence and fine structural techniques;
and molecular genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1) Determine
the extent of dispersal perpendicular to the coastal zone, both from onshore-to
offshore sites, and in the opposite offshore-to-onshore direction; (2) Determine
whether dispersal within the coastal zone (i.e., parallel to the coast) occurs
over long distances (i.e., between adjacent coastal provinces), as implied by
numerous reports of "cosmopolitan" intertidal species, or whether dispersal is
generally limited by region. (3) Determine the relationship between dispersal in
selected benthic foraminifera and their life history dynamics; and (4) Assess
the diversity of adult foraminiferal assemblages that can be grown from a single
propagule bank under different environmental conditions, thus providing insight
into the environmental adaptability of the propagule bank at each of the sites
and hence the ability to respond to environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will contribute to a more
comprehensive understanding of the processes of dispersal, life history
dynamics, and connectivity in marine systems. Results would further resolve the
debate between the ubiquity and moderate endemicity models of microbial
dispersal, provide additional comparisons of dispersal patterns between
eukaryotic microbes and macro-organisms, and contribute to our understanding of
community-level modifications that result from environmental perturbations and
change. In terms of education, this project will include participation by
graduate and undergraduate students from the University of Georgia, including
students from under-represented groups. The project will also provide the
opportunity to participate in the research cruise for one or more undergraduates
or graduate students majoring in science education. Such opportunities expand
the educational base and experiences of future teachers.