* 0850788
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: An Experimental Comparison of Supermodular Lindahl Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2011
* John Wooders, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 5,000.00

The free rider problem in public good economies has led to the theoretical
development of incentive compatible institutions that yield efficient outcomes.
Earlier experimental work on this class of institutions has almost exclusively
focused on the stability properties of these institutions finding that
institutions with strong stability properties were better at achieving their
desired allocation. In this doctoral dissertation grant focuses on another
important issue in economic design. Specifically, the project focuses on the
role of informational complexity, hereafter complexity, in the design of
economic institutions. An institution is more complex if it requires people to
know more information when making their decisions. Some institutions become more
complex as the economy grows in size. This study proposes to examine information
complexity by comparing the performance of two stable efficient institutions
that vary in the way their information requirement changes when the economy gets
bigger. This is the first experimental study to: (a) focus on how an
institution?s information requirement changes with the size of the economy; (b)
to compare two supermodular Lindahl mechanisms; (c) to test the institution
proposed by Van Essen (2008). It also provides further evidence on the scope of
the applicability of incentive compatible mechanisms in the context of achieving
socially desirable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The study of
how decisions are affected by the information requirements of institutional
arrangements is important in many areas of economics and computer science. This
study provides key insights into these properties by examining experimentally
two different institutions whose allocation goal is the same, but they vary in
the way their informational requirement changes for different sized
economies.&lt;br/&gt;