* 0850184
* Julian Scholarships: Recruiting, Retaining and Supporting Local, First-Generation Undergraduate Scientists
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Gloria Townsend, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 552,000.00

The Julian Scholars: Recruiting, Retaining and Supporting Local, First-
Generation Undergraduate Scientists project provides DePauw University
scholarships for twenty-four, first-generation students in west-central Indiana
who major in one of the following disciplines: Biology, Chemistry, Biochemistry,
Computer Science, Geosciences, Mathematics or Physics.

The Julian Scholars project: 1. Serves the region of the State of Indiana most
historically linked to the University, by offering an excellent education in the
sciences to qualified students who might otherwise not have such an opportunity.

2. Provides urban and rural students a mechanism for widening their academic and
social viewpoints through interactions with each other.

3. Maintains retention levels and builds recruitment rates by selecting students
who reside geographically near DePauw.

4. Enhances recruitment by selecting as many students as possible from Indiana's
21st Century Scholars Program.

The Julian Scholars project capitalizes on DePauw University's excellent
retention rates for first-generation students, the First-Year Seminar and
Advising program, the Science Research Fellows program, the Women in Science
program, and committed faculty members who offer students optional research and
internship experiences. Julian Scholars participate in the following: the Bridge
to Science (B2S) program, an established and successful summer collaborative
science research project linking high school students and their teachers with
college students and their professors, and Storytelling for Science (S4S)
programming, which describes science as accessible, dynamic and collaborative,
reinforcing the B2S approach to science for Julian Scholars and motivating them
to persist to graduation.

Recruitment and Retention Plans for the Julian Scholars project include: --
Establishing blueprints for supporting at-risk, rural and inner-city first-
generation college populations; -- Developing a prototype for using urban and
rural students to support each other and to increase diversity; -- Tapping a new
pool of students who can help strengthen the education of Indiana's residents
and future workforce; -- Leveraging the successful Indiana 21st Century Scholars
program to increase enrollments of underrepresented groups in STEM degree
programs; -- Highlighting research as a motivator for careers in science, an
orientation to the university and a confidence and community builder; --
Creating an increased level of cross-disciplinary conversation by leveraging
components of the successful Science Research Fellows Program; -- Preparing a
diverse population for adult employment that would otherwise not have the
opportunity to attend DePauw University; and -- Generating additional evidence
to support the theory of action which undergirds the Julian Scholars project.