* 0850311
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Ancient DNA in the Southwest United States
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Meradeth Snow, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2011
* USD 14,267.00

The ancestral Pueblo people of the US Southwest are the focus of considerable
archaeological attention because their relationship with other populations in
the region and Mexico are unknown. Prehistoric and modern Native Americans
belong to one of five mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplogroups, A, B, C, D and X.
Previous studies have reported mtDNA haplogroup frequency distributions in
prehistoric Pueblo remains that are characteristic of haplogroup frequencies
observed in modern populations in the Southwest but very different from those of
Mexico. However, shared derived mutations (haplotypes), which have been either
absent from or limited in previous studies, can provide a more detailed view of
the populations in the region. Two sites found in New Mexico, the Tommy and Mine
Canyon sites, yielded aDNA in previous studies and this project will double the
number of individuals studied from the Tommy Site and sequence the mtDNA control
region in samples from both sites. This larger and better genetically
characterized sample will aid in understanding the relationship between the two
sites, as previous research demonstrated that there are significant mtDNA
differences between them. Four hypotheses will be tested: (1) haplogroup B
predominates among the 22 additional Tommy Site samples, and their sequences are
shared with other Southwestern, but not Mexican, populations. (2) Samples
belonging to haplogroup A are rare at the Tommy Site, but their haplotypes are
shared with the Mine Canyon Site as well as other Southwest US populations where
haplogroup A has been found at higher frequency. (3) Haplotypes of both
haplogroups are shared with Mexican, but not Southwest US populations. (4)
Haplotypes of males and females will differ, based on differing demographic
factors. The larger sample in this study will aid in answering these, and other,
questions by providing insight into regional migration and exploring potential
differences between male and female migration among the prehistoric occupants of
the desert Southwest.

The results of this study will contribute to a better understanding of Native
American prehistory in the Southwest and its potential relationship to
prehistoric cultures of Mexico. This project will enhance international
cooperation and understanding regarding the common interests, including history
and prehistory, of Mexico and the United States.