* 0850318
* Cohort Development:  Growing a Community of Scientists
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Fernan Jaramillo, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 07/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This project is providing scholarships and support services in a program that
especially targets under-served populations that major in the sciences at a rate
far below the rest of the student population. The project emphasizes cohort
formation, trust, and community. This faculty-driven Cohorts program focuses on
talented students on the threshold of success in STEM areas. Building on a
successful pilot project, the project has a dual structure of cohort support:
the first comprises academic-year students in their first and second years
(FOCUS), followed by the research-oriented Summer Science Fellows (SSF). The
cohorts receive coordinated academic support, advising, mentoring, and career
exploration opportunities. Each FOCUS cohort includes up to sixteen students,
each of whom is receiving S-STEM scholarships and loan reduction. The SSF
cohorts of four to six students each year also receive S-STEM academic-year
scholarships and two years of summer-research funding from other sources. Over
four years the initiative is supporting up to eighty-four unique FOCUS and
eighteen SSF students, assuming some overlap between the cohorts.

Regarding broader impact, this project affects, especially through assessment
and dissemination by the college's Science Education Resource Center, the
college's HHMI-linked alliances and regional and national organizations via NSF-
funded LSAMP MN North Star Alliance.

The project's intellectual merit stems from the strength of the science programs
and an overall strategy adapted to the college's environment after a systematic
national investigation of successful programs. As the student population becomes
increasingly diverse, the college's future success in the sciences hinges on
increased engagement of traditionally under-served students.