* 0850622
* Collaborative Research:  Creation of a coastal current - The transition of an energetic river discharge from buoyant jet to geostrophic plume
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Robert Hetland, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2014
* USD 308,328.00

The mid-field river plume is a transition area where a multitude of geophysical
mechanisms act to constrain and transform a strongly inertial jet into a
geostrophic coastal current. The near-field jet is the area over which the
estuarine outflow is supercritical, where advection and shear mixing dominate
the dynamics, where the shape of the estuary mouth is important in determining
the shape of the near-field plume flow structure, and where the flow is often
directed offshore. This is distinct from the geostrophic far-field river plume
where the earth?s rotation, wind, and background flow dominate the evolution of
the plume, and the flow is primarily along-shore. Although entrainment of
ambient water is high in the near-field, the far-field plume tends to form a
coastally-trapped boundary current where entrainment is quite small in the
absence of other forcing mechanisms such as winds and tides. Within the mid-
field, plume spreading must be arrested, mixing reduced, and the flow directed
along-shore. Rotation or background currents may arrest plume spreading,
preventing plume acceleration and reducing further mixing in the plume. Frontal
processes enhance mixing locally, but have an unknown effect on the core of the
plume. The contribution of each of these processes to the spreading and mixing
of the plume is expected to depend strongly on the scale of the plume. A
quantitative understanding of the relative role of these processes is necessary
for determining the dynamical role of river plumes of different scales on shelf
circulation and transport.&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this proposal is
to better understand how small scale processes of O(1 km) operating near an
estuary mouth transition to larger-scale (O(100 km)) buoyancy driven coastal
currents through the intermediate scales of O(10 km). The central hypothesis is
that a suite of processes operating in the mid-field plume modify the plume
spreading and mixing and thus the transition between the near- and far-field
plumes. The proposed work will establish the relative influence of a number of
key mechanisms in setting the spatial and temporal scales of the near- and mid-
field plume regions. It will constrain the total water mass modification in the
initial evolution of the plume and help understand how continental shelf-scale
coastal currents are formed. The following three specific objectives will be
pursued:&lt;br/&gt;1) Quantify the processes that arrest plume
spreading,&lt;br/&gt;2) Relate reduced mixing rates to arrested plume spreading
and&lt;br/&gt;3) Determine net mixing in the near- and mid-field
regions.&lt;br/&gt;The approach will be one that integrates field observations,
laboratory experiments and numerical model experiments. Such an approach is
necessary to accurately describe and quantify the full array of physical
processes that contribute to mixing in natural plumes and to determine how these
processes are modified across a broad parameter space. Detailed field
measurements in the Merrimack River plume will be complimented with non-rotating
and rotating laboratory experiments and laboratory and geophysical scale
numerical model experiments. This work will fill an important gap in the ability
to relate fresh water discharge to large scale coastal ocean
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study are two-fold:
better understanding the role of river plumes in coastal oceanography, and
education of graduate and undergraduate students. The study will determine how
river inflows affect water properties over a large area influenced by plumes and
provide better predictive capability to coastal managers. It will fund three
graduate students, one at each of the three participating institutions. In
addition, the field campaigns will provide a unique learning experience not only
for the three funded graduate students, but for additional graduate and
undergraduate students. The use of a number of small vessels for synoptic
research will require graduate students to assume chief scientist
responsibilities on individual vessels, providing a level of autonomy and
responsibility rare for larger scale physical oceanographic field programs.