* 0850931
* Stress Transfer Between the Cascadia Megathrust and the Northern San Andreas Fault
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Chris Goldfinger, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 01/31/2013
* USD 444,971.00

The west coast of the North America from the Gulf of California to British
Columbia is characterized by high earthquake activity. That great earthquakes
occur in California is well known. Less well known is the fact that northernmost
California, and western Washington and Oregon (the Cascadia Margin) are subject
to truly great, "megathrust" earthquakes, the last of which occurred in about
1700. It is of vital importance to understand both the frequency of these
events, and any linkage between events in Cascadia and those that occur to the
south, on the San Andreas Fault in California. Earthquakes commonly produce
turbidite (submarine landslide) deposits offshore. One way to address these
issues is to establish chronologies by dating these deposits. This project will
acquire new cores and date turbidites along the Cascadia Margin to improve high-
resolution paleoseismic chronologies in this active margin setting and test a
proposed model of interaction between two plate boundary fault systems. Long
paleoseismic records afford the opportunity to make such comparisons, test
models of recurrence, and establish long term records of behavior and plate
boundary interaction that are not possible with earthquake records that are
typically much too short. A primary aim of this work is to test the hypothesis
that earthquakes along the Cascadia Margin have triggered events on the Northern
San Andreas Fault repeatedly during the Holocene. Broader impacts of this work
arise in part from the fact that the Cascadia Margin is expected to produce
truly great "megathrust" earthquakes, with attendant tsunami hazards, this work
has enormous societal relevance. This work should have a major, direct impact on
the assessment of earthquake and tsunami hazards in the U.S. and Canada. Other
benefits are training graduate students and the involvement of undergraduates in
the project.