* 0850957
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Binding of Radionuclides with Marine Biopolymers, A Comparative Study on TH, PA, BE, PO and PB Isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 333,888.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although natural radioisotopes, such
as Th(IV), Pa(IV, V), Po(IV, II, -II), and Be(II), are important proxies that
have long been used in oceanographic investigations, the molecular interactions
and binding relationships between radionuclides and marine organic matter remain
unclear. Through years of research, it has become evident that metal ions in the
ocean are mostly controlled by biopolymers and other organic molecules excreted
by marine micro-organisms, and that biopolymers play a significant role in the
biogeochemical cycles of the natural radionuclides that are used as
oceanographic tracers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify and characterize the
relationships between these biopolymeric carrier compounds and the radionuclides
used in tracer research, scientists from Texas A&amp;M University and the
University of Southern Mississippi will conduct a comparative study on
radioisotopes of thorium (Th), protactinium (Pa), polonium (Po), lead (Pb), and
beryllium (Be). This laboratory and field experiment will identify the
radioisotope carriers that are effective marine binding ligands and clarify the
basics of oceanographic chemical tracer applications of various natural
radioisotopes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results from this
research will enhance our fundamental understanding of the biogeochemical
controls on natural radionuclide and carbon cycling, in the oceans. This
research will also refine the interpretation of data collected in the GEOTRACES
program. The project also involves the training of students and international
collaborations.