* 0850424
* REU Site: Preparing for Graduate School through Interdisciplinary Summer Research
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Theodore Djaferis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 10/31/2011
* USD 228,000.00

Proposal: 0850424 PI Name: Michael F. Malone

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This two year renewal REU site program will provide interdisciplinary research
experiences for twelve undergraduates each year. The objectives of the program
are to:(1) provide a significant number of research opportunities for women and
underrepresented minority students; (2) build a diverse pipeline of graduate
students; (3) educate students to recognize the value, significance and broad
range of interdisciplinary research being conducted in the College of
Engineering; and (4) create stronger relationships for research and educational
exchanges between faculty and students at partner institutions. REU students
will have the opportunity to work with researchers who are leading experts in
their fields.

A major outcome of this program will be to further enhance the infrastructure
for research and education in the College of Engineering by establishing a self-
sufficient REU site program that will continue after this award period has
concluded.

This program outlines a strong plan for recruitment that will broaden the
representation of women and minority students entering the engineering and
science pipeline. Students will be recruited from partners Smith College and Mt.
Holyoke College, Springfield Technical College and from the University of Puerto
Rico Mayaguez. Since preparation for graduate education is a major focus of this
program, our nation's academic institutions and industry will benefit from an
increased number of students, particularly women and minorities, entering the
workforce with advanced degrees.