* 0850357
* Antipodal acoustic propagation and a half-century of ocean warming
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Brian Dushaw, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2013
* USD 245,032.00

In March 1960, an ocean acoustics experiment conducted by the Lamont Geological
Observatory of Columbia University recorded the travel times of sound from
Perth, Australia to its antipode at Bermuda. The travel time, 13,382 s, is a
measure of the ocean temperature in 1960, averaged along the sound channel axis
over a path that traverses the southern Indian Ocean, the South Atlantic, and
the North Atlantic. Previous work on this subject has been focused on
determining the acoustic path followed by the sound. The horizontal refraction
of the sound as it traversed the global ocean, and the Antarctic circumpolar
current in particular, gives the perplexing result that the sound was blocked
from Bermuda by the African continent. Based on primitive data for sound speed
and bathymetry, previous work determined two acoustic paths that required
acoustic interactions with Heard Island in the southern Indian Ocean and the
north coast of Brazil. Viewed from a modern perspective, that explanation is
unconvincing. An explanation for the results of the 1960 antipodal experiment
remains elusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern high-resolution ocean models will
be employed to (a) determine if intense, small-scale features, Agulhas rings
near the Cape of Good Hope in particular, can account for the successful
antipodal propagation, including the details of the acoustic arrival pattern at
Bermuda, and (b) establish a present-day travel time for the antipodal acoustic
propagation. The change in travel time from 1960 to the present day is a measure
of a half-century of ocean climate change. Such a measurement is valuable
because the acoustic path traversed regions of the southern Indian and Atlantic
Oceans which were poorly observed a half-century ago. Based on recent estimates
of ocean warming, travel times today are expected to be about 10s faster than in
1960.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accurate description of acoustic propagation is
of importance for such purposes as tracking or observing marine mammals
acoustically, or for the detection of clandestine nuclear or conventional
explosions. The challenging Southern Ocean environment is particularly relevant
to both these examples. The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Organization
maintains several monitoring hydrophones in the Indian Ocean. The measurement of
oceanic climate change is a subject of primary importance in oceanography and to
society at the present time. The proposed work offers a unique quantitative
measure of the net change of ocean temperature over the past half-century.