* 0850040
* Scholarships for Economically Disadvantaged Students From Indianapolis
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Jonathan Sorenson, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 08/31/2015
* USD 561,983.00

The objectives of this project are to improve the attraction, recruitment,
retention, professional preparation, and graduation of economically
disadvantaged science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) students.
The methods are threefold: aggressively recruit students from two local school
systems in the metropolitan area of Indianapolis; offer personalized support of
those STEM students financially, academically, and socially; and provide
exclusive programs for their scientific professional development through on-
campus research and off-campus internships.

The first cohort of five students is funded for their four years by the
scholarship program. Butler University intends to fund the scholarships for the
last fifteen students at the annual amount beyond the duration of the granting
period. Scholarship recipients have a support network in place to insure their
academic success. This support includes a community of specially trained
academic advisors/mentors, orientation and special programs for scholarship
recipients, targeted assistance from student support services, peer mentors, and
a common housing unit for scholarship recipients. The scholarship recipients
have opportunities for development as professional scientists through on-campus
research as well as a STEM internship with a local industrial or government
partner.

Intellectual merit: The scholarship recipients gain a liberal arts education
reinforced by scientific rigor so that they are prepared for graduate study or
direct entry into the work force.

Broader impact: The project affects two communities: the community of students
in Indianapolis from which participants eligible for these scholarships are
drawn and the local scientific industry that stands to benefit from a
scientifically trained workforce. Scholarship recipients graduate possessing the
technical knowledge of their science major and have experience with the local
STEM industry to help advance the objectives.