* 0850100
* GenoCAD: A Computer Assisted Design Environment for Synthetic Biology
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jean Peccoud, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,421,725.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Virginia Bioinformatics Institute
at Virginia Tech is awarded a grant to develop GenoCAD, a web-based computer
assisted design environment for synthetic biology. This infrastructure helps
molecular biologists design custom DNA molecules by combining basic genetic
parts used in protein expression, protein engineering, metabolic engineering,
and other applications. The project has four aims. Computer languages will be
developed to represent the structure of synthetic DNA molecules used in E.coli,
yeast, mice, and Arabidopsis thaliana cells. The research team will develop a
compiler capable of translating the DNA sequences into mathematical models of
the gene network encoded in the DNA sequence to predict the phenotype encoded in
the designed DNA sequences. Collaborative features will allow teams to work
together on complex projects. A collaborative workflow environment will allow
workgroups to share parts, designs, share fabrication resources, and define
custom design strategies suitable for their projects. The award promotes the use
of computer assisted design for genetic constructs by advancing discovery
through teaching, training, and learning. The project contributes to broadening
the participation of underrepresented groups through a joint summer program with
a neighboring historically black college. Finally, the project will ensure a
broad dissemination of the results by reaching out to the user community through
an external advisory board, an annual user conference, and outreach to industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages a broad community of users whose
experience provides valuable feed-back. GenoCAD is made available to 1,000
undergraduate students enrolled in iGEM, a synthetic biology competition. An
external advisory board composed of leaders of the academic and industrial
community ensures that GenoCAD developments meet the needs of a large community
of potential users. Finally, specific plans combining research grants and
technology transfer will ensure the project long-term sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional information about GenoCAD can be found at
www.genocad.org.