* 0850294
* Reconstructing 700 Million Years of the Evolution of Genome Organization:  Tools and Community Resources
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nicholas Putnam, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 933,526.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Researchers at Rice University have been awarded a grant for
an interdisciplinary project in software development, evolutionary biology and
comparative genomics that will create new computational methods and web-based
resources for comparing and interpreting how genes are organized in the
chromosomes of humans, other animals, plants and other complex organisms.
Biologists studying the large-scale organization of genomes -- the arrangement
of genes on chromosomes -- recently discovered that species that had diverged
more than 500 million years ago still have genomes that are organized in similar
ways. It is not known whether the conservation is due to a very slow decay of a
neutral feature of genome organization, or due to the action of selection
through an unknown functional link between genome organization and phenotype.
The project will take two new approaches to the problem. The first approach uses
a heuristic search procedure to identify the most parsimonious historical
scenario explaining the data. The second approach uses Bayesian Markov-chain
Monte Carlo to estimate the probabilities of historical scenarios given a model
of genome evolution. The tools and databases created by this project will allow
scientists to more easily compare and contrast the structure of genomes. In
particular, the tools will allow scientists to do side-by-side studies of both
modern and reconstructed ancient genomes. By comparing and contrasting the
organizational structure of genomes, scientists hope to better understand
evolution, biodiversity and the mechanisms species use to fight stress and
disease. This project will provide interdisciplinary training in software
development, evolutionary biology and comparative genomics to the researchers
and students who participate. The web-based interface to the results will be
used as a source of projects and exercises in an undergraduate course in
evolution and bioinformatics taught by the project leader. To learn more about
this project, including the most recent progress, visit the project web site at
http://putnamlab.org/genome-evolution.