* 0850425
* Persistence and Fate of Domoic Acid in the Santa Barbara Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Claudia Benitez-Nelson, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2012
* USD 499,383.00

Toxic blooms of a variety of algal species (harmful algal blooms -- HABs) have
been documented throughout the world?s coastal oceans, ultimately impacting
shellfish, finfish, marine mammals and birds over large areas. Several species
within the genus of Pseudo-nitzschia, a group of marine diatoms that produce the
neurotoxin domoic acid (DA), have been identified as common members of algal
assemblages along the coast of California. Key questions in HAB research include
not only what causes toxic Pseudo-nitzschia spp. to bloom, but what happens to
that bloom after its demise. Causative factors ranging from coastal
eutrophication to increased upwelling to resuspension of seed populations from
sediments have all been hypothesized, but remain enigmatic, mainly due to a
paucity of integrative data. The fate of DA producing Pseudo-nitzschia blooms
remains even more elusive, and yet there is increasing evidence of substantial
DA concentrations in benthopelagic feeders and benthic organisms both along the
coast and offshore. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at
the University of South Carolina at Columbia will build upon intriguing and
exciting preliminary data that suggests that sinking particles are a major
vertical transport mechanism of DA from surface waters to sediments, with DA
fluxes exceeding 50,000 ng DA/m2/d at depths in excess of 500 m. They
hypothesize that DA is rapidly transported to sediments and likely persists on
greater than seasonal timescales, well after the demise of a Pseudo-nitzschia
bloom. Their goal is to create a regional observation and modeling program
focused on the Santa Barbara Basin (SBB) that specifically: 1) Examines the
temporal relationship between Pseudo-nitzschia blooms, DA toxicity, and the
vertical transport efficiency of Pseudo-nitzschia and DA to the benthos, 2)
Investigates the incorporation of DA into the sediments, and 3) establishes a
historical record of DA toxicity spanning the past decade, and potentially, the
last century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, they will use a
combination of monthly survey cruises of water column biogeochemistry, two
continuously moored sediment traps (150 and 550 m), regional surface and down
core sediments records, satellite imagery and develop a numerical model that
examines the surface timing of toxic Pseudo-nitzschia blooms and the vertical
export of DA to the seafloor. They expect that this research will fundamentally
change current views on the persistence of DA toxicity in marine systems and
that it will provide the groundwork for similar measurements of other harmful
toxins. The proposed research leverages sampling opportunities with a number of
ongoing programs off coastal California, such as Plumes and Blooms and the Santa
Barbara Coastal LTER Project (water column), the Marine Sediments Laboratory at
USC (archived and future sediment trap collections), and the Southern California
Coastal Water Research Project Bight 2008 campaign (surface and down core
sediment collections). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to have a
number of broader impacts. Beside its obvious relevance to HAB research and
marine environmental toxicology, the project will directly support a
postdoctoral fellow and one Native American graduate student. Undergraduate
students will also participate in the proposed research, supported by internal
funds contributed by the University of South Carolina. All students in the
principal investigator?s laboratory participate in Science Quest, an after
school informal science and technology program geared towards at-risk elementary
and middle school students (ages 8 -14).&lt;br/&gt;