* 0850501
* REU Site: Frontier Physics and Astronomy Research with Technical Presentations
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Francoise Queval, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2013
* USD 372,655.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award supports the REU site at the University of
California - Los Angeles. The main objective of the program is to encourage
students, including women, underrepresented minorities, and students from
institutions with limited research facilities to pursue careers in physics,
astrophysics, and science in general. The program is aimed at a geographically
and culturally diverse group and thus students are recruited nationally and
special effort is made to target 4-year institutions, historically black
colleges and traditional women's colleges. The program's activities include at
its core a 10-week research project under the supervision of a UCLA faculty
member. The projects span the various fields represented in the department
(including plasma physics, condensed matter physics, accelerator physics, high
energy physics, nuclear physics, astrophysics, astroparticle physics, and
biophysics), and vary from year to year as different faculty members volunteer
their time. The intellectual merit of this program is rooted in the close
student-faculty interactions as they work together on one of a rich selection of
cutting-edge projects. These research experiences have been supplemented by
other auxiliary training such as a machine shop workshop, an ethics workshop, a
Physics GRE prep course, and a weekly faculty seminar series.