* 0850369
* The Evolutionary Origins of the Vertebrate Brain: Neural Organization and Complexity in Chondrichthyans
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lawrence Frank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 766,025.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common perception is that sharks are
small-brained animals with a limited behavioral repertoire. Recent research has
been dispelling these myths and has found that sharks possess brains that are of
comparable size to birds and mammals. One brain structure of particular interest
is the cerebellum, largely due to its extensive evolutionary history as well as
the ongoing debate surrounding its function. This structure originally appeared
in early sharks and has been carried through vertebrate evolution from the
earliest cartilaginous fishes to the base of the human brain. However, the
cerebellum and its function, from fish through to humans, has been an area of
debate among neurobiologists. A large body of research asserts that the
cerebellum controls and orchestrates movement while other research suggests that
the primary function of the cerebellum is not movement, but is the acquisition
and discrimination of sensory information. What can elasmobranchs (sharks,
skates, and rays) contribute to our understanding of the human cerebellum and
the origin of its function?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large variation exists in the
size and convolution (or foliation) of the cerebellum across cartilaginous
fishes, including sharks. Until recently, the variation in cerebellar complexity
has only been qualitatively assessed by scoring surface structure on the basis
of length and depth of the folds using the visual grading index. The output of
these visual assessments has shown that the highest levels of foliation are
found in agile predators that lived in open ocean (3D) environments, such as
Isurus oxyrinchus (shortfin mako shark), Alopias vulpinus (thintail thresher
shark), and Sphyrna mokarran (great hammerhead shark) and the lowest levels of
foliation occur in slow-moving, passive predators such as Orectolobus maculatus
(wobbegong shark), Squalus acanthias (spiny dogfish), Squatina angelus (angel
shark). These preliminary ecological correlations with brain development suggest
a functional basis for this characteristic. However, visual classification is
limited, as it does not provide a quantitative method for characterization and
comparison of foliation. To confirm these trends, which show that cerebellar
complexity is correlated with ecological factors (primary habitats, with varying
locomotory styles, reproductive modes, and prey capture strategies), a more
quantitative approach is necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is unique in its ability to non-invasively acquire high-resolution
data from soft tissue structure and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) is an MRI
method that provides information on the orientation and coherence of white
matter fiber tracts, thereby facilitating the reconstruction of neural fiber
pathways. This project aims to utilize microscopic anatomical MRI and
microscopic DTI in conjunction with novel analysis methods (shape analysis and
fiber tract mapping) to assess the degree of folding in the cerebellum and how
this relates to diversification and proliferation of fiber tract pathways from
this brain structure to other neural processing centers. Through these methods,
the team will inform the debate on cerebellar function, provide rationale for
the evolution of cerebellar foliation in cartilaginous fishes, and explore the
extent to which adaptive, developmental, and phylogenetic processes are driving
neural evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Publications, results, databases, and
tools will be disseminated to the research community and general public via the
existing Digital Fish Library website (www.digitalfishlibrary.org).