* 0850263
* Personalized Resource Allocation Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Larry Samuelson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 03/31/2012
* USD 167,817.00

Economists have a good understanding of competitive markets, whose supply-and-
demand diagrams are the staple of introductory textbooks and the source of much
of our economic intuition. Competitive markets are characterized by large
numbers of sellers featuring identical products and large numbers of buyers, all
with good information about trading possibilities. As a result, participants in
this market have no effect on the market price, and do not care who they trade
with?buyers are just as happy to trade with one seller as another, and sellers
as happy to trade with one buyer as another. Prices have relatively little to do
in such markets, serving to balance the quantities supplied and demanded, with
the remaining details of how trade occurs and who trades with whom being largely
irrelevant. It is thus no surprise that competitive markets work relatively
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Much of current economic theory is concerned with
the many markets in our economy that are not competitive. It is well understood
that markets will not be competitive when there are only a few buyers or
sellers, large enough to affect prices through the exertion of market power, and
a rich literature in industrial organization has emerged to examine such
markets. The research described in this proposal is instead concerned with cases
in which markets create asymmetries that distinguish agents, giving rise to
personalized relationships (rather than the anonymous interactions of
competitive markets). How are resources allocated in such personalized
markets?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research begins by examining markets in which
people must undertake investments before they can trade?potential employees may
acquire skills, just as employers may invest in capital equipment. These
investments introduce a matching component in the subsequent market, as people
vie to trade with desirable partners. The appropriate legal and institutional
structure, including especially the appropriate assignment of property rights,
turns out to be critical for prices to do an effective job of clearing such
markets. This project gives us a new understanding of this relationship,
potentially leading to the possibility of designing more effective matching
markets. A second component of the research examines relationships in which
people repeatedly deal with one another, sometimes sacrificing short-term gain
in the interests of a more effective long-term interaction. Technically, the
research advances the theoretical tools used to examine such relationships,
namely the theory of repeated games under incomplete information. More
concretely, the investigator applies these tools to model specific economic
questions involving resource allocation and price formation. Finally, the
research considers cases in which economic interactions are personalized rather
than anonymous because the preferences of the parties are linked, with each
having some regard for the welfare of the other. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual goal is a better understanding of resource allocation and economic
behavior. A running theme is that personalized interactions often complement or
even replace prices and markets in allocating resources. Taking a longer term
view, this research enhances our understanding of how to better allocate
resources through the design of more effective markets.&lt;br/&gt;