* 0850307
* Graduating Highly-Qualified Secondary Mathematics Teachers with Emphasis on Recruitment from Underrepresented Groups
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Michael Plantholt, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* gregory goins
* 04/30/2014
* USD 596,611.00

This project is designed to offer renewable, one-year scholarships to
academically talented, yet financially needy, students to major in secondary
mathematics education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual and social merit
of the project lies in the historic mission of the university as a teacher
preparation institution and its capacity to produce a large number of highly
qualified mathematics teachers every year. The program team has strong
connections with the Chicago Teacher Education Pipeline, providing them inroads
into one of the largest urban and low-income communities in the nation. In
addition, the Mathematics Department has several innovative programs aimed at
preparing the best teachers in the nation, and students in the program graduate
with a mathematics major. The Teacher-Scholar and Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) programs give future teachers authentic experiences with
mathematics that not only change their views about mathematics, but also enhance
their beliefs about teaching and learning. The Math Lifestyle Floor of the
campus residence hall, bi-weekly undergraduate seminars, and support groups for
recent graduates entering their first year of teaching build community, provide
support, and promote success among students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the project lies in the ability of the mathematics education program
at the institution to recruit, mentor, and graduate highly qualified mathematics
teachers who will in return excite their future students about careers in
science, mathematics, and education. This project is vital because the shortage
of well-qualified math teachers threatens the nation's future prosperity. This
project aims to provide about 30% of the scholarships to students from
underrepresented groups because this shortage is more profound in urban and low-
income communities and is amplified by the lack of minorities in the teaching
profession.