* 0850008
* Computational Analysis of Nucleosome Positioning Signals in Eukaryotic Genomes
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Zhiping Weng, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 912,283.00

The University of Massachusetts Medical School and the University of Washington
have received a grant to develop predictive models of the packing of DNA within
eukaryotic cells. This research will provide important insights into important
cellular control mechanisms for gene expression and gene suppression. As a first
goal the research team will use existing genomic data sets to identify sequences
that associated with higher or lower nucleosome density. The second goal is to
design, train and validate sequence-based discriminative and generative models
of nucleosome positioning. The third goal is to apply the trained models to data
from a variety of organisms and human cell lines, with the goal of understanding
how the nucleosome positioning signal encoded in the DNA interacts with other
nucleosome positioning factors and which aspects of the nucleosome positioning
signal are most strongly conserved, and which vary in divergent species. The
project will also lead to predictive models of nucleosome formation. Such models
can be used to design DNA sequences that form stable nucleosomes in vivo. These
sequences can be used to manipulate chromatin structure remodeling and
transcriptional regulation. In this project, we will train three PhD students at
two participating institutions. The project will provide content for courses at
the undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as for two summer research
programs for underrepresented minority high school and undergraduate students at
both institutions. The algorithms, software, and data sets resulting from this
project will be made freely available to the research community via the web.
Additional information may be found at http://zlab.umassmed.edu and
http://noble.gs.washington.edu/