* 0850148
* Sequence and Structural Patterns in RNA
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Gribskov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Haake
* 08/31/2013
* USD 902,262.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purdue University is awarded a grant
to implement a complete informatics system for identifying conserved RNA
structure topologies, and for finding new examples of similar topologies in
sequence databases. This will allow RNA researchers the same loop of
hypothesis/search/hypothesis-refinement that has been so powerful for DNA and
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA plays a central role in core biochemical
process such as translation, RNA-splicing, gene regulation, and viral infection.
Once thought to be only a structural scaffold, it is now appreciated that RNA
can also act as an enzyme on its own or in ribonucleoprotein complexes. However,
advances in understanding the role that RNA plays in the cell has been hampered
by the difficulty in experimentally determining and computationally analyzing
RNA structures. Approaches based on identifying conserved structures have been
extremely powerful in deducing functional properties of DNA and proteins. This
is because it is the function of the molecule that makes the sequence appear
conserved over evolutionary time. Unfortunately, a similar analysis has not been
possible for RNA structures because the conservation acts at the level of the
base-paired structure rather than that of sequence per
se.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since many other biological problems, such as systems
biology, regulatory circuits, and some kinds of intermolecular binding, have
strong graphical components, the ideas and software developed in this project
will significantly advance other areas of biological research. Graph mining is
also an important subject in Computer Science and other disciplines, which may
also benefit from this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact activities
during this project include the research of three PhD students, cross-trained in
both Biology and Computer Science, on aspects of this project. Outreach to high
schools will include modules on RNA topology structure. Software from this
project will be made publically available:
http://wiki.genomics.purdue.edu/index.php/Gribskov::Main