* 0850063
* Discovery of Complex Recurring Protein Interaction Patterns within Interactomes:  Algorithms, Applications and Software
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mona Singh, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 613,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Princeton University to develop computational tools
to facilitate research in biological networks through discovery and analysis of
recurring patterns of relations among biological units such as proteins.
Searching for recurring patterns in biological data has been the backbone of
much research and analysis in computational biology, and has been essential in
uncovering biological function. In the last few years, there has been an
explosion in the availability of protein-protein interaction data, and we now
have large-scale interaction networks for human and many model
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to develop
the necessary computational infrastructure for applying recurring pattern
analysis---which has already proven to be useful in analyzing biological
sequence, structure and expression data---to biological networks. The specific
goals of this research are: (1) To develop a computational framework for
uncovering what types of proteins preferentially work together, with the goal of
revealing patterns underlying cellular organization and protein functioning. (2)
To apply these algorithms to existing interaction networks across the
evolutionary range, with the goals of understanding how the recurring network
units within organisms differ and of revealing how new types of proteins are
incorporated into existing networks. (3) To develop software that, given a
particular protein sequence, uncovers the recurring network interaction patterns
it participates in, with the goal of placing the input protein within the
context of its cellular pathways and modules, and thereby gaining insight into
its function. The proposed research is coupled with the development of a new
undergraduate course in bioinformatics, with a final project focusing on network
analysis. Software and results of this project will be available from the
website http://compbio.cs.princeton.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;