* 0850962
* Evidence Observed:  Daubert's Impact on Science and Justice
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Sheila Jasanoff, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 185,000.00

Evidence Observed: Daubert?s Impact on Science and
Justice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sheila Jasanoff and Sean
O?Donnell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1993, the US Supreme Court issued a landmark
decision, Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., that changed the rules
for managing the quality and flow of scientific evidence into federal courts.
Daubert charged trial judges with the responsibility to act as ?gatekeepers? for
scientific evidence and to ensure that such testimony was both reliable and
relevant. This project examines the impact of Daubert on science and justice and
documents the translation of a legal decision into practices in the legal
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project addresses the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;Did the decision succeed with respect to its primary
objective: to keep unreliable and irrelevant expert testimony (popularly known
as "junk science") out of courts? &lt;br/&gt;What was the effect of requiring
trial judges to "think like scientists"?&lt;br/&gt;To what extent did Daubert
stimulate the production of new scientific knowledge?&lt;br/&gt;Has Daubert
impeded the introduction of valid scientific knowledge as
evidence?&lt;br/&gt;Has Daubert promoted justice?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address these questions with a mix of qualitative methods. A
searchable database will be created of state and federal decisions across four
"hotspot" jurisdictions representing ?liberal? and ?restrictive? interpretations
of Daubert. Claims of chemical and drug-induced injuries and their associated
forms of evidence and expertise will be tracked and analyzed. Case studies will
be prepared of two high-profile post-Daubert lawsuits involving evidentiary
conflicts: litigation over phenylpropanolamine (PPA), a drug suspected of
causing strokes; and over silicone gel breast implants, alleged to cause immune
system disorders. Trial documents and videotaped testimony will be analyzed and
personal interviews will be conducted to provide in-depth understanding of the
uses of expert evidence after Daubert.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
document and preserve the early history of Daubert's implementation by archiving
pertinent written texts, videos, and interviews so as to assist future
researchers in law and science. Project results will also help improve the
education of judges, litigators, and expert witnesses.