* 0851042
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Living in Liminality: Experiences of Displacement Among Involuntary Refugees
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Nadia El-Shaarawi, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,670.00

Case Western Reserve University doctoral student, Nadia El-Shaarawi, working
under the supervision of Dr. Eileen Anderson-Fye, will conduct research on how
refugees who have not been resettled understand the nature of their
displacement. The research will focus in particular on the role of the
international institutions with whom the refugees interact in shaping refugee
understandings, and the effects of these understandings on mental health. The
research will be conducted among Iraqi refugees in Cairo, Egypt. The researcher
will employ the social science concept of liminality to understand how refugees
in Cairo experience and make meaning in a state of uncertainty between flight
and a durable solution such as resettlement.

The research project has three objectives: 1) to examine the relationships
between Iraqi refugees in Cairo and international institutions and policies; 2)
to understand how Iraqi refugees negotiate the uncertainty that pervades their
lives in Cairo; and 3) to investigate the processes through which refugees
construct and communicate narratives of displacement, and the effects, if any,
of the construction of these narratives on mental health. The research methods
used will include participant observation, ethnographic interviews, narrative
analysis, and archival research.

This research project will contribute to a better understanding of the
relationship between refugees' experiences and their interactions with
international institutions in a context of uncertainty. This research is
important because it brings together an emphasis on refugee subjective
experiences and an exploration of the institutions and policies that govern
refugee lives. In addition, this project aims to contribute to policy debates
about refugee health and the role of international institutions in forced
migration. The research also will contribute to the education of a social
scientist.