* 0851367
* An Interdisciplinary Materials Science REU Program at James Madison University
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Brian Augustine, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 09/30/2012
* USD 255,000.00

The James Madison University (JMU) Center for Materials Science offers a
Research Experience for Undergraduates in the unique environment of a primarily
undergraduate university with strong support for interdisciplinary research in
materials science. Students in this program work in small groups with other
undergraduates under the direct supervision of a JMU faculty member. The
students and faculty come from a wide variety of backgrounds including physics,
chemistry, engineering, geology, and mathematics. Projects include the
fabrication of microfluidic devices, the growth and characterization of carbon
nanotubes, the modeling of granular materials and crystallization processes, and
the chemistry associated with technically important metal oxides and organic
molecules that have potential uses in molecular motors. Students will work with
state of the art equipment in a class 10000 clean room, metal deposition and
photolithography tools, scanning probe and electron microscopes and optical
spectrometers. Students also participate in activities that enhance their
technical communication and presentation skills and are given the opportunity to
travel to regional and national meetings to present their work before a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program and NSF Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;