* 0851954
* Foraminifera as a proxy for seawater neodymium: Core-top calibration and down-core application for reconstructing Holocene variability in the Indonesian Throughflow (ITF)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Mark Feigenson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2011
* USD 180,958.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will assess the utility
of Nd-isotopes(defined as &amp;#949;Nd) measured in foraminifera as a water mass
proxy. The first component of the work is a calibration study that takes
advantage of a large set of surface sediments and overlying water samples
collected on several cruises worldwide over the past few years to assess the
applicability of foraminifera as recorders of deep ocean and thermocline
&amp;#949;Nd. Rare earth element patterns will be measured on the same samples
to test their utility for paleoceanographic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new method will then be used to reconstruct Holocene variability in the relative
contributions of North Pacific Intermediate Water (NPIW) and South Pacific Water
(SPW) to the ITF. Seawater &amp;#949;Nd will be measured in three vertical
profiles from key locations within the ITF route and south Pacific in order to
document the &amp;#949;Nd signatures of water masses within the ITF and its end-
members. The PIs will generate a low-resolution foraminiferal record of
&amp;#949;Nd throughout the Holocene in a core located in the Makassar Straits
as a proxy for water mass variability, and combine it with measurements of
sortable silt mean size as proxy for bottom current velocity. The work will
improve understanding of Holocene changes in water mass variability and
thermocline flow through the Indonesian Seas. This award supports a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;