* 0851303
* REU Site:   Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Anson Hines, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 10/31/2012
* USD 268,650.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC) on the
Chesapeake Bay will offer an REU program in environmental biology to ten
undergraduate students during the summers of 2009-2011. SERC interns participate
in a comprehensive 12-week period of field research, laboratory work, and
educational training on some of the most challenging environmental issues of the
21st century, including climate change, biodiversity loss, invasive alien
species, and the alteration of global biogeochemical cycles. Students work side-
by-side with Smithsonian staff scientists to design and conduct their research
projects, and at the end of their internship, each intern presents a formal
research seminar describing their project to the SERC science community. While
conducting their research projects, interns also take a series of mini-courses,
attend seminars by visiting scientists, participate in laboratory exchanges with
other SERC labs, and take field trips to affiliated research institutions. SERC
encourages participation by groups that are traditionally underrepresented in
scientific careers. Additional information can be found at
http://www.serc.si.edu/pro_training/internships/internships.jsp, or by
contacting the Fellowship Coordinator, Dan Gustafson, at 443-482-2217 or
gustafsond@si.edu.