* 0851350
* Particle Transport and Carbon Export over the Northwest Atlantic Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2012
* USD 1,058,724.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project researchers at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) seek to address two primary questions
regarding the transport of organic carbon over the New England continental
margin. Their first question addresses the relative importance of intermediate
nepheloid layers versus benthic nepheloid layers for organic carbon transport.
Their second question focuses on assessing the importance of interannual
variability on particle transport. The researchers will collect both settling
and suspended particles along the NW Atlantic ocean margin, and they will
utilize both novel and established tracers of material transport to address
their primary research questions. Their assessments of particle dynamics will be
coupled to an existing hydrographic observation program along an ocean section
between Cape Cod and Bermuda ('Line W'). This program is focused on the physical
characteristics of the region, and provides an accompanying framework for the
study of carbon dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of the work to
global carbon cycling lies in the fact that continental margins generally
maintain high biological production and are physically dynamic environments. One
potential fate of the biologically produced carbon is that it may be exported to
the deep ocean, yet the magnitude of that exported carbon is generally not well
defined. Over the Northwest Atlantic margin, large-scale currents have the
potential to be an important dispersal mechanism for organic carbon to the ocean
interior. In a prior research project, the investigators hypothesized that the
lateral transport of particulate organic carbon occurs via a bottom nepheloid
layer (BNL) maintained by the Deep Western Boundary Current (DWBC). Although
their research supports the notion that the DWBC transports a significant amount
of organic carbon, their observations also indicate that intermediate nepheloid
layers (INLs) emanating from the shelf-slope break and upper slope of the Mid
Atlantic Bight may also be important vectors for carbon export.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Line W program initiated by physical
oceanographers at WHOI and involving partners at other institutions, has
established a website for activities centered on this section. The researchers
are in the process of uploading their biogeochemical flux data onto this website
and intend to develop a link to the Ocean and Carbon Biogeochemistry (OCB)
Project Office website. In addition, these researchers intend to continue to
archive aliquots of materials from the sediment trap program, and make these
available to other members of the research community. In addition to their
synergy with the Line W program, the researchers envision that the samples and
data emanating from their project will provide important context for other
studies in this region, particularly those exploring tracers of water mass
movement, or seeking to understand elemental boundary exchange and scavenging
processes. The research will provide graduate student support for MIT/WHOI Joint
Program student, David Griffith. It is anticipated that this student will work
closely with Drs. Eglinton and Charette, gaining experience in both organic
geochemical and radiochemical methods and will participate in several of the
planned research cruises.