* 0851750
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Dynamic Habitat Partitioning among Savannah Baboon Social Groups - the Role of Group-level Social Dominance Hierarchies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Jeanne Altmann, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2012
* USD 14,970.00

Most primates live in relatively stable social groups, and for many species
these groups occupy partially overlapping homeranges. This non-exclusivity
raises fundamental questions about when and how groups temporally partition the
landscape. The central hypothesis of this study is that group-level social
dominance hierarchies function to resolve intergroup resource competition, thus
proximately affecting the allocation of resources among social groups and
ultimately affecting differences between groups in the average individual
fitness of group members. Investigating the influence of group-level dominance
on the dynamics of space use over time is the focus of this research on a well-
characterized population of savannah baboons (Papio cynocephalus) in the
Amboseli basin of east Africa. In addition to utilizing long-term ecological,
life history, and behavioral data available through the Amboseli Baboon Research
Project, researchers will collect novel data using modern geographic information
system (GIS) tools to (1) automatically record the locations of numerous groups
on a pre-determined, synchronous schedule and (2) delineate resources and
habitats within the study system. These approaches will, for the first time,
permit detailed analyses of both the interrelated movements of multiple groups
within this population and the temporal and spatial relationship among the
ecological resources for which they compete. Results will thereby provide data
essential to examining landscape-level questions such as how group-level
dominance patterns affect where and when groups move in relation to one another,
what role these hierarchies have in mediating when groups have access to limited
resources, and the influence of spatial context on resource selection and
exploitation. Because baboons are considered valuable analogs to hominins,
findings will have significance relevant to the spatial ecology of both modern
primates and human ancestors. A dedicated website component will be developed to
present the research findings and implications through interactive mapping
applications that illustrate dynamic space-use and movement patterns.