* 0851065
* A Feasibility Study for Understanding Climate Uncertainty with an Ocean Focus
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Robin Tokmakian, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2012
* USD 393,274.00

Climate models are used extensively for understanding climate change and for
developing policies to address it. Quantifying the uncertainty in the ocean
component is important to understanding the importance of the oceans to the
Earth's climate. Understanding the non-linearity of the ocean model's parameter
space as exhibited by the resulting circulation will lead to improved
representation of the&lt;br/&gt;simulated ocean and its deficiencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Complex climate models make use of
parameters to represent aspects of various physical processes. There is
uncertainty in the outputs from the lack of knowledge of the parameters used to
represent the model physics. The best method of propagating the uncertainty
through the complex and non-linear models is to use large ensembles of runs.
This feasibility study will demonstrate a method using a relatively small
ensemble of simulations coupled with an emulator to examine the effect of
uncertainty in parameter specification on ocean circulation in a model. The
parameter space of the ocean component of a climate model will be explored,
focusing on understanding the uncertainties associated with a set of ocean
metrics (e.g. transports, strength of the meridional ocean circulation, sea
level, regional and global SST). First, a 100-year experiment using the ocean
model of Community Climate System Model parameter space, will be conducted for a
full ensemble of 100 (fewer if for a reduced set of parameters) at coarse
resolution (3°). Then, the model output will be used to develop a set of ocean
based metrics to examine the model's uncertainty of its parameter space.
Finally, these metrics will be used to create and explore an ensemble of 10 runs
at a higher resolution (1°) by mapping differences between two parameter spaces
to make inferences about uncertainties at 1°. The proposed method is known as
Statistical Analysis of Computer Code Output or Design and Analysis of Computer
Experiments, rather than the classical method of Monte Carlo ensembles. These
methods allow the use of much smaller ensembles, i.e., order 100 rather than
order of a 1000 runs. A minimum number of simulations are required to span the
parameter space in a designed experiment. An emulator, or surrogate, is a fast
statistical approximation to the original climate model. As such, the emulator
can be used, instead of the complex model, to efficiently span the parameter
space to estimate the probability distribution and to address questions relating
to parameter setting and metric uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The funding of this research will have broader impacts. The
investigator is a member of an underrepresented group within both the Physical
Oceanography and the Statistical and Mathematical communities. As such, her
participation in meetings of both communities will increase their diversity. The
multi-disciplinary aspect of the proposal will allow for the cross fertilization
of ideas. Further, this proposal would produce an unprecedented dataset that
would be available to researchers and projects beyond the scope of this proposal
for analyses of various ocean-climate and statistical investigations.
Understanding the uncertainty in a climate model and the estimates of what the
future climate might look like is critical to the public's acceptance of climate
predictions. As with weather forecasts, the public and policy makers are better
able to understand the risk associated with an outcome (in this case, climate
change), as well as trust the information, when the uncertainty is known. This
research will give the public and policy makers the information and to external
researchers, the methods for determining uncertainties of similarly sized
problems.