* 0851618
* REU Site: REU-University of New Orleans Site, TRACK: Training and Research in Computing Knowledge
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Huimin Chen, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,222.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This REU site at the University of New Orleans (UNO) provides research
experience for undergraduates in the area of integrated sensing and data
processing for surveillance missions and automated scene understanding. The
project recruits groups of diverse and talented undergraduate students from
around the nation to actively engage in this cutting-edge Integrated Sensing and
Automated Scene Understanding (ISASU) research, and to enhance the Electrical
Engineering program at UNO.

Intellectual Merit The participants are performing research that is expected to
impact the field of ISASU, as well as other associated scientific disciplines
such as Image Processing, Artificial Intelligence, Pattern Recognition, Computer
Vision, Bioinformatics, Data Mining, Knowledge Discovery, Automated Decision
Making & Planning, and Information Fusion, among others. The REU PIs have
extensive expertise in ISASU, as evidenced by their publications and current
funded support. The student projects address cutting-edge research themes,
directly stemming from the PIs? current research, and the PI has significant
experience in student advising, as evidenced by the large number of graduate and
undergraduate advisees. The proposed REU experience is expected to be successful
in training undergraduates in ISASU; the goal is for this work to lead to
significant results in the field.

Broader Impacts The recruitment plan, in conjunction with strong commitment from
faculties at affiliated institutions attracts undergraduate students, including
females and under-represented groups, to the REU UNO site. The project engages
in total a diverse group of 30 students, and two graduate students who will be
involved in undergraduate teaching, research and mentoring activities. The REU
research results will be published in peer reviewed conferences, and
potentially, technical journals. These REU research advances are fed back and
integrated into the teaching of related courses at UNO, and/or affiliated
institutions. Finally, the project leverages industrial contacts through the
Information and Systems Technology Research Center (IST-RC) and UNO?s Research
and Technology Park.