* 0851473
* Explaining the African Vote
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Karen Ferree, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2011
* USD 233,825.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite pouring millions of dollars
into programs to further the democratization of Africa, donors remain uninformed
about one of the most important facets of politics on the continent: Why do
Africans vote they way they do? Most observers of African elections view the
process as a mere ethnic headcount: all citizens vote for their own ethnic group
regardless of the performance of the incumbent government and without reference
to the issues of the day. Yet there is scant evidence to support this view. In
the vast majority of African countries a single ethnic group cannot achieve a
majority of the votes. Ethnic coalitions break down and shift frequently and
politicians from the same ethnic group are members of different political
parties. The salience of ethnicity to politics in African countries varies
widely and elections produce violence in some cases but not others. Moreover,
our knowledge of the motivations of African voters remains murky, based
primarily upon anecdotal reports, studies of a small number of (unscientifically
selected) cases, or surveys that measure attitudes but not actual electoral
behavior. Surprisingly, few scholars up to this point have employed the most
powerful tool to measure vote choice: the exit poll. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators plan to explore the determinants of voting in Namibia, a
transitioning democracy that features a dominant ethnic group: the Ovambo in
Namibia represent nearly half the population. Scholars and policymakers consider
Namibia to be on its way to stable democracy. However, a single party (SWAPO)
has dominated politics since independence. To what extent is this dominance
based on ethnic claims, and to what extent of performance or issue evaluations?
Understanding the motivations of its voters opens the way to a deeper
understanding of African politics, and help to inform scholarly opinion and the
challenges (or not) that remain with respect to democracy promotion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have broader impacts by placing four
graduate students and one undergraduate student in the field. The knowledge they
will receive through helping to construct, manage, and analyze this exit poll is
required to advance training beyond the classroom. For two of the students, it
will be their first experience in Africa. For all, it will be the first time
they are involved in generating quantitative scientifically produced primary
data. This nation-wide exercise will also help in the participation and training
of hundreds of enumerators in Namibia. Finally, the poll can also provide
another check on the official electoral results which may prove unreliable given
the challenges faced by the Namibian electoral commission to conduct a free and
fair election.