* 0851555
* Statistical Methods for Respondent Driven Sampling Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mark Handcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2012
* USD 269,318.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop probability
models and inferential methods for the analysis of data collected using
Respondent Driven Sampling (RDS). RDS is an innovative sampling technique for
studying hidden and hard-to-reach populations for which no sampling frame can be
obtained. RDS has been widely used to sample populations at high risk of HIV
infection and has also been used to survey undocumented workers and migrants.
RDS solves the problem of sampling from hidden populations by replacing
independent random sampling from a sampling frame by a referral chain of
dependent observations: starting with a small group of seed respondents chosen
by the researcher, the study participants themselves recruit additional survey
respondents by referring their friends into the study. As an alternative to
frame-based sampling, the chain-referral approach employed by RDS can be
extremely successful as a means of recruiting
respondents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yet despite the promise of being able to
recruit study participants from communities that are otherwise intractable to
study, there are very few statistically informed methods available to analyze
the data. In particular, extant methods for estimating population means from RDS
data rely upon qualitative assumptions about unobserved aspects of the
underlying social network connecting survey respondents; and the standard
practice for regression analysis of RDS data is to either ignore dependency
between observations or to limit analysis to variables where dependency is
assumed to be absent. Thus this project has two key aims: 1) replace the
qualitative network assumptions with a well-defined probability model for the
underlying social network and 2) develop regression models that explicitly
incorporate the dependencies between observations. In addition to carrying out
the basic science required to fulfill these aims this proposal will create
freely available software that will make these new analytical techniques
available to field researchers using RDS.