* 0851976
* REU SITE: Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education: Emerging Interface Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 04/30/2012
* USD 299,964.00

SPIRE-EIT (Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education -
Emerging InterfaceTechnologies) at Iowa State University is a 10-week
interdisciplinary summer experience for undergraduates that integrates research
and education in emerging interface technologies. Students are provided with
classroom training and gain hands-on research experience using cutting-edge
instruments, equipment, computers and technological infrastructure. Classes in
computer programming and graphics, interface design, human computer interaction,
and ethics occupy approximately 35% of the students'time. For the remaining
time, students conduct interdisciplinary research projects in groups of three.
Each group interacts with graduate students in the Human Computer Interaction
Graduate Program under the supervision of HCI faculty. The research projects are
presented at an end-of-the summer campus- wide research symposium in the form of
posters, demos, and a five-page research
paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Two major trends are
driving research in Emerging Interface Technologies: a dramatic increase and
cheapening of interface technologies themselves, and the ubiquitous permeation
of technology into everyday lives. Correspondingly, research questions focus on
what new interfaces can be designed and on people's perception,
conceptualization, and usage of these interfaces. The SPIRE exposes studentsto
four broad areas of EIT: information visualization, mobile/ubiquitous
interfaces, intelligent agents, and enabling infrastructure. Because SPIRE-EIT
has arisen from the ISU HCI graduate program, with 72 faculty across ISU's seven
disciplinary colleges, faculty members compete to have their research projects
included in the SPIRE and cite strong benefits from participation afterwards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;As knowledge work and
adaptability to new technologies continue to drive global competitiveness, it is
imperative for the US to maintain leadership in interdisciplinary technology-
based research and training. ISU's HCI graduate program was developed in
response to this need, and represents an ideal platform to host SPIRE-EIT. Both
the HCI program and SPIRE-EIT recruit with an emphasis on underrepresented
groups, preparing students for graduate education in the interdisciplinary area
of HCI, an area of importance to the US economy. By including instruction on
ethics and on research-based evaluation techniques, the SPIRE gives students
skills that are useful lifelong, independent of discipline, and which students
might not otherwise encounter in a traditional engineering or computer science
curriculum. Because of the connection with HCI, the results of research projects
can easily be incorporatedinto faculty members' undergraduate and graduate
classes. Professionally, the SPIRE offers an impressivementoring experience for
the participants because of the large number of graduate student mentors
involved. The experience offers these mentors, in turn, an opportunity to
practice mentoring for when they become faculty.