* 0851827
* REU Site: Engineering Cities
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mira Olson, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three year REU site program at
Drexel University will focus on research and education in five overlapping areas
of ongoing study: 1) Analysis and Mitigation of Natural and Anthropogenic
Hazards; 2) Environmental Quality and Sustainability; 3) Urban Infrastructure
Management; 4) Disaster and Emergency Preparedness; and 5) Application of
Sustainable Technologies for Urban Engineering. The majority of the students
will participate in a 10-week intensive research experience; however, one co-op
student per year will continue his/her research experience on a full time basis
for an additional 16 weeks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the
program is to improve students' research and creative abilities, thus this REU
experience will encourage development of key skills that will serve the
participants throughout their careers. Such key skills include the following: 1)
identifying a research problem and performing a critical review of literature;
2) designing and implementing a research plan and timeline; 3) conducting
research, including learning new methods, analysis procedures and/or skills; and
4) disseminating research results in both written and oral forms. The
development of these skills will increase student confidence, improve critical
thinking and problem solving abilities, and enhance both verbal and
communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research
experience, students will be engaged in a series of enrichment activities that
will enable them to better understand their topical work in its broader
societal, ethical, and political context and provide them with a rich urban
experience. These enrichment activities include an ethics component, a seminar
series on Urban Engineering, meetings and field trips, Philadelphia walking
tours and book discussions, and group interactions and networking. Social
activities will be an integral part of the students' experience with the goal of
building friendships and collegiality between the students and faculty
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts will be targeted to
participants from underrepresented groups, as well as individuals who do not
have access to advanced research facilities at their home institutions. The REU
program aims to increase the participation of women and minorities in
engineering, to raise the awareness of the complex challenges associated with
engineering and managing the urban environment, and to encourage students to
pursue careers serving the urban community after completion of their
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research and education
activities from the REU site will be disseminated as follows: 1) on the
Engineering Cities website (http://www.drexel.edu/coe/cae/REU/index.htm); 2)
presented in relevant conference sessions and educationally oriented
publications (e.g., Journal of Engineering Education, Journal of Professional
Issues in Engineering Education and Practice); and 3) through presentations by
REU participants at their home institutions in a class or seminar forum.