* 0851162
* Ecological Release and Resistance at Sea: Invasion of Atlantic Coral Reefs by Pacific Lionfish
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Mark Hixon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2012
* USD 718,712.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive species are increasingly
introduced by human activities to new regions of the world where those species
have never existed previously. In the absence of natural enemies (predators,
competitors, and diseases) from their homeland, invasives may have strong
negative effects on invaded ecosystems, especially systems with fewer species
("ecological release"), and may even drive native species extinct. However, if
native natural enemies can somehow control the invaders ("ecological
resistance"), then ecological disruption can be prevented or at least moderated.
Most of the many invasive species in the sea have been seaweeds and
invertebrates, and the few documented invasive marine fishes have not caused
major problems. However, this situation has recently changed in a stunning and
ominous way. In the early 1990s, lionfish (Pterois volitans) from the Pacific
Ocean were accidentally or intentionally released from aquaria to the ocean in
the vicinity of Florida. Camouflaged by shape and color, protected by venomous
spines, consuming native coral-reef fishes voraciously, and reproducing rapidly,
lionfish have subsequently undergone a population explosion. They now range from
the mid-Atlantic coast of the US to the Caribbean, including the Bahamas. Native
Atlantic fishes have never before encountered this spiny, stealthy, efficient
predator and seldom take evasive action. In fact, the investigator has
documented that a single lionfish is capable of reducing the abundance of small
fish on a small coral patch reef by nearly 80% in just 5 weeks. There is great
concern that invasive lionfish may severely reduce the abundance of native
coral-reef fishes important as food for humans (e.g., grouper and snapper in
their juvenile stages) as well as species that normally maintain the integrity
of coral reefs (e.g., grazing parrotfishes that can prevent seaweeds from
smothering corals). There are far more species of coral-reef fish in the Pacific
than the Atlantic, so this invasion may represent a case of extreme ecological
release with minor ecological resistance. Dr. Hixon and colleagues will study
the mechanisms of ecological release in lionfish, as well as examine potential
sources of ecological resistance in the heavily invaded Bahamas. Because very
little is known about the ecology and behavior of lionfish in their native
Pacific range, he will also conduct comparative studies in both oceans, which
may provide clues regarding the extreme success of this invasion. In the
Bahamas, the investigator will document the direct and indirect effects on
native species of the ecological release of lionfish, both as a predator and as
a competitor. These studies will be conducted at various scales of time and
space, from short-term experiments on small patch reefs, to long-term
experiments and observations on large reefs. Whereas direct effects involve
mostly changes in the abundance of native species, indirect effects can be
highly variable. For example, lionfish may actually indirectly benefit some
native species by either consuming or outcompeting the competitors of those
natives. The project will explore possible ecological resistance to the invasion
by determining whether any native Bahamian species are effective natural enemies
of lionfish, including predators, parasites, and competitors of both juvenile
and adult lionfish. Comparative studies of natural enemies, as well as lionfish
ecology and behavior, in both the Atlantic and the Pacific may provide clues
regarding the explosive spread of lionfish in the
Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regarding broader impacts, this basic research
will provide information valuable to coral-reef and fisheries managers fighting
the lionfish invasion in the US, the Bahamas, and the greater Caribbean,
especially if sources of native ecological resistance are identified. The study
will fund the PhD research of U.S. graduate students, as well as involve
assistance and participation by a broad variety of undergraduates and
reef/fisheries managers, including women, minorities, native Bahamians, and
native Pacific islanders. Participation in this project will promote education
in marine ecology and conservation biology directly via the Dr. Hixon's and
graduate students' teaching and outreach activities, and indirectly via the
experiences of undergraduate field assistants and various associates.