* 0851932
* REU Site:  The City University of New York/Goddard Institute for Space Studies Center for Global Climate Research
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Leon Johnson, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2012
* USD 340,350.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site program is a
collaboration of the City University of New York (CUNY) and the Goddard
Institute for Space Studies (GISS) based on geoscience, Sun-Earth interaction,
atmospheric science and global climate impacts. It will create summer research
opportunities and enrichment experiences for undergraduate science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) majors at both the community college and
senior college levels. Research topics include: Characterizing ozone
distribution and transport in the lower troposphere, Distribution and dynamics
of atmospheric aerosols, Measuring atmospheric aerosols in an urban environment,
Wetland carbon project, Urban heat island research, Scanning FTIR (Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy) remote sensing of hazardous aerosols, Ocean
mixing model, Interactions between the solar wind and the Earth's
ionosphere/magnetosphere. Each year ten students will be recruited and at least
five students will be placed at GISS. It is expected that underrepresented
minorities will represent 60 percent and females will represent 40 percent of
the participants and the recruitment area will be the CUNY and New York City
Region (Southern New York State, Northern New Jersey and Southern Connecticut).
Participation in enrichment activities will be required, e.g., workshops on
background material and developing research skills, faculty seminars, and
student progress presentations. Faculty and scientists will encourage students
to continuing their research during the academic year. The CUNY faculty and GISS
scientists have a strong record of working with underrepresented students and
advancing student through the STEM pathway to graduate study in areas in which
fewer students are selecting as careers and where the loss of retired scientists
is significant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include the
expansion of this unique urban collaboration so that more undergraduate students
in Greater NYC (New York City) can experience the rich scientific research and
the diversity of the environment of CUNY/GISS. Students will be involved in
cutting edge research in global climate change with access to a NASA research
center with the strong potential of stimulating student interest in atmospheric
and Earth and space science. This experience will motivate students including
underrepresented minorities and women to pursue for research and professional
careers in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).