* 0851605
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor Supply Decisions and Fatality Risk
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Kurt Lavetti, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert E. O'Connor
* 02/28/2011
* USD 8,477.00

When making labor supply decisions, workers frequently trade off wages and non-
wage job characteristics. The theory of compensating differentials offers a
framework for explaining how workers make many of these decisions, but the
generality of the framework combined with insufficient empirical evidence have
provided researchers and policymakers with a poor understanding of how the
prices of non-wage job characteristics are affected by workers' preferences
through labor supply decisions. The purpose of this project is to use a new
empirical approach to advance the understanding of compensating differentials
for fatality risk. The empirical setting focuses on the commercial fishing and
crabbing industry in the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands region of Alaska, where
the same crewmembers performing the same jobs face variation in both wages and
fatality risk in different seasons of the year. This unique variation between
job spells makes it possible to circumvent many of the chronic sources of bias
in previous empirical estimates arising from unobserved static worker and firm
characteristics, unjustified assumptions about perfect labor markets, and from
common sources of measurement error.

In addition, this approach of using variation within the worker-firm level
provides information on how the compensating differential varies as the level of
fatality risk varies. The literature estimating the statistical value of life
has relied heavily on the assumption that compensating differentials vary
linearly with fatality risk; however, this assumption has not been tested. This
project will formally test this linearity assumption over the observed range of
fatality risk in order to assess its validity for extrapolating estimates beyond
empirically observable risk levels, which is necessary for estimating the
statistical value of life. Improving estimates of the compensating differential
for fatality risk and the statistical value of human life will assist
policymakers whose decisions affect life expectancies, as in the cases of
workplace safety policies, health policies, and environmental policies.
Understanding how individuals in the labor market make vital decisions can guide
public policy decisions.