* 0851257
* Single-Molecule Investigation of Nanocatalysis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Peng Chen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2012
* USD 281,039.00

0851257 Chen

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit Nanoparticles catalyze many chemical transformations in
organic synthesis, pollutant removal, and energy production; intense efforts are
thus made to characterize the structure and understand the catalytic properties
of nanoparticle catalysts. While structures of individual nanoparticles can be
studied down to atomic resolution with advanced transmission electron microscopy
and scanning probe microscopies, their catalytic properties have been mainly
measured at the ensemble level, obtaining averaged properties. The catalytic
properties of nanoparticles are intrinsically heterogeneous, however, due to
their structural dispersions, heterogeneous distribution of surface sites, and
surface restructuring dynamics.

To address this heterogeneity challenge and to remove ensemble averaging in
measurements, the PI has pioneered in studying nanoparticle catalysis at the
single-particle and single-turnover resolution, using single-molecule
fluorescence microscopy of fluorogenic reactions. Focusing on the redox
catalysis by colloidal Au-nanoparticles, the PI's preliminary studies show it is
possible to follow in real time in solution the catalytic turnovers of single
Au-nanoparticles at single-turnover resolution. We found that for the catalytic
product formation reaction, all Au-nanoparticles follow a Langmuir-Hinshelwood
mechanism but with heterogeneous reactivity; for the product dissociation
reaction, three nanoparticle subpopulations are present that show heterogeneous
reactivity with distinct kinetics between two parallel product dissociation
pathways. Moreover, individual Au-nanoparticles show large temporal activity
fluctuations, attributable to catalysis-induced and spontaneous surface
restructuring dynamics that occur with distinct timescales at the surface
catalytic and product docking sites.

Building on the achievements, the PI proposes to use the single-particle single-
turnover approach to: 1) probe the nature of the heterogeneous reactivity and
surface restructuring dynamics of Au nanoparticles, 2) determine the size
dependence of single Au-nanoparticle catalysis, and 3) determine the shape
dependence of single Au-nanoparticle catalysis. The results to be obtained will
reveal the structural origins of their heterogeneous reactivity, unravel the
nature of their surface restructuring dynamics, and gain insight into their
structure-activity correlations at the single-particle level, much of which are
beyond the reach of conventional ensemble measurements.

Broader impact The single-molecule nanocatalysis research described in this
proposal opens new directions in both heterogeneous/nano-catalysis and single-
molecule research. The single-particle methodology is also generalizable to
study other nanoscale catalysts if a suitable fluorogenic probe reaction is
designed. The knowledge to be gained will help understand the fundamental
principles governing catalytic activities of nanoparticles, which will assist
the efforts in improving current nanoscale catalysts and designing new ones for
heterogeneous catalysis. Metal nanoparticles are widely used as catalysts for
chemical transformations and in particular for energy conversion in fuel and
solar cells. The fundamental knowledge from these studies will help understand
the activity of nanoparticles used in the chemical industry and in fuel and
solar cells, which will help in identifying possible means to improve them, thus
benefiting the society as a whole.

The PI's education efforts integrate his single-molecule research activities to
promote interdisciplinary teaching and training in both undergraduate and
graduate classes. The PI actively broadens the participation of women and
minority students (both undergraduate and graduate) in research and offer
training to undergraduate students, including those from four-year colleges. The
scientific expertise and technical instrumentation of the PI's lab add strength
to the research infrastructure of local community. The PI's outreach activities
will advance the public understanding and support of frontier single-molecule
research and promote science education in K-12 students.