* 0851101
* ETBC: Collaborative Research: Controls on the Flux, Age, and Composition of Terrestrial Organic Carbon Exported by Rivers to the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Robert Holmes, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2013
* USD 842,431.00

Scientists from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the Woods Hole Research
Center will characterize the sources, pathways, and timescales of riverine
export of carbon, especially organic carbon, from land to sea. To attain their
goal, the proponents will integrate geochemical measurements on the temporal and
spatial changes in the composition of dissolved and particulate river loads
combined with spatial and temporal data on relevant ecosystem, hydrologic,
geologic, geomorphologic, and climatologic characteristics obtained from remote
sensing and GIS mapping. The study will be conducted on six large river basins,
namely the Brahmaputra, Congo, Ganges, Lena, Fraser, and Yangtze. This
represents an integrated, multi-disciplinary project that focuses on an emerging
topic in carbon cycling because processes occurring at the land/ocean boundary
have not been adequately addressed to date. Lack of this information represents
a glaring omission for marine scientists involved in establishing the carbon
cycle of the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, a
traveling art exhibition based on the artwork of students living near their
study sites in Siberia, Bangladesh, India, Canada, China, and Africa will be
developed. The exhibition idea is based on their successful pilot program
entitled 'My River, My Home' carried out on the Lena River. It is anticipated
that the exhibit will engage local populations at the study sites as well as
document the scientific and cultural aspects of the project to a broader public
audience. In addition, the project represents a strong collaborative effort
between scientists in the United States and colleagues in Russia, China, Canada,
Bangladesh, the Republic and Democratic Republic of Congo and France. Two
graduate students and one postdoc will be supported and trained as part of this
project.