* 0851700
* REU site: Global Sustainability through Chemistry at the University at Buffalo
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Janet Morrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2012
* USD 213,600.00

This award by the Chemistry Division supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the University at Buffalo for the summers of
2009-2011. The program director is Janet Morrow and the co-director is Sarbajit
Banerjee. Eight students will participate in a ten-week program by working with
faculty members on chemistry projects relating to global sustainability
including inorganic /organic materials for catalysis and energy related
research, environmental analytical chemistry, medicinal chemistry and chemical
biology. The program will recruit students from local and national colleges and
universities, especially from primarily undergraduate institutions. In addition,
recruiting efforts are focused on institutions with underrepresented groups
including Puerto Rican institutions, colleges in the New York City area and
institutions that participate in New York state LSAMP program. Students will
attend weekly lectures and workshops on ethics, selection of graduate schools,
careers, and research topics. Group activities to build a community of practice
will include weekly research meetings with graduate student and faculty mentors,
an oral presentation for the REU participants and mentors, and a poster
presentation for students and faculty. In addition, there will be field trips to
several chemical industry sites and research centers in Western New York to
expose students to different careers in chemistry. Both formal and informal
evaluations will be conducted with the help of an external evaluator, Rene
Palmer, from St. John?s University.