* 0851745
* REU Site: Socially Relevant Computing Research: Visualization, Virtual Environments, Gaming, and Networking
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Tiffany Barnes, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2013
* USD 393,561.00

The project objectives are to broaden participation in computing doctoral
programs by providing a summer research experience that will immerse
undergraduates into the activities and culture of a research lab. Participating
labs include the Charlotte Visualization Center, the Future Computing Lab, the
Games+Learning Lab and the Networking Research Lab. Students will focus on
computing research, within these labs, that empower people to solve problems of
personal interest or that are important to society at large (socially relevant
computing). The activities include a summer research experience introducing
students to computing research methodologies and a broad array of computing
research disciplines. Students will receive support from peer and faculty
mentors. Students will take a GRE prep course and will be shown how to apply to
and succeed in graduate school. The targeted student participants are women and
under-represented minority students who are rising juniors, predominantly from
non-doctoral institutions. The intended impact is that a high number of REU
students will apply to computing doctoral programs.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT The intellectual merit will primarily be the contributions to
computing research that will be produced by the undergraduate students
participating in the REU Site. The topics addressed are relatively new in CS.
Additionally, the program evaluation will inform efforts to recruit
undergraduate students to doctoral programs by demonstrating the success and
challenges of this REU Site structure for motivating students to apply to
doctoral programs in computing.

BROADER IMPACT The broader impact of the project will be evidenced by the
increased numbers of students from under-represented populations in computing
who successfully participate in research and who apply to and are accepted into
graduate programs in computing.

