* 0851518
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hero or Inmate, Prison or Camp, Rehabilitation or Labor Extraction?: A Multi-Level Study of California's Prison Fire Camps
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Philip Goodman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 11,989.00

This research aims to better understand California's Conservation Camp Program,
in which more than four thousand male and female prisoners are housed in fire
camps throughout California. In these camps, which generally have no secure
boundary and look more like army barracks than traditional prisons, inmates work
either inside the camps or on crews outside the camps on various projects for
government agencies under the supervision of forestry or fire department
employees. Tasked with responding to emergencies, including wildfires, these
prisoners constitute a substantial proportion of those doing the hard, dangerous
labor of cutting fire lines to prevent and fight wildland fires. The current
project utilizes interviews with inmates, officers, supervisors and
administrators, as well as on-site ethnographic observations to explore everyday
life in the camps in terms of the nature of rehabilitation and punishment.
Another phase of the project examines what happens to camp inmates once they
parole and return to the community, especially in terms of employment and
recidivism rates. Although each phase of the project has its own methodologies
and research sub-questions, the overriding research question is how one
particular carceral setting fits into the larger picture of punishment in
California and the United States more broadly. This project will therefore serve
as a springboard for contributing to knowledge about punishment and social
change by drawing from diverse literatures including law and society, sociology
of punishment, and criminology. More broadly, the findings may shed light on the
relative effectiveness of the fire camps in reducing recidivism and aiding
parolees in securing gainful employment.