* 0851767
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Effects of Deforestation on Reproductive Fitness in Female Red Colobus (Procolobus rufomitratus) in Kibale National Park, Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Rebecca Stumpf, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2010
* USD 14,721.00

Mammalian reproduction is associated with high metabolic and physiological
requirements for females. Animals living in degraded habitats may not be able to
support these heightened needs; thus, reproduction may be compromised. Using the
endangered red colobus monkey (Procolobus rufomitratus) of Kibale National Park,
Uganda as a model, this study investigates the relationship between habitat
quality and female reproductive function by comparing groups living in
previously logged areas of the forest with groups living in unlogged areas.
There are three main objectives to this study: 1) to investigate the
relationship between habitat quality and ovarian function using estrogens and
progestins as indicators; 2) to determine the mechanisms for changes in
reproductive function due to habitat quality by examining intermediary
indicators such as cortisol (a stress hormone) and ketones (an indicator of
nutritional intake); and 3) to investigate female behavioral differences between
habitats, especially regarding feeding and mating. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urine
will be collected from adult females and analyzed for hormone concentrations and
ketone levels. Hormone concentrations will be measured with radioimmunoassays
(reproductive hormones) and enzymeimmunoassays (stress hormones). A combination
of Geographic Information System, Remote Sensing technologies, and food tree
measurements will be used for habitat classifications. Finally, behavioral
observations will be recorded for adult females. By integrating reproductive
hormones, stress hormones, ketones, behavioral observations, and habitat
characteristics, this study will clarify the physiological and behavioral
connections between habitat quality and female reproductive function.
Additionally, this study will examine what physiological mechanisms red colobus
may use to cope with degrading habitats and will consider evidence for
phenotypic plasticity and developmental reaction norms. Overall, this research
will provide important theoretical and methodological considerations for future
studies of primate reproduction, and results of this study will be incorporated
into the larger conservation and monitoring project at Kibale National Park.
This research will provide crucial information for future conservation
strategies and for understanding the response of nonhuman primates to their
greatest threat, habitat disturbance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;