* 0851123
* Exploring the adaptation and acclimatization potentials of tropical reef corals to Global Climate Change
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Mauricio Rodriguez-Lanetty, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2013
* USD 385,984.00

Coral reefs around the world are in decline with much of the mortality
attributed to coral bleaching - the loss of their photosynthetic microalgal
symbionts - resulting from global warming. Recent projections of future global
climate changes (GCC) have given rise to grave concerns about the future of the
world's coral reefs, as the thermal consequences of GCC have been predicted to
intensify in the next 30-50 years. To date, our ability to gauge the
vulnerability of coral reefs to global warming has been limited by our lack of
knowledge about the capacity for coral symbioses to acclimatize and/or adapt to
thermal stress over ecological time frames. In order to be able to predict and
model how corals will respond to increasing ocean temperature anomalies, we need
to begin understanding the potential mechanisms of thermal tolerance in
scleractinian coral symbioses. This project will identify the genetic response
of coral species to global environmental changes by looking at the molecular
mechanisms behind thermal tolerance and by identifying the genetic traits under
global-change-induced selection. This area of research is crucial to a complete
understanding of the potential of tropical corals to survive and adapt to the
rapid global climate changes that our planet is facing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of gene expression profiling approaches, under
simulated and controlled experimental settings, will allow the investigators to
identify the molecular level effects that account for thermal tolerance ranges,
and type of changes in gene expression is needed to achieve thermal
acclimatization. This project will also use the identified candidate genes
involved in the acclimatization process of thermal tolerance as genetic markers
to monitor whether seawater temperature changes influence coral species at the
level of DNA sequences. The nature of selection imposed by environmental changes
and the potential of coral populations to respond to global climate change by
evolutionary rapid adaptation will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Coral reef ecosystems provide for the livelihood of millions
of people through the tropics but their future is uncertain as we still do not
fully understand the capacity of corals to respond to the new global climate
changes - thus the results of this project is relevant to society. The
information to be generated in this project is vital for managing the current
and future coral reefs in our planet, and the findings will be disseminated both
through peer reviewed publications and through presentations at national and
international scientific meetings. This project represents a collaborative
effort between U.S. and Australian scientists with experience in the field of
molecular biology and ecology of coral and Symbiodinium symbioses. In addition,
the data and methodologies generated will be transferred to both national and
international students during training workshops organized in collaboration with
Australian scientists through the Global Coral Reef Targeted Research &amp;
Capacity Building Project, funded by the Global Environmental Fund from the
World Bank. Moreover, this project will have an immediate and significant impact
by training one or two graduate and several undergraduate students in a
multicultural environment that includes minorities, national and foreign
students. This setting will provide young scientists a chance to participate in
the development of experiments that range from molecular ecology to physiology,
including both lab and marine field experiments/procedures.&lt;br/&gt;Rodriguez-
Lanetty has recently started a new position and new laboratory in the University
of Louisiana at Lafayette, and part of his planned initiative is also to
establish a relationship between his laboratory and the local community
including teachers and students of several minority serving institutions in the
region. The research in this project will be showcased in both interactions with
the Louisiana schools and in guest lectures presented to community colleges and
undergraduates at UL Lafayette. The effort of this initiative is aimed at
transferring the details of our work to a diverse set of audiences which will
promote awareness of the issues facing coral reefs worldwide.