* 0851593
* REU Site:   Integrated Development of Bioenergy Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Paul Blum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2014
* USD 279,592.00

This University of Nebraska-Lincoln's REU Site will provide a research
experience for undergraduates during the summers of 2009 thru 2011. This REU
Site is supported by the NSF REU Program and by the Department of Defense
through the Awards to Stimulate and Support Undergraduate Research Experiences
(ASSURE) program. The REU Site program focuses on bioenergy research using
microbes or plants. Ten students will receive hands-on research experience in
one of twelve laboratories under the guidance of an experienced faculty mentor.
Students will receive a $4,500 stipend for 10 weeks (June through mid-August).
On-campus housing, travel to and from the lab, health insurance, and other minor
costs are provided at no cost to participants. Research will be coordinated with
seminars, lunches, career guidance, industrial exposure, group activities, and a
research symposium. Students will get training in biochemistry, molecular
biology, genetics, and the physiology of selected model systems. They will
engage in a debate on how to achieve sustainable energy supply for meeting a key
national challenge. Upon completion of the REU program, students will be better
prepared for future opportunities as researchers in bioenergy, including
graduate education. The program is open to all undergraduate students enrolled
in biology, chemistry, or engineering. Underrepresented minorities and students
from colleges with limited research opportunities are encouraged to apply.
Lincoln is a safe, midsize city with diverse and inexpensive entertainment,
extensive bike paths and over 100 parks. More information is available at
http://www.unl.edu/summerprogram/program_bioenergy.shtml, or by contacting
Laurie Einspahr (leinspahr2@unlnotes.unl.edu; Tel 402-472-1106), or the Program
Director, Dr. Paul Blum (pblum1@unl.edu; Tel 402-472-2769).