* 0851108
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Paleoenvironmental Implications of Dating and Characterizing Loess Deposits in the Upper Midwest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Randall Schaetzl, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 185,086.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Absolute dates and ages for key
geomorphic events in the Midwest U.S. are sorely lacking, mainly because of the
paucity of wood in glacial deposits for radiocarbon dating. This collaborative
research project will address the paucity of geochronologic information that
exists for Midwestern glacial and postglacial environments by enriching and
making more precise the post-glacial chronology, thereby facilitating a better
understanding of the timing of Late Pleistocene landscape evolution for the
upper Midwest so important for paleoenvironmental models. To help accomplish
this goal the investigators will date loess (wind-deposited silt) deposits with
optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) techniques. Doing so will establish the
age of the geomorphic/glacial event that sourced the loess, such the draining of
a glacial lake or a glacial readvance. In addition to adding critical
information regarding the dates of loess deposits, the project will enable the
investigators to evaluate the extent to which thin loess deposits can be dated
with OSL and the limits to this technique. Because most loess deposits in the
Midwest are thinner than two meters in depth, they had been deemed undateable
because of surface contamination and mixing processes. The investigators will
determine the minimum thickness of loess that allows for accurate OSL dating and
provide empirical guidelines for other researchers who wish to sample such
deposits. Their goal is to open up a new suite of Quaternary deposits for dating
with established protocols and caveats. The project will be centered at several
research sites in small to medium-sized loess sheets in Wisconsin and Michigan.
At each of these sites the investigators expect that the mean OSL age of several
OSL samples in loess will establish the most likely age of a geomorphic event.
OSL dating of loess may be the only way that the dates of these geomorphic
events can be determined. Because this research will be performed in a highly
geographic manner; loess will be sampled systematically, with a keen eye on the
spatial spread of the samples. In this way, the spatial character of the loess
deposits can be determined and loess sources more clearly
elucidated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide valuable information
and insights for the Midwestern glacial literature, and it will yield
methodological contributions. The project will enrich the chronologic framework
used by geographers, ecologists, paleoenvironmentalists, and geoscientists. It
will provide important characterization and spatial data on the thin loess and
cover sand deposits that long have puzzled and confounded soil scientists and
geologic mappers. Developing a clearer and more accurate understanding of the
deglacial chronology for the upper Midwest is essential for continued advances
in paleoenvironmental modeling and land use. The project also will provide
excellent education and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.