* 0851759
* Nonparametric and Robust Methods in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Yuichi Kitamura, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 264,138.00

This project consists of two parts. The first is concerned with random
coefficients discrete choice models. The second explores robust and efficient
estimation of moment restriction models. The first part of the project aims at
developing a new estimator for a nonparametric random coefficient binary choice
model. Random coefficient binary choice models are widely used in applied
economic analysis. They offer a natural and convenient framework for modeling
economic decision making in the presence of unobserved heterogeneity. Typically
researchers make parametric distributional assumptions on the error term and the
random coefficients distribution, then apply the maximum likelihood estimator
(MLE), often with numerical or simulation methods that can be computationally
costly. The goal of the proposed research is to provide a computationally
attractive nonparametric estimator that avoids ad hoc distributional
assumptions. The resulting estimator requires neither numerical optimization nor
numerical or simulation-based integration, and has desirable properties in terms
of its rate of convergence and asymptotic normality
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project is concerned
with robust estimation of a moment restriction model. The model is
semiparametric and distribution-free, therefore imposes mild assumptions. Yet it
is reasonable to expect that the probability law of observations may have some
deviations from the ideal distribution as modeled by the moment restriction
model. It is then sensible to seek estimation and testing procedures that are
robust against slight perturbations in the probability measure that generates
observations. The main result shows that an estimator, termed the moment
restriction minimum Hellinger distance estimator (MHDE) in this project,
possesses optimal minimax robust properties. Moreover, it remains
semiparametrically efficient when the model assumptions hold. Convenient
numerical algorithms for implementing them are provided. Extensions of the
results to time series data are considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the proposed activities include the following. First, the project
aims at developing tools that are useful for applied researchers across a wide
range of fields in economics but also in other disciplines in social science.
For example, random coefficient discrete choice models are important in many
areas including marketing, political science and other social sciences.
Likewise, the robust estimation method is concerned with moment restriction
models and therefore applicable to numerous models in economics and finance. The
two projects develop practical algorithms, which will make the procedures
feasible tools for practitioners. Second, the project will yield computer
programs for the proposed procedures, written inMATLAB, and they will be made
freely available to the public. Also, the project for the robust estimation
procedure includes the development of a suite of programs in STATA as well.
Providing STATA codes for the moment restriction MHDE, EL and other recent
methods for moment condition models is potentially beneficial for applied
researchers. Third, the proposed activities are expected to provide educational
benefits to graduate students through research assistantships supported by the
proposed grant. My previous grants provided by the NSF supported a number of
graduate students. This support gave them valuable opportunities to develop
their skills in various areas including computer programing and research
planning, which proved helpful in developing their own thesis topics. These
experiences will have invaluable impacts on their research careers in academia
or the public sector. This project enables graduate students to participate in
the planned projects, which will promote their dissertation
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;