* 0851783
* REU Site for Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Terrance Boult, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2013
* USD 320,510.00

&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site at
the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs hosts 8 students for 10 weeks in
the summers of three years to do research in the areas of computer vision,
artificial intelligence, natural language processing, information retrieval,
knowledge management, and related topics. The experience includes a combination
of theoretical reading and research with a hands-on environment to increase the
scope of participants? knowledge of the project areas. The students attend
classes to be introduced to the topics and also to obtain and in-depth
understanding of selected topics. They also perform hands-on research, and are
exposed to ethical issues. Researchers from MITRE, an industrial partner, are
also serving as mentors in this project. This provides the students with an
interesting introduction to, and training in, both applied and academic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research areas of
computer vision, artificial intelligence, natural language processing,
information retrieval, knowledge management are especially important to applied
research and technology transfer in our age of information based society and
workplaces. The researchers have strong track records in their areas of
expertise, and have tied their scholarly strengths to interesting, timely, and
useful interdisciplinary projects that connect to linguistics, biometrics, and
bioinformatics, for example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The projects
that have been chosen are attractive to students in that they show the transfer
of research to practical problems of our time. This assures that students who
engage in this experience are more likely to continue to engage in technology
research and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;