* 0851761
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Development of Sex Differences in Ring-tailed Lemur Feeding Ecology: Effects of Social and Environmental Stressors
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Michael O'Mara, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 03/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Feeding ecology is linked to nearly all aspects of primate biology and
sociality, and the development of the behaviors and knowledge associated with
feeding is the best-documented predictor of survival and reproductive success.
Despite its significance, the ontogeny of the behaviors and knowledge associated
with feeding remain poorly understood. Sex differences in feeding may be key in
minimizing feeding competition and facilitating permanent social groups, but
also add further social complexity to the ontogeny of feeding ecology. Sex
differences in feeding are linked to times of increased costs of reproduction to
females, to permanent niche partitioning strategies, or to physiological
differences due to sexual dimorphism. While sex differences in feeding ecology
of adults are documented across the primate order, the timing and mechanisms of
their development are unclear. This project will integrate behavioral, stress
endocrinology, and forest phenology data from ring-tailed lemurs at the Beza
Mahafaly Special Reserve, Madagascar to identify when sex differences in feeding
develop. It will examine how differences are related to costs of reproduction or
niche partitioning, how habitat quality and stress impact the development of
juvenile ring-tailed lemur feeding, and how social mechanisms shape these
differences. Habitats of varying quality, including human-degraded habitats,
will provide a cost gradient to test how the development of sex differences is
related to food availability, mortality risk, and stress-factors which all
contribute to primate life history evolution. The comprehensive dataset
generated through this project will include the creation of a framework to test
long-term developmental questions relative to health and reproductive success.
This can then be used to explore future comparisons among haplorhines and
strepsirhines aimed at understanding evolutionary patterns of primate feeding
and stress. Understanding the ontogeny of feeding differences across a
phylogenetically broad array of primates assesses which behavioral and
developmental strategies of this key aspect of life yield successful adults and
how these strategies differ or are similar across taxa.&lt;br/&gt;This project
also has important conservation implications by addressing the effects of
habitat degradation on lemur growth and development and how stress fluctuates
with ring-tailed lemur life history stages. This information is highly relevant,
as 90% of Madagascar's forest habitat has been degraded by human use. This
project will additionally train a Malagasy Master's student and an American
assistant in methods of behavioral ecology.&lt;br/&gt; .