* 0851552
* Sphere-Sphere and Sphere-Surface Interactions in Viscoelastic Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ronald Phillips, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,950.00

0851552 R. Phillips

The important problem of how particles suspended in non-Newtonian fluids
interact with each other and with nearby surfaces remains relatively unstudied
in comparison with similar problems involving Newtonian fluids. These
interactions between particulates in polymer solutions and melts can result in
aggregation, chaining, and movement toward or away from the walls bounding a
flow. Even such seemingly simple questions such as whether two spheres
sedimenting along their line-of-centers will move together to form a doublet, or
move apart, remain unanswered. Similarly, the limited published experimental
data on the rate of fall of a sphere perpendicular to (i.e., toward or away
from) a flat surface disagrees qualitatively with theoretical predictions. These
two problems, the axisymmetric sedimentation of two spheres and the movement of
a sphere normal to a planar surface, are of practical importance in applications
such as the processing of composite materials, the use of proppant particles in
oil recovery, and the application of "lab-on-a-chip" microelectronic devices.
They are also ideal candidates for fundamental research, because their
axisymmetric geometry makes them accessible to both experimental measurement and
numerical calculations. In the proposed research, particle image velocimetry
(PIV) will be used to measure velocity fields in planar regions around two
sedimenting spheres and spheres moving normal to interfaces. Particle velocities
will also be measured directly, by using charge couple device (CCD) cameras.
Experiments will be performed in polymer solutions that exhibit elasticity with
negligible shear thinning (i.e., Boger fluids), solutions that are strongly
shear thinning but exhibit very weak elasticity, and solutions that are both
strongly elastic and shear thinning. The sizes and densities of the spherical
particles will be such that the Deborah numbers are of order unity, but the
Reynolds and Stokes numbers will be small, isolating the effects of the non-
Newtonian rheology relative to inertia. Numerical calculations of viscoelastic
flow around spherical particles will be performed by an approach that accounts
for the hyperbolic nature of the constitutive equations and the elliptic nature
of the momentum conservation equations. The proposed methods are capable of
resolving the stress boundary layers and regions of severe polymer stretching
that are present in viscoelastic flow around particles at finite Deborah
numbers. Preliminary calculations show the formation of a negative wake, or
region where the fluid moves in the direction opposite to that a sedimenting
sphere, in flows with strong elasticity as well as shear thinning. The formation
of a negative wake is qualitative agreement with experimental measurements of
two-sphere sedimentation performed by PIV.

Intellectual Merit

The proposed work consists of carefully chosen experiments in the simplest
possible geometries that are still relevant to nearly all flows of non-Newtonian
suspensions. These experiments will involve quantitative measurements of
velocity profiles that can be compared quantitatively to calculations done by
our group and by others. The students involved will gain an appreciation for
both experimental and computational work, as well as the importance of
establishing a close connection between these two avenues of research when
dealing with complicated materials.

Broader Impact

This research will provide an excellent educational opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate students. It has applications in a wide range of areas, including
developing new composite and nanocomposite materials, improving oil recovery,
and designing new "lab-on-a-chip" microdevices. Undergraduate students will be
recruited from underrepresented groups, both to help with the research and to
create instructional materials to be used in classroom teaching