* 0851364
* A long-term perspective on marine biodiversity and conservation: Interdisciplinary fieldschool in the Lau Group, Fiji
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Loretta Cormier, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2013
* USD 346,132.00

Using the excitement of scientific discovery, the experience of hands-on
research in a foreign setting, and the power of the Internet, the proposed
project aims to enhance understanding of global culture, biological diversity,
and effective strategies in science education. Over 2 summers undergraduate
students will engage in interdisciplinary problem based research that is
expected to generate a model of long-term dynamics in human exploitation of
marine biological communities, emphasizing interactions between humans and the
environment. A diverse group of undergraduates from the University of Alabama at
Birmingham (UAB; a Minority Serving Institution and the lead institution for
NSF?s Alabama AMP or Alliance for Minority Participation Program) and elsewhere
in the US, will spend 6 weeks in the field and 3 weeks in the classroom and lab
at UAB each summer. The team will recruit minorities to fill a significant
proportion of the available positions by tapping into the diversity in student
participation already present in UAB?s AMP and the McNair Scholars Program.
Students? activities and projects will include: archaeological surveys, mapping,
and excavations; collecting and analyzing ethnographic data on resource
exploitation and foodways; conducting lab analysis of archaeological materials;
working with database systems and computer software; and interpreting data in
written, digital, and oral presentations for the academic and general public. An
External Advisory Committee of senior scholars will guide and monitor the
progress of this REU site. Intellectual Merit. This innovative project will
produce a model describing millennia of human-environmental interactions. An
evolutionary perspective is afforded by our team?s expertise in ethnography,
archaeology, and historical ecology, providing for the evaluation of changes in
marine diversity and exploitation through time. A fundamental part of the
proposed research is the collaboration of students and faculty from North
America, Fiji-based collaborators, and Fijian villagers. These interactions will
serve to stimulate interest in the understanding and preservation of cultural
and natural resources. This site will provide a model of innovative strategies
for teaching field-based sciences, for disseminating research to educators, and
for evaluating the educational effectiveness of our approach. The team will
develop visual digital media and contribute to technologically savvy curriculum
for use in K-16 classrooms throughout the state of Alabama. This research is
expected to have a positive impact on the practices of anthropology, historical
ecology, and science education in terms of theory and method. Broader Impacts.
The broader impacts of this project include the teaching and training of
students and indigenous collaborators in anthropological field methods. The
research findings will be disseminated via a partnership between this REU site
and Alabama Public Television (APT) through APTPLUS, APT?s 21st century
destination for online learning. State-of-the-art technology combined with a
wealth of content-rich resources makes learning a dynamic, interactive
experience for all ages. Free for educators, adult learners, parents and youth,
APTPLUS provides exciting multimedia education. This video-on-demand service
offers pre-K through adult learning curriculum content, professional
development, national and local video libraries, and links to state and national
educational web sites and support materials. Currently, 100% of the public
school districts and 71% of the public K-12 teachers are using APTPLUS as a
teaching and learning tool. REU video footage, photos, and research data hosted
on the APT website will be incorporated into online educational professional
development programs. In an effort to reach as many audiences as possible, the
project team will also disseminate information through traditional procedures
such as scholarly presentations and publications. Data gathered by REU students
will be used in displays and presentations to the general public in
collaboration with UAB, the McWane Science Center, University of the South
Pacific, the Fiji Museum, and Alabama Public Television. This project is being
co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and
also EPSCoR.