* 0851497
* Collaborative research: Understanding the spatial and temporal variability of dissolved oxygen through a hierarchy of models.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jeffrey Collett, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 396,838.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;In this project ocean modelers at The University of
California at Los Angeles and Colorado State University will develop a new
theoretical framework for understanding and predicting the responses of oceanic
oxygen to wide range of climate variability. Recent observations of decadal
oxygen changes of in the upper ocean, which now have been documented in every
ocean basin, motivate several questions regarding the underlying mechanisms. How
does dissolved oxygen respond to atmospheric forcing at different time scales?
How do the temporal spectrum and spatial patterns relate to that of its driving
forces, both physical and biological, and to the coupling between them? Modeling
studies on long-term trends and basin-scale variability revealed that dissolved
oxygen is highly sensitive to both physical and biological processes, and it has
been suggested as a tracer of climate change in the oceans. However, mechanistic
understanding of underlying causes are far from complete, and fuller elucidation
of the large-scale modes of oxygen variability is therefore needed, particularly
as new data is rapidly increasing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
hypothesizes that the physical and biological drivers of oxygen changes are
modulated by the thermocline ventilation in the upper ocean, leading to enhanced
large-scale, low frequency variability. The theory leads to novel hypotheses for
explaining two recurring and general observations: that O2 changes are so
prevalent at decadal time scales and are focused in waters occupying a common
position in the water column, namely the base of the ventilated thermocline.
They plan to evaluate these predictions using a hierarchy of models ranging from
a one-dimensional isopycnal model to a state-of-the-art eddy-permitting global
ocean model with ecosystem and biogeochemistry components. The work plan will
involve comparison of patterns across a hierarchy of models, illuminating
fundamental and non-model dependent dynamics of the oceanic oxygen cycle. This
project culminates in the application of our theoretical and modeling approach
to the Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs) for the proposed global
implementation of ARGO-O2 project to develop future observational strategies.
This will be a major step toward building a set of tools for understanding the
types of O2 variability found in the real world, and laying the groundwork for
analyzing a wide range of observational and modeling data for this important
tracer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The researchers anticipate that
this work will shed light on hypoxia as an emerging problem in the ocean of
strategic importance to fisheries managers and marine conservation efforts.
Through the proposed OSSEs, this project will assist in the formulation of
optimal observational strategies for the international efforts to develop the
global array of O2 sensors on ARGO floats. The results are also expected to
provide a mechanistic basis for estimating global scale losses of O2 from such
irregular sampling networks, thus reducing a key uncertainty in the
quantification of the partitioning of anthropogenic CO2 uptake between the land
and the oceans. Finally, the project will provide for the training and support
of two beginning graduate students, as well as outreach activities at Coloado
Statue University on oceans and climate science for K-12 through graduate
students and for the general public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;