* 0851869
* REU Site:   Research Experiences in Neuroscience for Students from Rural and Tribal Colleges
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Peter Meberg, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 464,250.00

The University of North Dakota REU Site, a partnership of the North Dakota
Association of Tribal Colleges (NDATC) and the University of North Dakota (UND),
will provide a research program for undergraduates during the summers of 2009
through 2013. Ten students will be selected each summer to work on neuroscience
projects under the mentorship of UND faculty. Students from Tribal and rural
colleges will be recruited to participate in the program. All students will be
paired with faculty mentors and will conduct their research at the University of
North Dakota. The primary objectives of the program are to (1) foster academic
and social independence, (2) promote an interest in research and science
careers, and (3) encourage professional development for student participants.
Students will initially receive one week of training in cell, molecular and
imaging techniques, and then develop their own research project under the
mentorship of faculty. Students will attend weekly professional development
sessions that will include instructions in oral and written presentations, data
analysis, and proper research conduct. Students will be expected to present
their findings at an end-of-session Symposium, which will prepare them for
professional scientific presentations at a regional or national meeting. Salary,
travel, room and board will be provided for all students. Childcare funding is
available from UND, if needed. The hope is that participating American Indian
and rural students will choose to pursue graduate degrees in the sciences and
return to their communities to help strengthen science education, research and
literacy. Applications and other relevant information are available at
http://www.und.nodak.edu/instruct/spyle, or from Drs. Bennett
(bbennett@ndatc.org), Van Doze (vdoze@medicine.nodak.edu) and Sally Pyle
(sally.pyle@und.nodak.edu).