* 0851521
* An Effective Methodology for Combining Information from Independent Sources with Applications to Social and Behavioral Sciences and Medical Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Minge Xie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 154,695.00

In the modern era with explosive growth of information, it is important to
process information in an efficient and meaningful manner. Statistical
methodology of meta-analysis is a technique for enabling this. It has broad
impacts and applications in social and behavioral sciences and medical research,
among other fields. Indeed, formal and meaningful ways of combining data
information from independent sources are important both theoretically and
practically. Combined results from multiple studies summarize overall
associations, and inferences from this are more robust and reliable than
inferences from any single study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
proposal are to develop a unifying framework and new methodologies for combining
information from independent sources, and to demonstrate the usefulness of the
methodologies in a broad range of applications. The underlying tool of the
proposed framework is confidence distributions (CDs). Although CD is a
fundamental statistical inference concept with a long history, recent
developments have redefined it with a focus on solving more complex real-life
problems. The proposed framework based on CDs can unify most information
combination methods used in the current practice, including both the classical
p-value combination and the model based meta-analysis approaches. Furthermore,
this framework of CD combination can lead to developments of new methodologies,
such as: a) a robust meta-analysis approach, which can remove a critical
constraint in current practice requiring all studies be of the same type and
with the exact same parameter values; and b) a frequentist Bayes compromise
approach to combining expert opinions with information in observed data, which
is otherwise not possible in regular frequentist inference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying development can potentially lead to a common
computing program for various meta-analysis approaches. It not only has
theoretical values, but can also promote broader applications of meta-analysis.
Advances emerging from this project will help solve the specific set of problems
set forth herein, and stimulate new research and applications in statistical
methodological developments.