* 0851404
* Dissertation Research: Institutionalizing Multi-Culturalism in South Korea
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Donald Nonini, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,989.00

University of North Carolina doctoral student, EuyRyung Jun, under the guidance
of Dr. Donald M. Nonini, will undertake research on how the idea of
multiculturalism is developed and deployed in the wake of increased immigration.
The research will be carried out in South Korea, which has experienced an
increase in immigration for work and marriage. The notion of "damunhwa," which
means "multi-culture" or "multiculturalism," as been developed and promoted by
migrant centers, which are non-governmental organizations (NGOs) concerned with
immigrant issues. Interestingly, such practices focus more on the self-
transformation of the native population than on problems encountered by
migrants. This research will examine the activites pursued in the name of
multiculturalism to explore their origins, their effects on the South Korean
citizenry, and their consequences for immigrants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will undertake twelve months of fieldwork in the greater Seoul area
using a mix of ethnographic and historic methods. Primary research sites will
include the migrant centers, related state agencies, and citizens involved in
working with migrants. Research methdologies include interviews, archival
research, document analysis, and focus groups. The research objectives are to
examine the relationship between local NGOs' damunhwa practices and the ethical
normativity of tolerance of, and rights to, difference, and how they reconfigure
or not the political and ethical fields of cultural difference in South
Korea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
contribute to a new comparative social science of practices surrounding
international immigration, including multiculturalism and human rights, and to
better understanding of NGOs, their effects on public discourse, and their
relationship to the state. In addition to these theoretical contributions, this
study will help to understand the larger consequences of policies developed to
help social minorities in Korea and beyond. The research also will contribute to
the education of a social scientist.