* 0851574
* REU+RET Site: Structure Property Correlations Across Length Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Naresh Thadhani, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at Georgia Institute of Technology will continue to
offer summer research opportunities for undergraduate students recruited
nationwide and teachers from inner-city and suburban public high schools in the
Atlanta area. Research topics are in multidisciplinary areas of Materials
Science and Engineering and are grouped under three categories: (1) Materials
for biological and sensor applications, (2) Materials for structural and extreme
environments, and (3) Materials for energy applications. The REU program is for
8 weeks and will support 14 undergraduates and 6 teachers each year during 2009
to 2013. Participants receive research training in the laboratories of faculty
mentors at Georgia Tech. Some students also participate in international
research experience at institutions in Brazil, China, England, Japan, and
Singapore, through established collaborations between faculty mentors at Georgia
Tech and researchers at institutions abroad. While being immersed in one-on-one
research with the faculty, the students attend presentations on various
materials related topics, laboratory safety, technical communication, and
guidelines for graduate school preparation. In addition, a one-day workshop on
professional development focusing on ethics, entrepreneurship and public policy
is also offered. The training fosters team work and prepares the participants to
address difficult technological problems requiring multi-disciplinary and
globally engaging approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the
Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate of National Science Foundation.