* 0851794
* REU Site: SURFO - Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kathleen Donohue, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2013
* USD 286,764.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at the University of Rhode Island (URI). The program is called the
Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography (SURFO) and offers a
10-week research/educational program designed to expose 9 undergraduates per
year to cutting-edge, authentic, oceanographic research at the URI?s Graduate
School of Oceanography (GSO) located in Narragansett, RI. Each student will work
with a research advisor and graduate student to develop/conduct a research
project in an area of oceanography appropriate to each student's background and
interests. The research or educational niche filled by the SURFO program deals
with the more quantitative aspects of oceanography, which closely parallels the
strengths of GSO/URI. GSO also plans to expand the scope of the research
projects to include renewable energy to complement their recently state-funded
center of excellence for Research on Offshore Renewable Energy. The research
projects undertaken by participants are typically part of a separate NSF funded
research program, but the student project focuses on an interesting aspect of
the research that was not anticipated. As such, these projects are often high-
risk and high-reward for which support for the PIs or graduate students was not
budgeted. These types of projects truly give the student a taste of the
successes and frustrations of authentic, cutting-edge research. Many of the
student projects represent important initial results for subsequent research
proposals or publications. The primary undergraduate population targeted by the
program includes students with strong backgrounds in math, physics, computer
science, and engineering. Students who have completed their junior year of
undergraduate education are preferred participants, but well-qualified
sophomores or matriculating seniors are also considered. Students from under-
represented groups in the geosciences and students with limited exposure to
oceanographic research at their home institutions are highly sought. The SURFO
program exposes students to a broad spectrum of oceanographic research across
various sub-disciplines. The program provides students with exposure to the
expectations and lifestyle of graduate school. These combined experiences are
expected to result in better-prepared graduate students and faster degree
completion times. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is supported by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.