* 0851733
* REU SITE: Numerical Computing and Optimization in Multidisciplinary Applications: Methods and Software
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Niki Pissinou, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* John Reppy
* 01/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This project is a Numerical Computing and Optimization REU site hosted by
Florida International University (FIU). This site?s region, Southeast Florida,
is a rapidly growing communication industry hub. This REU Site contributes to a
well trained technical workforce in response to information from to the US and
Florida Bureau of Labor Statistics indicating that the need for computer systems
and data communication analysts is projected to grow during the 2006-2016
period. FIU is recruiting a diverse group of students and engaging them in a
research experience to ensure that greater numbers will attend graduate school.
Each summer 10 students are selected from across the country to participate in a
variety of research projects that are supervised by the faculty for a period of
10 weeks. Projects span fundamental multidisciplinary areas in reconfigurable
algorithms, software and operating systems for emerging applications. Students
also attend a number of technical and professional seminars.

Intellectual Merit: Undergraduate students participating in this summer program
perform supervised research and obtain rich experiences in a diverse and
multicultural environment. Female and under represented minorities are selected
from across the country to participate in the program, thus giving a diverse
perspective and strength to the research. The student projects allow
participants to learn fundamental principles of theoretical and practical
telecommunications and networking. The undergraduate students attend structured
training sessions to learn how research is conducted and how to be effective
team members. The research projects involve a combination of model design,
development and testing of algorithms, and software and tools necessary to
design and validate secure, context-aware and adaptable next generation
computing and communication systems and devices.

Broader Impacts: This project engages students from underrepresented groups in
research and exposes them to the possibilities of graduate study and encourages
them to choose a career path involving research. The students develop
intellectual confidence as they associate with other students who share their
commitment to science and engineering. This REU site advances the research
skills of the undergraduate participants and improves the employment options for
these students. This provides a stronger technically educated American
workforce. The REU research advances are integrated into the curriculum of
related classes at FIU and thus benefit other students.