* 0851579
* NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA, July 2009, July 2010 and July 2011
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* James Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 12/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

This grant provides renewed funding for the participation of junior faculty in
the NBER Summer Institute. For more than twenty five years, NBER's Summer
Institute has offered an ideal environment for developing new ideas and forging
collaborative work relationships. Summer Institute brings together economists
and scholars in other fields from universities, government, and international
organizations for a few days or a few weeks of seminars, workshops, conferences,
and cooperative research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Summer Institute is four
weeks long, and includes at least 40 sessions organized and co-organized by over
80 individuals. There are more than 1,750 attendees from over 300 universities
and non-academic institutions, and in 2008 more than 64% of the individuals who
attended Summer Institute were not NBER affiliates. While there are many
presentations of work nearing completion, emphasis is placed on the workshop
aspects of the program where new ideas are raised, preliminary research ideas
are developed, and plans for joint or coordinated research efforts are
established. Efforts are made to include a wide variety of new participants, and
to reach out to women and minorities. Calls for papers are circulated widely and
are available on the NBER website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2007 NBER
inaugurated a new feature at the Summer Institute, a two-day mini-course
entitled "What's New in Econoemtrics." The course is intended to update
researchers on the latest techniques in econometrics. The feedback was very
positive and NBER held a second-mini-course in 2008 focusing on time-
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The NBER Summer Institutes
generate timely and influential research on important economic policy questions
related to such topics as international financial stability, economic
productivity and technology, enviornmental regulations, social security policy,
and educational policies. The workshops are an invaluable part of the research
infrastructure in ecobnomics and assist the research of a large number of
economists.