* 0851893
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary research in water resources at the University of Florida
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jasmeet Judge, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,132.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the REU site is to provide
eight undergraduate students in science and engineering with eight weeks of
research experiences, focused on sustaining water resources using
interdisciplinary approaches. Specifically, the research experiences will
involve students in quantifying different components of the water and energy
balance of various land uses in Florida. The students will learn the
significance of this quantification and how it impacts management practices and
decisions, through extension activities. The projects, conducted at three
locations in Florida, will involve combination of field and laboratory
experiments, theory, and computer modeling. The projects will utilize the
intricate UF/IFAS infrastructure through their Research and Education Centers.
Recent advances in Information and Cyber-technologies will be used heavily to
facilitate frequent communication among the students and ensure a positive
cohort experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed REU project has broader
impacts for water quantity and quality management, crop-yield forecasting,
irrigation scheduling, and ecosystem sustainability. In addition to the broader
impacts of the research, the education and mentoring activities will also
provide significant impact. The model of providing research experiences in
hydrology where all the REU participants are not physically located at the same
place can be extended to other disciplines. The students will be trained in a
broad-based interdisciplinary field, with opportunities for professional
development. The students will present their research and interact with other
researchers in water resources during professional meetings.