* 0851831
* REU Site: Cellular Bioengineering -- From Biomaterials to Stem Cells
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Prabhas Moghe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal: 0851831&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Charles M. Roth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year REU site program at Rutgers
University will engage 10 undergraduate students each year in cutting-edge,
cross-disciplinary research in the field of Cellular Bioengineering. Cellular
Bioengineering encompasses a number of cutting edge research fields and
articulates with nanotechnology, advanced materials, systems biology and stem
cells. The research focus on Cellular Bioengineering From Biomaterials to Stem
Cells will integrate these areas towards the establishment of a strong
engineering base for the development of cell-based devices and therapeutics. An
emphasis on stem cells is a relatively unique opportunity for an REU site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program will continue and expand upon an existing
seed program called ISURF (Integrated Summer Undergraduate Research Frontiers).
Students will receive training in fundamental laboratory techniques in a
Cellular Bioengineering Boot Camp, will meet weekly for community building and
exercises designed to develop their research communication skills, and will
present their research results to their peers, faculty and visitors at a Summer
Symposium. Another unique feature of this program is the Buddy System which will
be employed to provide REU participants with near-peer mentors outside of their
own laboratories, and participants across various years of the program will be
linked via an E-Pals system and via an online blog and community called The
Human Cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts will be targeted to
students from underrepresented groups and those from colleges without
substantial graduate research and training. This REU program will train
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds in Cellular Bioengineering and
motivate them to pursue graduate studies which will lead to a better trained
workforce in this rapidly expanding field.&lt;br/&gt;