* 0851420
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Child Maltreatment: Eyewitness Memory and Executive Function
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Gail Goodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 01/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This research examines whether child maltreatment is associated with deficits in
children's eyewitness memory and executive function (EF). In this study,
researchers also investigate potential interactions between children's age and
maltreatment background (maltreated vs. nonmaltreated) as influences on
eyewitness memory and EF performance. Moreover, researchers examine effects of
emotional arousal on eyewitness memory in maltreated and nonmaltreated children
by examining their memory for an argument between a man and woman in an emotion-
evoking condition. Previous research on children's eyewitness memory has focused
primarily on nonmaltreated children. As a result, little is known about
eyewitness memory in children with maltreatment histories, despite such
children's frequent questioning by authorities (e.g., in child abuse and
domestic violence investigations).

Recent studies suggest that maltreatment experience is related to changes in EF
performance relative to that of controls. Further, several studies find that EF
(e.g., working memory) ability predicts children's eyewitness memory
performance. In this project, maltreated and nonmaltreated children between 9
and 15 years of age complete various EF tasks, including measures of working
memory, response inhibition, attentional control, and cognitive flexibility.
Half of the children in each age/maltreatment category are exposed to emotion-
evoking stimuli (an argument between a man and woman) prior to completing the
memory task, whereas the other half will be exposed to a comparable, emotionally
neutral event. Mental health and trauma-history measures are included. Main
effects of age and maltreatment status, and an Age-Maltreatment Status
interaction, are predicted for both EF and eyewitness memory measures.

Mediational analyses are performed to investigate possible mediators of
relations between maltreatment status and eyewitness memory (e.g., EF, state
anxiety, and trauma-related psychopathology). Results will indicate whether
emotion-evoking stimuli differentially influence the eyewitness memory
performance of children with (and without) a history of maltreatment.