* 0851989
* REU Site: Incorporating Ethical Decisions into Nanomanufacturing Research
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Carol Barry, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 09/30/2012
* USD 299,088.00

Proposal: 0851989&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Carol Barry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF funded Nanoscale Science and
Engineering Center (NSEC) for High-rate Nanomanufacturing (CHN) will host a
three year REU site program. This REU site program includes the University of
Massachusetts Lowell (UML), Northeastern University (NEU), and the University of
New Hampshire (UNH) which are equal partners in this NSEC. This NSEC is
leveraging the expertise of the three partners to research and develop robust,
high-rate, environmentally-benign nanomanufacturing techniques, and thereby
ensuring rapid transfer of nanotechnology discoveries to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ten-week summer REU site program focused on
nanomanufacturing research will support a total of ten undergraduate students,
i.e., four at UML and three each of the partner institutions. This REU program
is part of the CHN umbrella REU site which includes undergraduate researchers
supported by (1) this REU site program, (2) CHN, and (3) other research awards
at the three universities. This umbrella REU site will facilitate creation of
sustainable infrastructure for undergraduate research at the three partner
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each undergraduate student will be assigned
a mentor, typically a graduate student or post-doctoral researcher working in an
area closely related to the REU participant's research. The REU site program
will also provide training for the students' mentors and program evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to enhance the research experience, undergraduate
students will participate in social events and a cross-university professional
development program. The professional development program includes an
orientation to the REU program; safety training; extensive communication skills
development which is necessary for professional careers (i.e., library skills,
"Writing and Introduction", "Basics of PowerPoint", and "Technically Speaking");
and a strong ethics component. The ethics training will go beyond engineering
ethics to include research integrity, business ethics, and the ethics of
emerging nanotechnology, and value sensitive design. Finally, the at the end of
the REU program participants will make presentations of their research project
at the Museum of Science, Boston where they will have full access to the Museum
to enjoy and comingle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site program will enhance
recruiting of students from local community colleges and minority serving
institutions. In particular, this project facilitates collaborative research
between UML, NEU and UNH faculty and faculty at minority serving institutions.