* 0851375
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Linked Migration and Changing Labor Markets in the Rural United States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Nelson, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 162,492.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Two groups of migrants, aging baby boomers and Latino immigrants, are converging
on rural America. Together, these groups will significantly transform their
destination communities in the coming decades. While these migration streams
have each attracted scholarly attention, work to date has treated these groups
of migrants separately, leaving unstudied how their combined effects are
reshaping rural places. Using a two-staged methodology, this collaborative
research project will explore potential economic linkages between the Latino
immigrants and baby boomers arriving in the same or nearby rural destinations.
The project also will examine how these linked migration streams are
transforming rural labor markets. In Stage 1, the investigators will use
publicly available census data to identify areas attracting higher-than-expected
flows of both baby boomers and Latinos. They also will examine areas that show
evidence of rural gentrification, a force theoretically tied to linked migration
streams. Maps of these population groups at the sub-county level developed at
this stage will facilitate visualization of the micro-scale social geographies
of these destinations with linked migration streams. Stage 2 of the project will
involve intensive community case studies and will focus on labor-market
experiences of Latino workers, non-Latino workers, and private employers. During
Stage 2, the investigators will use interviews, participant observation, and
textual analysis to determine how rural labor markets are transformed in the
wake of increasingly diverse migration streams.

This project will provide key insights into critical forces of rural
restructuring that are likely to substantially increase in the coming years.
Rural communities need to better understand these demographic transformations,
because more than 5 million new baby boomer migrants are likely to arrive in
nonmetropolitan destinations by 2020, and Latino migration is unlikely to
subside. This project will generate new empirical and theoretical understandings
of the ways in which aggregate transformations in the age structure of the
population are likely to reshape domestic and transnational migration streams as
well as generate socioeconomic change at different geographic scales.
Furthermore, examinations of linked migration systems and labor market dynamics
within rural spaces will reframe understandings of gentrification and
globalization, which to date largely have been drawn from urban-based
scholarship. Finally, the project will build a collaborative research
relationship between a major research university and an undergraduate
institution. Undergraduate and graduate research assistants will gain scientific
expertise through their involvement with the project, and the data collected as
part of this project will enhance existing undergraduate course offerings at
both institutions.

