* 0851957
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Internship Program at the Information Trust Institute
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Michael Loui, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2013
* USD 357,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The security
and economic well-being of our society rests upon the trustworthiness of a vast
complex of networked information systems that provide communications, computing,
and control to manage our nation?s critical infrastructure systems (power,
transportation, aerospace, telecommunications, health care, emergency response,
banking, finance, and e-commerce). These critical infrastructure systems face
enormous threats to their operation not only from malicious attacks, but also
from their very nature as extremely complex, interconnected, and interdependent
systems. The proposed summer REU site, at the Information Trust Institute (ITI),
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, advances knowledge about techniques
for analyzing and improving the security, reliability, and safety of networked
information systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This site has
extensive computing resources and includes a team of senior investigators who
have previous experience in collaborating with undergraduates in research
projects. This effort is based upon projects in two prior highly successful
summer undergraduate research internship programs that have resulted in co-
authored publications. The topics of research are timely and address the
important computing research problem of protecting networked information
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. A diverse group of undergraduates
is learning how to conduct research and is becoming prepared to pursue graduate
studies. The research teams include women and underrepresented minorities.
Domestic students in this program are interacting with otherwise supported
international students through their research projects and through ethics
sessions. Graduate student mentors are learning mentoring skills. The
educational effectiveness of the summer program, the ethics sessions, and the
mentoring experiences are being assessed. The results of the assessments will be
presented at conferences on computer science education and on engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;