* 0851435
* Collaborative Research: ETBC: Implication of ANAMMOX community structure and microbial interactions in estuarine N removal processes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Craig Tobias, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2013
* USD 515,800.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries, connecting the freshwater
and marine environment, are among the most dynamic and the productive ecosystems
on Earth. However, they are under threat from anthropogenic N loading, resulting
in various symptoms of eutrophication. The intensity and duration of estuarine
eutrophication and the rate of estuarine recovery strongly depend on microbial N
removal processes (anaerobic ammonium oxidation (ANAMMOX) and denitrification).
Denitrification has been intensively studied in various estuaries, while ANAMMOX
as a recently discovered N removal pathway is much less studied in estuarine
ecosystems. Existing studies indicate that ANAMMOX rates and its contribution to
total N2 production (ANAMMOX significance) are system specific and controlled in
part by reaction-scale substrate limitations and by environmental parameters.
However, community structure (abundance and composition) of ANAMMOX bacteria
have not been linked to their activities along environmental gradients. In
addition, ANAMMOX community interactions with aerobic ammonia oxidizers and
denitrifyers have not been adequately studied in estuarine and coastal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine the importance
of ANAMMOX community structure on their activities along estuarine gradients at
the CFRE. In addition, microbial interactions among ANAMMOX, denitrifying and
aerobic ammonia oxidizing (AAO) communities will be examined to gain a better
understanding of sedimentary N cycles in the estuary. They will address the
hypothesis that the total abundance of ANAMMOX bacteria will be linearly
correlated to their activities, and that members of ANAMMOX communities are
influenced differently by environmental parameters present along the estuarine
gradients. Depending on the community structure of ANAMMOX bacteria, temporal
and spatial variations of the ANAMMOX rates and its significance to N loss will
be observed along the estuary. In addition, they will explore functional
linkages among ANAMMOX, denitrifying and AAO communities in estuarine sediments
that will alter the pathway of N loss. In order to test the proposed hypotheses,
the investigators will conduct interdisciplinary and collaborative research by
integrating molecular microbial techniques, 15N isotope tracer methods and
multivariate statistic analyses. Thus, this project will address key gaps in our
understanding of ANAMMOX ecology by understanding how the community structure of
ANAMMOX bacteria influences their activities, and lead to a more complete
understanding of estuarine N loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:
This project includes interdisciplinary research in the fields of molecular
microbial ecology and stable isotope geochemistry. New techniques developed by
the PIs will enhance the studies of ANAMMOX ecology and understanding of global
N cycle. Functional gene studies of ANAMMOX bacteria will provide a
transformative tool to detect and quantify diverse ANAMMOX bacteria in the
environment. The investigators will define the key factors influencing ANAMMOX
communities, which will promote the understandings of ANAMMOX significances in
estuarine N removal. In addition, knowledge gained from this project will be
applied to a fundamental understanding of the correlation between microbial
community structures and functions using ANAMMOX bacteria as a model organism,
and development of a predictive framework for ecosystem response to
environmental variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project
will be manifested through diverse educational components, outreach, and
improved research infrastructure at UNCW and Columbia University. Three PIs, at
UNCW (microbial ecologist and geochemist) and Columbia (microbial ecologist),
will provide interdisciplinary training to a postdoctoral fellow and at least
one graduate student seeking M.S. or Ph.D. Additional educational impact will be
accomplished both in the classrooms and through individual undergraduate
research projects (DIS, honor programs, and Lamont intern program). Research
experience for high school students will be achieved by including the project
within the UNCW Summer Ocean Ventures program. Outreach will be facilitated by
partnering with a local citizens group (NC-Coastal Ocean Federation) to recruit
volunteers to participate in sampling cruises and chemical analyses, and by
using the existing UNCW-CMS Planet Ocean public platform discussing estuarine
nitrogen loading and attenuation.