* 0851092
* Nitrogen Isotope and N2/Ar Biogeochemistry of the Peru Suboxic Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Mark Altabet, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2013
* USD 405,428.00

The suboxic intermediate waters of the world's oceans, though constituting only
a small fraction of total oceanic volume (0.1%), play a vital role in the
ocean's nitrogen cycle and its biogeochemical and isotopic signatures. Suboxic
conditions are required to activate the microbial processes that convert
nitrogen to N2 gas. Because of this, suboxic waters act as a predominant sink,
removing nitrogen from the biosphere. An ocean chemist from the University of
Massachusetts at Dartmouth is working in collaboration with scientists from
GEOMAR/Kiel University to complete an extensive field study of the Eastern
Tropical South Pacific Ocean off the coast of Peru, one of the three major open
ocean suboxic zones. Water samples, collected from a series of transects off the
Peruvian margin, would undergo isotopic and gas ratio analyses to assess the
following: (1) insights on the net impact of the Peru suboxic zone on oceanic
nitrogen and nitrogen isotope budgets and (2) the relationship between the
intensity of the nitrogen sink and the nitrogen isotope signal preserved in
margin sediments. Results from this research would provide the science community
with a greater understanding of the relationship between the oceanic nitrogen
cycle and suboxic waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, this
research would refine the interpretation of paleo-records with respect to past
interactions between the oceanic nitrogen cycle and climate variability and
contribute to numerical modeling studies of the global oceanic cycle. This study
represents a collaborative effort between U.S., German, and Peruvian scientists.
One graduate student would be supported and trained as part of this project.