* 0851245
* Collaborative Research:  Extending Lifemapper to Enable Macroecological Research
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Robert Colwell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 151,415.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Kansas and the
University of Connecticut are awarded collaborative grants to develop software
to gather, visualize and analyze large data sets of the distribution of species
on continental and global scales. The proposed computational software and web
services tools will gather together all available data on the geographical
occurrence of any focal species from Internet sources. Once gathered, the data
enter a computational pipeline to an ecological niche modeling environment that
generates information on the potential distribution of individual species,
which, in turn will be mapped on multi-species geographic grids. These multi-
species grids are used by macroecologists for analyses of the geospatial
patterning of species and for determining the ecological and evolutionary causes
of current species distributions, and biodiversity spatial patterns.
Macroecological analysis is also capable of analyzing the potential impacts of
environmental changes on continental scales. This project, in addition to
generating multi-species data grids for study, will also develop web services
software tools based on the ?Spatial Analysis in Macroecology? software suite
maintained at the University of Connecticut. The University of Kansas will
engineer the server software architecture and computational web services for the
project, building on its current species geospatial data archive and cluster-
based, environmental niche modelling project
?Lifemapper."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the proposed software
infrastructure is expected to catalyze macroecological modeling activity on
important ecological and evolutionary geospatial questions by lowering the
technical barriers to multispecies grid assembly and analysis. This integration
is an obvious and cost-effective opportunity to accelerate research in this
young, important field. The research challenges being addressed by macroecology
include the most vital and insightful research predictions biologists can
produce today to anticipate the biotic consequences of the changing natural
environment, including global climate change.