* 0851004
* Collaborative Research: Victim Impact Statements in Capital Trials: Examining the Differential Influence of Anger and Sadness on Juror Sentencing Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Narina Nunez, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 303,417.00

The U.S. Supreme Court has warned that the inflammatory nature of victim impact
statements (VIS) could lead to capricious sentencing judgments and the purpose
of the research is to examine conditions under which the emotional VIS affects
sentencing decisions in capital cases.

Basic research on emotion suggests that negative emotions do not uniformly
affect decision making. While anger can reduce depth of information processing
and promote biased decisions, sadness can promote systematic processing and
facilitate objective decision making. Thus, the potential for VIS to influence
juror sentencing decisions might depend on whether jurors experience sadness or
anger in response to VIS.

The first study examines VIS from actual capital cases. For descriptive
analyses, method of VIS delivery, number length of VIS testimony, and emotional
content of VIS will be examined. Content analysis of VIS will be done to assess
the emotions typically expressed by victims, and whether angry or sad VIS
predicts sentencing decisions. The second study manipulates sadness and anger
(using VIS obtained in Study 1) and measures the effect of these specific
emotions on sentencing decisions and information.

Little research has examined the effects of specific negative emotions on juror
information processing and decision making. The results of these studies will
contribute to basic theory on the effects of emotions on decision making.
Furthermore, results will inform the applied field of psycho-legal science and
aid in understanding of how non-legal factors influence jury decision making.

Results will shed light on how and when victim impact statements lead to biased
decisions, and may provide the courts with information to guide how they accept
VIS in their jurisdictions. Research results will be disseminated broadly, and a
large database of capital sentencing transcripts will be created and made
available to other researchers.