* 0851854
* REU Site Proposal: Environmental research to support management of human (especially military) activities on coastal barriers and nearby estuaries in North Carolina
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Charles Peterson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2011
* USD 197,803.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for an REU site to
located at the University of North Carolina Institute of Marine Sciences (IMS).
This site will offer eight students each summer a chance to participate in
research that is multidisciplinary, provides introductions to both pure and
applied science questions, and has relevance to management of coastal regions
everywhere. The REU program will enable the students, with the assistance of
faculty mentors and group discussions, to design, conduct, and interpret
individual research projects that are integrated into a large, research effort
focusing on environmental studies at the US Marine Corps base at Camp Lejeune,
North Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustaining ecosystem services of coastal
habitats, while maintaining social and economic uses of these areas, requires a
thorough understanding of the relevant natural processes as well as the
consequences of specific anthropogenic activities. Extensive human habitation
and visitation to coastal barriers and nearby estuaries has illustrated the
problems associated with uses of these habitats without providing insight in
choosing among alternative management strategies. IMS has a decades-long history
of conducting research in these critical areas that has proved useful to policy
makers. We are continuing that effort in a Department of Defense study focused
on the Marine Corps base at Camp Lejeune. Environmental management of the base
faces all the problems seen in other coastal regions, with the added challenge
of integrating military training activities while maintaining the integrity of
the base?s natural habitats. Their need for relevant, rigorous scientific
information for management decision-making has led to a multi-year research
effort combining the expertise of a broad array of investigators who are
integrating a diverse range of disciplines to respond to the
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on prior working associations, we will
recruit minorities, women, and individuals from institutions that lack
undergraduate research opportunities. The students will receive: 1) specific and
general knowledge relevant to coastal marine ecosystems, 2) illustrations of the
challenges of managing coastal areas, 3) information on careers in science, and
4) expansion of their individual skills and confidence through the REU program.
&lt;br/&gt;