* 0851652
* REU Site:   CSHL NSF-REU Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Summer Undergraduate Program
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Doreen Ware, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 02/29/2012
* USD 208,367.00

The REU Site at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) will provide a research
program for undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011, through support
provided by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS), and Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE). Six students will be selected to participate in a 10-week research
program in bioinformatics. The REU program is part of a larger summer
Undergraduate Research Program (URP) at CSHL, providing an opportunity for
students to learn about bioinformatics and computational biology by conducting
intensive research under the supervision of a mentor. Students learn about
scientific reasoning, laboratory methods, theoretical principles, and scientific
communication. In addition to research, participants attend seminars, workshops,
panel discussions on careers in science, lectures on ethics, and special events
designed specifically for them. At the URP Symposium held at the end of each
summer, students present a summary of their research to their peers and
advisors. Students also write a final report, similar to a scientific abstract,
to describe his or her project. Students are also encouraged to attend advanced
courses at CSHL to learn the latest experimental techniques in different fields
and to seek advice about their future schooling and research. By the end of the
program, students are well equipped to decide whether scientific research is a
career they would like to pursue. The program is open to all US citizens or
permanent residents, and applications from under-represented minority groups are
encouraged. Further information can be obtained by visiting
www.cshl.edu/URP/nsf-reu, or contacting the Watson School of Biological Sciences
at 516-367-6911 or urpadmin@cshl.edu, or the Program Director, Dr. David
Jackson, at jacksond@cshl.org (tel 516-367-8467).