* 0851828
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Research on Granular and Particulate Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Kumbakonam Rajagopal, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award establishes a new REU Site for a ten-week program at Texas A&amp;M
University for three years. The focus of the program is to provide
interdisciplinary research experience on granular and particulate materials for
26 diverse undergraduate students. The REU students will work with faculty
mentors from different science and engineering departments at Texas A&amp;M on
characterizing, modeling, and fabricating granular and particulate materials.
Granular and particulate materials span several length scales, from bulky solids
such as ores and rocks to nano-particles and ultra-fine powders. Understanding
the behavior of granular materials is important in virtue of their scientific,
technological relevance and their impact on society. For example, large-size
particles play important roles in natural disasters such as landslides,
earthquakes, soil liquefaction/erosion, and are also useful for enhanced oil
recovery. At the other end of the length scale, nano-particles present great
potential for applications in many fields. In this REU program students will
engage in research on granular materials and receive training in technical
writing, communication/presentation techniques, preparation for graduate school
environment, and have opportunities to interact and network among peers and
professionals from different research groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.
Within NSF, this award is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Division of
Engineering Education Centers in the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;