* 0851465
* Dissertation Research:   Cuisine as an Agent of Acculturation: Mexican American Cultural and Culinary Incorporation and Acceptance
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Paul Scanlon, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,987.00

University of Georgia doctoral student Paul Scanlon, under the supervision of
Dr. Brent Berlin, will undertake research on how food and culture interact as
migrant groups are incorporated into host societies. The focus of his resarch
will be Mexican cuisine in the United States. The researcher will ask whether
and how Mexican dietary practices play a role in Mexican American cultural
incorporation and acceptance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted in two metropolitan areas with constrasting migration ecologies and
histories: Atlanta, Georgia, and Houston, Texas, where he will focus on
restaurant patrons and owners. Using a combination of ethnographic, cognitive,
and archival research methods, the researcher will determine how the perceptions
and meanings of Mexican American cuisine differ across ethnic, local, and
sociocultural lines, and how they affect the cross-cultural acceptance and
incorporation of Americans and Mexican immigrants. As part of the research, he
will employ a preliminary ethnographic analysis to create two new scales, one to
measure Anglo and African American acceptance of Mexicans and Mexican Americans,
and another to measure cuisine acculturation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research's significance is multifaceted. The new analytical scales will be
useful to other researchers and can contribute to future comparative social
scientific research. The research also will aid better understanding of inter-
ethnic interactions at the local level, how these vary regionally in the United
States, and how these change over time.