* 0851723
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program in the Structure and Function of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Cherie Dotson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2012
* USD 285,879.00

The University of Michigan REU Site will provide a research program for
undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Ten students will be selected
each year to participate in a ten-week interdisciplinary research program
focused on the structure and function of proteins. Student participants will be
engaged in an intensive hands-on experimental training and independent
investigation in the areas of biochemistry, biophysics, cheminformatics,
computational chemistry, enzymology, marine biology, molecular biology and plant
biology. In addition to research, students will participate in a series of
weekly enrichment seminars focusing on scientific communication, graduate school
admissions and scientific career options. Opportunities for integration into the
university research community will be provided through periodic social
activities and field trips with REU faculty mentors, graduate students, and
undergraduate students from other university summer research programs. It is
hoped that the overall REU experience will promote student persistence in the
STEM disciplines (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) at the
undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels. Students will be recruited
from across the nation while maintaining a special interest in providing
research opportunities to women, underrepresented minorities, and students from
institutions with limited resources for research. Rising sophomores, juniors or
seniors majoring in biochemistry, biology, biophysics, chemistry, computer
science, engineering (chemical/biomedical), mathematics or a related discipline
will be eligible for participation in the program. All participants will receive
on-campus housing, meal and travel allowances, and a stipend. Additional
information is available at: http://pharmacy.umich.edu/reu, or by contacting the
Program Director, Dr. Cherie R. Dotson (crdotson@umich.edu / 734-615-6562) or
Dr. Ronald W. Woodard (rww@umich.edu / 734-647-8429).