* 0851669
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Experiences in Biogeosciences at Iowa State University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Udoyara Tim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2013
* USD 351,513.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site Program in
Biogeosciences at Iowa State University supports 10 undergraduate engineering
and science students each year for three years in a 10-week summer research
experience. With a focus on complex environmental systems, the program's
principal goals are to (1) involve undergraduates from a wide range of host
institutions in a coherent and extendable research experience; (2) enhance the
ability of students to undertake high quality, interdisciplinary research in a
collaborative, collegial environment; and (3) cultivate a generation of
environmental scientists and educators that reflects the diversity of
backgrounds and experiences of students in the United States. The specific
objectives of this program are to (1) provide students with opportunity to
conduct independent research in biogeosciences in a supportive and challenging
environment; (2) provide exposure to different scientific approaches and
experimental methods; (3) introduce students to the presentation of scientific
results through oral presentation and peer-reviewed publication; and (4)
motivate students to continue on to graduate school and successful careers in
science and engineering. Each participant will undertake an individual research
project under the supervision of a faculty member, typically as a member of a
group that includes graduate students and post-doctoral research associates.
Students will participate in a series of workshops, seminars, and discussions by
invited speakers addressing issues such as research methodology, career
planning, and ethics in scientific research. Also included in the program are
field trips and community-building activities designed to foster cohesiveness
among the students as a multicultural group and to enhance their appreciation of
scientific research. The experience will conclude with a research symposium at
which students will present their work to faculty, peers, scientists, and
resource management professionals from local, state and federal agencies.