* 0851965
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Joseph Levy, Levy                    Joseph         S
* Fellowship Award
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2011
* USD 140,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The proposed research will quantify the hydrological and biogeochemical effects
of shallow permafrost on habitat suitability for soil ecosystems in the
Antarctic Dry Valleys. The role of permafrost processes in the Dry Valleys
ecosystem is poorly understood, therefore definition of relationships among
permafrost, soil moisture, hyporheic zones, and geochemical brines is an
important advance. The investigators will apply mapping techniques developed for
planetary geology missions, including remote mapping and geomorphic analysis, to
Antarctic permafrost. This effort will be combined with ecological,
hydrological, and geochemical characterization, enabling documentation of
permafrost effects on water and nutrient cycling in Antarctic soil ecosystems.
Antarctic results will guide emerging astrobiological interpretation of
permafrost landforms on Mars. The research partnership combines a postdoctoral
geologist from a planetary permafrost background and LTER interdisciplinary
scientists, to provide new perspectives for understanding physical/biological
processes permafrost habitats. The fellowship will advance the investigator's
career goals of becoming a university scientist, and will provide cross-training
between planetary geology, earth sciences and ecological sciences. Direct
societal impacts will be derived from interactions with diverse undergraduates
through teaching and research mentoring at the urban Portland State University
campus. K-12 teacher and student field experiences sponsored by the Schoolyard
LTER will broaden public awareness of Antarctic research experiences.