* 0851056
* 230Th dynamics in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific Ocean: testing the 230Th-normalization method to estimate sediment fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mitchell Lyle, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2013
* USD 401,841.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the behavior of 230Th is
critical to interpret the sedimentary record and understand how climate change
affects oceanographic processes. This study will address the controversy in
using this technique based on assumptions made in the 230Th model. Specifically,
the PIs will address the issue of how one explains sedimentary 230Th inventories
along the equator in the Pacific that are larger than those expected from a
constant water column production rate. They will compare the assumption that the
flux of laterally advected sediment can surpass the vertically rained flux by up
to 2-4 times versus the argument that mass accumulation rates are affected by
230Th mobility and lateral transport of 230Th from the central Pacific gyres.
This project teams up PIs who have reached different conclusions about this
question. The award supports a research cruise that will collect water column,
sediment trap, and sediment (low-flux red-clay environments) to determine if
significant 230Th transport might occur out of the region. The award also
supports education and training of a graduate student for three years, and the
cruise will include sea-going experience for both graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;