* 0851104
* DDIG: Constructing a British Mixed Race Identity: The Intersection of Nation, Citizenship and Belonging in Britain
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Linda Hunt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 14,956.00

Graduate student Nicole Truesdell, under the guidance of Dr. Linda Hunt, will
undertake research on the relationship between racial identity, national
identity, and citizenship. She will examine the varied and shifting racial and
ethnic identities of long-time residents and new immigrants in England. She will
focus particularly on how those identities are related to ideas of nationality;
how they compare to the official new governmental racial and ethnic category
system that includes a mixed-race category; and how recent immigration, which
has made Britain more racially and ethnically heterogeneous, affects
understandings of what it means to be British. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will conduct her research in various locations, including shopping
areas, pubs, coffee shops, and markets, throughout the middle-sized city of
Bristol, England. Her methodologies will include participant observation, semi-
structured interviews, and textual analysis. She will also interview 50
individuals to 1) understand how Britons of different racial and ethnic
backgrounds understand their place within British society; 2) examine how
different ethnic populations, both individually and collectively, think about
notions of Britishness; and 3) examine the use and influence of race and
ethnicity in the construction of British national
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
contribute to current theoretical and policy debates centered on issues of
citizenship, race and ethnicity, and rights of belonging in a context of
increasing worldwide immigration. Much of the social science research on race
has been done in the United States, and this project will add a useful
comparative case. It also will contribute to the education of a social
scientist.