* 0851449
* NSF REU SITE: Nature InSpired Engineering Research Experience for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Kenneth Barner, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Preston
* 03/31/2013
* USD 312,001.00

Proposal: 0851449&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Kenneth Barner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
unique 10-week summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program
at the University of Delaware's College of Engineering is complementary to the
university's six-week Nature InSpired Engineering Research Experiences for
Teachers Program (RET ) program. The intellectual focus of the comprehensive
program is Nature InSpired Engineering (NISE) which is defined as the
engineering study or inspirational use of natural systems and principles.
Engineering faculty and students can learn a great deal from nature, infusing
that information into research and educational activities, yielding innovative
results and inspired students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To engage participants in
the comprehensive program, a team comprising faculty from five engineering
departments, complemented by educational technology, ethics, and evaluation
experts will be involved. The joint REU and RET programs will form five sets of
research teams. Each NISE research team will consist of one math teacher, one
science teacher, and two undergraduate students. To further assist in the growth
of the undergraduate students, each participant will be paired with a career
mentor in addition to his or her research mentor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
program will be comprised of four main components: 1) in-depth laboratory
experiences; 2) corporate site visits and social trips; 3) synergistic workshops
and seminars; and 4) a research symposium. These four components will be common
to the REU and RET programs, with overlaps and variations necessary to serve the
specific participants. Corporate site visits will expose participants to the
practical application of engineering principles they encounter in their
research. A broad range of social and cultural activities will be critical to
fostering a sense of community within the diverse undergraduate student groups.
A set of workshops and seminars will assist in their development as researchers,
improve their technical writing and presentation skills, expose them to
technical research projects across the spectrum of NISE fields, and expand their
knowledge of graduate programs and the process of applying to graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the students will participate in the
following activities: 1) a Friday lunch seminar series that will focus on the
virtues of lifelong learning; 2) an ethics component; and 3) a summer symposium
where they will present a poster illustrating their research experiences. The
activities in the ethics component of the program will include the following: 1)
discussions and readings pertaining to ethical issues; 2) talks from experts in
the various fields of engineering ethics; 3) each student will give a
presentation on a particular ethical issue; and 4) each student will construct a
wiki for ethics topics and readings in the field of science and in engineering,
which they will be able to update and contribute to in the years following their
summer REU participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the summer REU program
will be complemented by a set of academic-year activities designed to keep the
undergraduate students engaged, tracked, and directly involved in continuing
technical and evaluation research and in-school collaboration with the teachers.
Two undergraduate students will have an opportunity to work in the classroom
with teachers, who focus on translating their research experiences into
classroom activities and experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts
will focus on attracting women and minority participants. These efforts will
build upon well-established collaborations with Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), minority serving programs, and women in engineering
networks, societies, and programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to yielding
novel research results, this REU program will develop student's critical
thinking, collaboration, and presentation skills as well provide students with
an appreciation for the advantages of long-term collegial relationships,
advanced degree studies, and lifelong learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;