* 0851488
* REU Site: The Economics Summer Training Program at UC Santa Barbara
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Douglas Steigerwald, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida N. Chowdhury
* 03/31/2012
* USD 237,268.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal would allow 8 undergraduate students to attend
the American Economic Association Summer Training Program. The goal of the
AEASTP is to prepare undergraduates from non-research-intensive campuses for
Ph.D. study in economics, by conducting an original, mentored research project
supported by intensive coursework. The program?s two-tier structure (foundations
and advanced levels) allows students to participate in two successive years,
returning if appropriate-- to the same research topic in greater depth in the
second year. AEASTP has been in operation for 34 years at various campuses
around the U.S.; for this funding period the program will be located at UC Santa
Barbara. The program?s shift to UCSB coincides with an increased emphasis on the
research component, and more generally on the "why" of doing economics in
addition to the ?how?. Among other changes, students will have greater latitude
to collect their own data for projects of their own choosing, and two weeks of
the program will be devoted exclusively to research on this project.

Broader Impacts: The road to successful Ph.D. study in economics can be a rocky
one, especially for students coming from non-research-intensive and minority-
serving institutions. Obstacles include undergraduate economics training that is
often oriented more towards the major's most popular career goal --business--
than to Ph.D. study, a lack of familiarity with placing students in Ph.D.
programs and financial limitations affecting both the student and the
institution. One consequence is a continuing lack of diversity among both
economics faculty and Ph.D. students in the United States. AEASTP addresses the
above roadblocks to Ph.D. study in a number of ways. The program provides
advanced coursework specifically tailored to Ph.D. study, engages the student in
a research project on a topic of direct interest to him or her, and provides a
continuing pipeline from less-privileged undergraduate institutions into
research-intensive Ph.D. programs. This pipeline includes program alumni who
regularly return to teach or T.A. in the summers. Continuity of the AEASTP is
therefore important to the continued progress of underrepresented minorities in
the economics profession. To accelerate this rate of progress further, UCSB
plans a change of emphasis towards even more student-directed, mentored
research. We hope this will demonstrate to underrepresented students in a very
concrete way, how the powerful tools of economic analysis can be brought to bear
on issues of direct interest to them.