* 0851655
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Phylogeny and Phylogeography of the Mesoamerican Spider Monkeys (Ateles Geoffroyi and Ateles Fusciceps)
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Anthony Di Fiore, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Understanding the mechanisms that underlie evolutionary diversification in
tropical forests has intrigued scientists for more than a century. The
Pleistocene refugia hypothesis proposes that forest fragmentation during glacial
maxima led to the isolation and subsequent diversification of associated taxa,
and this hypothesis is often suggested as a possible explanation for patterns of
speciation among Neotropical primates. Spider monkeys are distributed from
Panama to the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico and are among the most diverse primate
genus in Mesoamerica. It has been suggested that they first entered Mesoamerica
roughly two million years ago, shortly after the formation of the Isthmus of
Panama. Currently, at least two species and nine subspecies are recognized,
based mainly on regional differences in pelage color. However, the phylogenetic
relationships among these various forms of Mesoamerican spider monkeys are still
debated and the significance of the extensive morphological variation seen
within the genus is poorly understood. Some authors have questioned the use of
pelage color as a valid trait for separating species and subspecies, and others
have stressed the importance of evaluating the genetic diversity that underlies
variation in coat color. This project will contribute to a better understanding
of the evolutionary history of Mesoamerican spider monkeys by [1] documenting
the genetic relationships within and among currently recognized spider monkey
forms and [2] examining whether the current diversity of spider monkeys in
Mesoamerica can be explained by the Pleistocene refugia hypothesis. The project
will yield the most comprehensive molecular assessment of Mesomerican spider
monkey phylogenetic relationships and biogeography undertaken to date and may
help elucidate likely causes of diversification and speciation among
Mesoamerican fauna more generally. From a conservation perspective, it will
contribute to understanding of which forms of spider monkeys represent distinct
evolutionary lineages, which is crucial for developing effective conservation
and management programs.