* 0851698
* REU Site at the Center for Embedded Networked Sensing:  Sense and Sustainability
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Karen Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Harriet G. Taylor
* 06/30/2013
* USD 340,360.00

This award provides funding for a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates
site at the Center for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS). CENS is a
multidisciplinary research center focused on developing embedded networked
sensing technology and applying the revolutionary technology to critical
scientific and social applications. The Center provides a proven, thoughtful,
and organized environment for 10 undergraduates to conduct authentic research
and become members of a highly collaborative intellectual community. All of the
projects are connected through the common theme of using sensing technology for
sustainability. The research projects focus on developing the SensorKit resource
for applications related to resource sustainability. The summer experience
includes mentoring, professional development, social events, and a special
summer ethics program funded by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in the strong research environment
and research team. SensorKit related projects should engage the participating
undergraduates in research focused on monitoring factors important in urban
sustainability, such as electricity, water, waste, traffic, building and parking
occupancy, and public transport usage patterns. In addition to increasing the
students' skills, knowledge base, and preparation for future studies, the
project has the potential to contribute to research breakthroughs with
scientific, environmental, and social relevance.

The broader impacts of the project include providing a quality research
experience to undergraduate students, particularly women and students from
underrepresented groups. The participating faculty members are committed to
including under-represented minority students in their research. Thus this
project has the potential to produce new computer science graduate students and
faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding while promoting
learning.