* 0851742
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Sustainable Infrastructure Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Amy Cerato, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 05/31/2013
* USD 284,727.00

EEC-0851742&lt;br/&gt;P.I. ? Keith Strevett&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site
program at the University of Oklahoma, School of Civil Engineering and
Environmental Science (CEES) will engage 10 undergraduate students in research
focused around the overall theme of "Sustainable Technology for Infrastructure
and the Environment. The research project topics include basic theoretical and
laboratory studies of unsaturated soil dynamics which will lead to a more
sustainable road design to computer simulation of complete systems such as a
bridge-foundation-soil system subjected to man-made (e.g. blast loading) and
natural (e.g. earthquake) hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
research projects, students will be engaged in a series of enrichment activities
that will help them become more confident as researchers, including workshops on
developing a research project, technical writing, giving effective
presentations, graduate school preparation, and ethics in engineering and
science. Social activities will be an integral part of the students' experience
with the goal of building friendships and collegiality between the students and
faculty mentors. At the end of the program, participants will be required to
make an oral presentation of their summer work to all faculty and invited
colleagues from local agencies. Finally, during the following academic semester
at their home institution, participants will give an oral presentation of their
summer work at an appropriate forum and submit a final written report to their
faculty mentor at the University of Oklahoma. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
program will motivate and prepare undergraduate students to pursue advanced
degrees in the critical areas of infrastructure systems. Such engineers are
needed in consulting and industry in order to be good stewards of our natural
and built environment, and they are needed in research laboratories and academia
to further the development of sustainable technologies.&lt;br/&gt;