* 0851586
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Risk Sharing and Social Networks in Village Ghana: Experimental Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Christopher Barrett, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 02/28/2011
* USD 28,708.00

Objective and methods&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to examine the role
of social networks in facilitating risk-sharing within villages in rural Ghana.
In the proposed study, a randomized experiment will be conducted to shed light
on how individuals share unexpected windfalls. The experiment will be an add-on
module to a survey of four rural villages in southern Ghana, to be conducted in
collaboration with ISSER (a Ghanaian research institute) between January and
December 2009. At the start of the year, information will be collected on the
strength of relationships between the individuals in each village, from which
detailed maps of the four village social networks will be constructed. In
subsequent survey rounds, positive shocks will be assigned to randomly selected
respondents in the form of cash and in-kind prizes. Some of the allocations will
be made publicly and others privately. Data will then be collected on each
respondent's expenditures, transfers and loans, and on the identities of
transfer and loan partners. Econometric analysis of these data will yield a
detailed picture of how the random positive shocks are disseminated through the
social network. The results will provide insights into the connection between
social relationships and financial support, the intrahousehold allocation of
resources, and the effect of individual characteristics on transfer behavior.
The authors will also be able to test whether the nature of the shock (cash or
in-kind) and its level of publicity affect the extent to which it is shared with
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed
activity&lt;br/&gt;Previous econometric analyses of risk-coping mechanisms in
poor rural villages have related transfers to reported historical shocks, such
as crop loss or theft. Such events are arguably non-random, potentially biasing
inferences. Furthermore, since it is often difficult to assign cash values to
historical events, these studies have been unable to quantify the responsiveness
of transfers to shocks. This project would be the first to conduct a randomized
test of risk-coping mechanisms in a village setting. Randomizing the incidence
of shocks eliminates the problem of bias. The project offers a number of other
novel contributions. A detailed social network map constructed from data on
intra-village relationships will be used to examine the connection between
relationship strength and the size of transfers. By experimentally controlling
the value, form and publicity of the prizes, the authors will be able to
estimate the proportional response of transfers to shocks, test whether
resources are fungible, and determine whether social pressures affect the
sharing of windfalls. The project will also make a novel contribution to the
literature on intrahousehold allocation. Since the unit of observation will be
the individual rather than the household, and gifts assigned to individuals, it
will be possible to test hypotheses about intrahousehold allocation while
avoiding complications of endogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
resulting from the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this study will
be of particular interest to governmental and non-governmental organizations
interested in development. When the project is complete, the PI and Co-PI will
organize workshops with NGOs and government bodies in Ghana to present the
study's findings. A research brief will also be prepared and disseminated to
various development practitioner organizations in the United States. The Co-PI
will hold information sessions in each of the villages to explain the findings
of the project to the villagers in non-technical terms. The PI and Co-PI will
also give presentations to K-12 school audiences in the United States, to share
some of the project?s outcomes and insights into village life in a developing
country