* 0851905
* REU Site:    Mechanisms of Behavior Summer Research Program in Systems and Integrative Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Warren Meck, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2014
* USD 353,636.00

The Duke University REU Site will provide a research program for undergraduates
during the summers of 2009-2012. Ten students will be selected each year to
participate in an intensive 10-week research program in "Mechanisms of
Behavior". The program provides an emphasis on integrative, systems, and
behavioral neuroscience. The focus on the study of animal learning and behavior
unifies faculty research interests within this interdisciplinary field and
serves as the common theme for the individual projects available to student
participants in the program. The program is designed to provide opportunities
for highly qualified individuals, including women, minority, and disabled
undergraduate students who would like to expand their laboratory skills. Each
summer, undergraduate students will participate in the research program that
includes a one-on-one mentorship with a participating faculty member. In
addition, three weekly seminar series including "Research in the Neurosciences",
"Science Basics", and "Science Ethics and Practice" will serve to integrate the
individual laboratory experience. The primary goal of the program is to provide
opportunities for undergraduates to receive training in the cutting-edge
methodologies of behavioral neuroscience and genomics. Mentors for the program
are prominent researchers in their fields and have substantial experience in
supervising and training undergraduates. The students will work on research
projects that are within their grasp, and which present real opportunities for
new discoveries that will be of value to the neuroscience community. Additional
information can be found at http://unp.aas.duke.edu/research/mob.php, or by
containing the Program Director, Dr. Warren H. Meck at 919-660-5765 or
meck@psych.duke.edu. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;