* 0851490
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduate Minorities in Marine and Environmental Sciences (MIMES)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Elizabeth Wenner, South Carolina Department of Natural Resources
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2011
* USD 161,685.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will be awarded using funds made
available by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for an REU site to be
located on James Island near Charleston, SC. The site will be under the
direction of the Marine Resources Division (MRD) of the South Carolina
Department of Natural Resources (SCDNR). The South Carolina Minorities in Marine
and Environmental Sciences (MIMES) program previously ran from 1989 to 2005 and
was highly successful in promoting careers in science and research among
undergraduate minority (primarily African-American) students. The objectives of
MIMES program include: 1) involving minority undergraduate students in mentor-
guided, independent research projects in marine and environmental sciences; and
2) providing minority students with role models and training in basic principles
of marine and environmental science and scientific theory through seminars,
classroom work, laboratory, and field experiences. The program will involve
eight students in the MIMES 10-week summer research experience. Students will
begin with problem development, carry out extensive literature reviews, conduct
scientific research, and progress through to statistical data analyses. Finally,
students will prepare written and oral technical reports to be presented to
their peers and the scientific staff of the MRD. Students will be encouraged to
participate in professional meetings following their summer research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;