* 0851207
* The effects of animal-sediment interactions on biogeochemical processes at the sediment -water interface
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2013
* USD 997,600.00

Diagenetic processes in sedimentary deposits play a central role in the cycling
and burial of biogeochemically reactive elements. The activities of marine
bottom-dwelling animals dramatically impact early diagenesis, altering material
transport and reaction distributions in surface sediments and sediment-water
exchange over much of the seafloor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the State University of New York at Stony Brook will continue to
examine, conceptualize, and quantify specific aspects of these biogenic effects
on biogeochemical cycles using newly developed optical sensors and models, and
will do so within the context of syn- and autecological characteristics of
benthos. Feeding, burrowing, and the irrigation of biogenic structures create
complex, time-dependent networks of oxic and anoxic microenvironments. The
scaling and macro-geometrical patterns of these biogenic microenvironments
determine absolute and relative rates of remineralization pathways, microbial
abundances and activities, the coupling between reactions such as sulfate
reduction/sulfide oxidation or carbonate dissolution - precipitation, and
elemental burial. Such biogenic heterogeneity is virtually impossible to
accurately measure or quantify by traditional methods. A set of planar optical
sensors designed to measure pH, pCO2, O2 , H2S, simultaneous H2S / O2, and Fe2+
at high resolution (~50 - 100 ìm) in single 2-D images over areas of ~ 100 - 300
cm2 were developed as part of recently funded research, and will be further
optimized and applied. The ongoing development of new exoenzyme and Ca2+ sensors
will be completed. These sensors will be used to directly investigate three-
dimensional solute distributions produced by functionally distinct infauna in
laboratory microcosms, and in natural communities in situ, using sediment
profiling cameras designed for use with planar optodes. Building on previous
microcosm experiments with Nephtys incisa, the effects of selected additional
individual species and mixtures of functional types will be examined at multiple
densities and constant biomass or biovolume. Biogenic structure and associated
remineralization rate patterns will be quantified and hypotheses regarding
scaling ? redox reaction relationships tested. Direct measures of microbial
activity around biogenic structures will be guided by the optically sensed
patterns. Diffusion-reaction cells designed to simulate the effect of irrigated
burrows at multiple scales will be used together with optical sensors to examine
transient and pseudo-steady redox reaction balances and microbial activity as a
function of diffusive transport scale for comparison with natural structures of
similar scale. The composition, structure, and degradation patterns of
representative macrofaunal tube materials, which represent a significant but
understudied pathway of sedimentary C, N, P, and metal cycling, will be examined
in laboratory and field experiments. Experimental results will be incorporated
into integrative conceptual and mathematical models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The present research will advance
predictive, mechanistic-based understanding of interactions between benthic
communities and sediment chemistry, their effect on biogeochemical cycles of
societal importance, and the fate of pollutants. The further development and
optimization of planar optical sensors integrated with biogeochemical
applications will substantially improve the basis for conceptual and
quantitative models of early diagenesis, aid experimental design, and extend
capacity for practical in situ monitoring of biogeochemical processes for
management purposes. Agricultural and soil research may also benefit from planar
sensor applications. These capabilities will continue to be promoted and shared
through interdisciplinary collaborations. Real time optical sensor images also
provide an effective means to communicate the dynamics and importance of benthic
biogeochemical processes, and to engage nonspecialists. Planar optode sensor
images and in situ Chem-SPI systems will be incorporated as educational and
research tools and will also be used as a way to raise general awareness about
benthic processes in public forums. Graduate and undergraduate education and
technical training will continue to be intimately integrated with laboratory and
field research. Results will be presented at national and international
meetings, and in peer-reviewed international scientific journals.