* 0851243
* REU Site in Physics and Astrophysics at Rochester
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Arie Bodek, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2012
* USD 434,518.00

This award supports the renewal of the REU site in Physics &amp; Astrophysics at
the University of Rochester. This site supports twelve undergraduate students
and two high school teachers each summer for ten weeks per summer in research
projects on a variety of topics including astrophysics, particle and nuclear
physics, quantum optics, condensed matter, biological, plasma, geo- and
environmental physics, and physics education. Each student works with a faculty
adviser on a specific project within the context of the overall research focus
of the group. The program may include mini-courses in machining and electronics
and a GRE preparation course offered in conjunction with other summer
undergraduate programs. REU students attend weekly presentations by University
faculty, tours of University research facilities, social outings and may also
take part in the department?s summer outreach activities. The program concludes
with a student symposium, at which each student speaks on his/her research
project; students submit written abstracts and reports of their research
experiences. The RET program sponsors teachers selected from area high schools.
RET activities engage teachers in projects such as physical chemistry, cosmic
ray and high energy particle detection, and geo- and astrophysics data analysis
using web-based databases. This award is co-funded by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the Physics and Astronomical Sciences Divisions in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.