* 0851315
* Applications of The Self Control/Dual Self Model in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2014
* David Levine, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 212,040.00

Decision theory is the foundation for economic analysis. The standard model is
one of an economic decision maker who has well defined preferences over random
events that can be represented by probabilistic beliefs and acts to maximize the
expectation of a numerical valued utility function in which rewards at different
dates are discounted with geometrically declining weights. This model has proven
very effective in analyzing behavior in the large, especially in macroeconomics
and the study of growth and business cycle fluctuations. On the other hand,
there are many known anomalies in the small: the Rabin and Allais paradoxes and
the hyperbolic discounting phenomenon, among others. In addition people have
preferences not only for their own rewards, but sometimes altruistically and
sometimes spitefully care about the rewards of others.

Psychologists have been especially interested in anomalous behavior, especially
in the laboratory, and both economists and psychologists have developed a number
of behavioral economics models designed to explain these various paradoxes.
However these models are largely inconsistent with each other and with behavior
in the large. The goal of this project is to study the dual self/self control
model as a single consistent framework in which to reconcile all these aspects
of behavior.

The dual/self self-control model has a long history, starting as the planner-
doer model and continuing through modern axiomatic models of self-control. The
project proposes to build on a particular model developed by Drew Fudenberg and
me. In this model self-control problems arise due to conflict between a long-run
patient self who satisfies the standard axioms of decision theory and a short-
run impulsive self who also satisfies the standard axioms of decision theory,
but cares only about the moment. This model is motivated by the hyperbolic
discounting phenomenon, but in our preliminary work we showed that the conflict
between the two selves results in non-classical behavior that has important
implications for attitudes towards risk. In particular the model is capable not
only of explaining hyperbolic discounting, but also the Rabin paradox of risk
aversion. The goal of this project is to examine the extent to which the model
can reconcile additional paradoxical or non-standard behavior: the Allais
paradox; altruism and spite; the impact of cognitive load and others. We want to
incorporate better models of mental accounting, and also explain things such as
addiction. Yet at the same time we wish to preserve the overlying long-run
behavior observed in the large. The proposal combines theoretical and numerical
methods with laboratory experiments and the analysis of data.

The theory has many applications, including the puzzle of why people are willing
to pay so much more to help a specific named individual than to reduce
statistical risk; the premiums observed in asset markets; and diverse behavior
such as risk-taking and gambling.

