* 0851001
* Collaborative Research: Computation-driven small area inference with applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Parthasarathi Lahiri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 97,543.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing demand to assess
various measures of human well-being (including socio-economic and health
characteristics) at national and sub-national levels. However, data availability
at the sub-national level is often limited owing to constraints such as costs of
data collection, natural limitations, confidentiality and other ethical issues.
This research aims to extract relevant information for predictive purposes from
several data sources and provide sound predictions under limited-data
conditions. Since small area statistics are routinely used by a diverse group of
stakeholders, there is an urgent need to develop different reliable risk
measures - this is the prime focus of this project. More specifically, a unified
computational method will be developed to estimate different risk measures
across a broad spectrum of statistical models, methods of estimation of model
parameters, types of data, and symmetric or asymmetric loss functions. The
proposed research will replace complicated analytical formulae, often hard or
impossible to obtain, by simple efficient techniques that use the efficiencies
of high power computing. Extensive evaluation of the proposed techniques will be
carried out using computer-generated and complex survey datasets. This research
will extend the scope of small area statistics to several applications of public
interest and will strengthen related educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;