* 0851335
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Investigation of the Rwandan State's Fight Against Genocide Ideology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Mark Geraghty, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Graduate student Mark Geraghty, under the direction of Professor Jean Comaroff,
will undertake research on nation-building efforts in post-genocide contexts.
Geraghty will conduct his research in Rwanda, where the government has framed
its campaign as a fight against genocide ideology, which has been officially
declared to be the root cause of genocide. Genocide ideology is said to consist
of the ideas, revealed through acts, speech and writing, which foster ethnic
hatred. This research addresses the prospects of renewed violence in the wake of
one of the deadliest bouts of ethnic massacres and genocide of the twentieth
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will gather data on the effects and
possible unintended consequences of the government's campaign through a
combination of semi-structured interviews, more informal conversational
interactions, observed practices, the collection of life-histories, the
compilation of case-studies, and the use of local archival and media sources. He
will conduct research in official contexts where the state seeks to directly
engage and interact with the citizenry in eradicating genocide ideology, such as
gacaca genocide courts, ingando re-education camps, and genocide commemoration
events. He also will interview people who are not directly involved in
governmental activities, to understand how different sections of the population
receive and respond to the government's fight against genocide ideology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will contribute to both academic
literatures and policy initiates on situations of post-conflict reconciliation
by addressing the extent to which regimes seeking to transcend pasts marked by
ethnic violence and genocide can overcome logics of demonization and
dehumanization of others. The results of the research will inform scientific
understanding of the causes of ethnic and political violence and the impact of
laws, policies and programs intended to prevent their return. Funding this
research will also contribute to the training of a social scientist.