* 0851612
* REU: Multidisciplinary REU in Computational Mathematics and Nonlinear Dynamics of Biological, Bio-inspired and Engineering Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 05/31/2011
* USD 180,000.00

The Department of Mathematical Sciences at George Mason University will host a
multidisciplinary REU program in computational mathematics and nonlinear
dynamics of biological, bio-inspired and engineering systems. This nine-week
summer program will expose eight qualified undergraduate students and a K-12
teacher to advanced topics in mathematics, problem-solving techniques and
multidisciplinary applications. This summer research program will provide the
participants with a unique experience of how mathematics can be applied to
understand the qualitative and quantitative behavior of biological, bio-inspired
and engineering systems. Selected problems range from Reconstruction of protein
networks and Aneurysm mechanics to Modeling of Micro Air Vehicles, Neuronal
field models, Porous substrates and Materials engineering applications. Through
these research problems, we hope to encourage students and teachers to learn by
discovery and enhance their understanding of the multidisciplinary role of
mathematics in engineering, science and medicine. This nine-week summer program
will also include the following activities: lecture series on topics; graduate
mentoring club; guest colloquiums; student seminars; computational laboratory
and; scientific &amp; social tours. The REU site will involve eight qualified
faculty who have excelled in their research accomplishments, have guided
graduate and undergraduate research, and have been involved in K-12 outreach
activities. The site will also involve two graduate students each year who will
serve as mentors for the participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-
disciplinary research program will greatly enhance the awareness of the ever-
increasing utility of mathematical and computational approaches in understanding
biological, bio-inspired and engineering systems; contribute to the scientific
development of undergraduate students and K-12 teachers and; will nurture the
intellectual growth and development of graduate students providing them with a
valuable experience of mentoring. This program will also integrate and
complement the existing Undergraduate Research in Computational Mathematics
program at George Mason University which is an NSF funded CSUMS program. The
symbiotic relationship between the existing CSUMS and the REU program will
provide opportunities for targeted students to prepare for success in the
mathematical and engineering fields and assist them from college to graduate
school. The REU program will provide a valuable experience to two K-12 teachers
in problem-solving and open-ended exploration in high-school mathematics
classrooms. This program will also greatly encourage women and underrepresented
minorities to pursue multidisciplinary careers that bridge mathematical,
computational and biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is co-
funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.