* 0851064
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Evaluating Retributive Justice in Croatia
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Richard Wilson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2010
* USD 5,044.00

University of Connecticut graduate student, Katharine Hawkins, with the guidance
Dr. Richard A. Wilson, will undertake ethnographic research on local knowledge,
perceptions, experiences, and practices after genocide and other forms of mass
violence and human rights violations. The research is to be conducted in Croatia
where the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is
nearing the end of its mandate to investigate and prosecute violations of human
rights that occurred in the early 1990s. The researcher seeks to ascertain the
degree of correspondence between local ideas of justice and international legal
conceptions as articulated at the ICTY. The degree of overlap between local and
international justice models has implications for the applicability of
international criminal proceedings and other transitional justice
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ground-up perspective that this researcher
will employ has heretofore been largely absent from the planning of responses
and theoretical debates about nation building, healing, and justice that
surround past intergroup violence. The researcher will conduct ethnographic
fieldwork in a Croatian village where Serb returnees and Bosnian Croat refugees
share the ongoing post-conflict difficulties of housing shortages and high
unemployment rates. She will live with local families and undertake vounteer
service, as well as conduct semi-structured and structured or survey interviews
in 200 households. The degree of empirical variation in individuals'
experiences, as victims, perpetrators, or bystanders, will add depth to social
scientific analysis of the post-conflict social and political context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous studies have focused on the ICTY's judicial
procedures and domestic compliance with its jurisdiction, this research will
contribute rich, local data to the debate over how to best address human rights
violations by documenting the views of those people who experienced the crimes,
either as perpetrators or as victims. The researcher seek to understand how
decisions made at the international level become (or do not become) meaningful
in daily life. The results of this study may be used to develop improved methods
for providing accountability and ending cycles of violence. The research also
will contribute to the education of a graduate student.