* 0851407
* Collaborative Research:  Air/Sea Gas Exchange Studies of Carbon Dioxide, Dimethyl Sulfide, and Acetone by Eddy Correlation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Scott Miller, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 274,489.00

The principal investigators will conduct two research cruises to measure carbon
dioxide, dimethyl sulfide, and acetone using the eddy covariance technique over
a broad range of oceanographic conditions.

A tropical cruise in the equatorial Pacific upwelling region will capture the
moderate to low wind speed conditions characteristic of most of the world's
oceans. A main goal of the Pacific cruise will be to study the increase of the
gas exchange coefficient with wind speed. A high latitude North Atlantic Ocean
cruise will focus on areas of high biological productivity and higher wind
speeds. On the high latitude cruise the impact of phytoplankton blooms on gas
exchange and the role of bubbles as a factor in gas exchange rates will be
studied. These cruises will add to the current database of direct flux studies
in the oceans, which is extremely small, and insufficient to rigorously
characterize the variability in gas transfer coefficients as a function of wind
speed, sea state, biological productivity or seasonality in the major ocean
basins.

The broader impacts of the research include the participation of students from
various levels of education from high school interns to undergraduate and
graduate students. Underrepresented students will be included through an
external program. There will also be an effort made to include an undergraduate
student and a high school teacher from a minority school district on a research
cruise.