* 0851391
* Tracing the Radiocarbon Signal of the Ocean's CO2 Release During the Last Deglaciation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Thomas Marchitto, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2013
* USD 457,981.00

This research will test the overarching hypothesis that ventilation of the
Southern Ocean caused low-D14C waters to spread northward via Antarctic
Intermediate Water (AAIW) in two stages during the last deglaciation. The work
follows on recent results from off the southern tip of Baja California that show
dramatic drops in intermediate water D14C during each of the two deglacial
atmospheric CO2 increases (atmospheric D14C decreases); such observations appear
to require the injection of very old waters from a presumed abyssal
reservoir.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide crucial mechanistic
evidence tying together established deglacial changes in ocean circulation,
atmospheric CO2, and oceanic and atmospheric D14C. Studies are based on bottom-
and surface- water D14C reconstructions in a depth transect of sediment cores
from the continental margin off southern Baja California and from the southern
Chilean Margin. D14C reconstructions are derived from benthic and planktic
foraminiferal 14C measurements in sediments with independent climate-
stratigraphic age control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research adds to the
mechanistic understanding of the ocean's role in glacial-interglacial
atmospheric CO2 cycles and provides concrete targets for testing of ocean-
atmosphere numerical models that are used to project future changes. The project
also provides extensive training for a PhD student and a Geological Sciences
undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;