* 0851351
* Enamel as a Dietary Indicator in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Peter Lucas, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 03/31/2011
* USD 289,927.00

The teeth of most mammals are covered with a very hard substance called enamel.
Several aspects of this enamel cap, such as its shape and thickness, vary from
species to species. Many scientists have long thought that this variation
reflects adaptation to diet, but nobody has been able to come up with a
convincing mechanism as to what the precise relationship is. Borrowing from the
field of materials science, this study uses principles of fracture and
deformation of solids to provide quantitative predictions as to how enamel may
be adapted to diet. The importance of using this body of theory lies in its
unification of many aspects of tooth form. It connects cusp form (in terms of
sharpness-bluntness), enamel thickness, enamel mechanical properties (i.e.,
hardness, toughness), and enamel microstructure (i.e., how the enamel is
formed), quantifying their combined effect on protecting the tooth against
fracture. Thus, data on these various aspects of tooth form in different species
can tell how these species differ in their ability to process different food
types. In addition, the outer casings of many hard foods, such as seeds and
mollusk shells, appear often to have evolved structures similar to those of
enamel, making it possible to predict the forces at which they break as well.
&lt;br/&gt; To test the theory, fracture experiments are being conducted on
extracted teeth from various mammal species, including humans and other
primates, to identify forces at which the enamel yields or cracks. After
fracturing the specimens, they are sectioned and examined under a light
microscope to measure enamel thickness, and the mechanical properties of the
enamel and dentin are determined by nanoindentation. The combination of data on
yield/fracture forces, enamel thickness, and enamel and dentinal properties
allows accurate tests of theoretical predictions to be made for both living and
fossil species. The thickness of the enamel can also provide an indirect measure
of the maximum bite force of an animal, which could be a useful dietary
indicator for both extant and extinct taxa. The broader impact of this study,
including interdisciplinary student training, is the integration of material
science engineering and physical anthropology to address the relationship of
tooth enamel fracture to bite force and food hardness.