* 0851691
* REU Site: Marine and Atmospheric Sciences in the Blue Water Environments of Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* F. Gerald Plumley, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2012
* USD 345,728.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences. The Bermuda Institute of
Ocean Sciences (BIOS) has been an Ocean Sciences REU Site since 1991, and thus
far, 121 students have gone through the program. The award will support eight
students during a twelve week, Fall-semester research program from 2009-2011.
Funding is provided for all room and board at BIOS, travel to and from BIOS,
student stipends, and travel for some students to present their research results
at a scientific meeting. BIOS will offer a hands-on experience for
undergraduates focused on the "process of science" rather than on specific
topics within science. Students will conduct independent research projects
within the framework of the long-term deep ocean program conducted at
Hydrostation S, the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study, the Microbial
Observatory, and the Ocean Carbon and Climate Change Program. Students will have
opportunities to focus on near-shore processes such as water and air pollution
and ecotoxicology, coral reef ecology, marine genomics, biotechnology, topics
within the Oceans and Human Health Program, and catastrophe models such as those
used to predict hurricanes and rainfall events that cause flooding. Students
will participate in a weekly seminar series, join BIOS scientists aboard the R/V
Atlantic Explorer, and visit local sites of ecological interest. Students will
have opportunities to work closely with students from developing countries as
part of the new POGO Centre of Excellence in Observational Oceanography. REU
students present a final seminar of their work to BIOS staff and write
manuscripts in the format of a journal appropriate for publication of the
specific research project conducted.