* 0851408
* The Neuroeconomics of Self-Control in Dieting Populations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Antonio Rangel, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 06/30/2012
* USD 527,244.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-control problems
are at the core of many of the public policy challenges facing the United
States. Examples include obesity, addiction, and low levels of savings. Not
surprisingly, given its importance, the problem of self-control has been the
subject of inquiry for many centuries. However, despite these efforts we still
do not have answers to basic questions such as: What aspects of the brain?s
decision making circuitry lead to temptation and self-control problems? Why are
some brains much better at exercising self-control than others? What can be done
to improve the brain?s ability to exercise self-control? In this research, the
Principal Investigators plan to use the new tools and techniques of
neuroeconomics (especially functional magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion
tensor imaging, and repeated transcranial magnetic stimulation) to address these
questions. The research involves studying the brains of dieters while they make
decisions about which food they want to eat. The brain patterns of connectivity
exhibited by successful and unsuccessful dieters will be compared to indicate
the regions of the brain responsible for temptation and for self-control. The
region of the brain thought to be responsible for self control ? the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex -- will also be studied using transcranial
magnetic stimulation which may induce improvements in self-control.