* 0851346
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fighting for Property Rights: Land Takings and Popular Resistance in Rural China
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Susan Whiting, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,990.00

This dissertation project focuses on farmers' use of the legal system and other
mechanisms to resolve disputes over how land should be managed in rural China.
Land disputes have emerged as a major problem in rural China in recent years,
commonly pitting local officials and developers against farmers in struggles
over the handling of property rights in land. In attempting to resolve these
disputes, farmers can avail themselves of an array of dispute resolution
mechanisms, such as petition offices, arbitration committees, courts, and public
hearings. This study investigates how farmers address "information deficits"
about the relative effectiveness of these various mechanisms and why farmers
choose certain dispute resolution mechanisms instead of others. &lt;br/&gt; The
primary methodology employed in this research is in-depth interviews, conducted
over the course of nine months in two coastal provinces where land disputes are
common. These will be used to investigate how farmers view urbanization, land
management, courts and other legal institutions, how much they know about
relevant laws, and what factors they consider when choosing tactics to resolve
disputes. Interviews also include questions designed to gather data on how
farmers acquire information, including education, ties to lawyers, legal aid and
exposure to legal stories in the media. In addition to interviews with farmers,
interviews are conducted with other stakeholders, including academics, local
government officials, lawyers and judges. &lt;br/&gt; Although the choice of
dispute resolution strategy is an important theoretical topic in the literature
on law and society and social movements, it is rarely examined in the context of
a non-democratic state with a developing legal system. Moreover, information
environments remain understudied in the literature on tactical choice. This
study addresses both issues in the context of land management in rural China,
contributing to the understanding of access to justice in non-democratic states
that seek to implement the rule of law. &lt;br/&gt;