* 0851826
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Physics at Purdue University
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sergei Savikhin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award supports an REU/RET which will provide 12
undergraduate physics majors from across the country with a ten week long
genuine research project emphasizing one-to-one mentoring with faculty from a
wide range of disciplines within the Purdue University Department of Physics.
The participants in this REU program will collaborate with their mentors and
other researchers to advance the diverse state-of-the-art areas of physics:
nanophysics of electrons in reduced dimensional conductors, the dynamical
behavior in proteins, the quantum mechanisms of photosynthesis, single
molecule/protein dynamic imaging, the use of cosmogenic nuclei as chronometers
in geoscience, detection of multiple proteins in a sample using revolutionary
BioCD approach, particle detectors with improved hardness and resolution,
detectors for TeV radiation, investigation of dark energy using supernovae,
novel application of nuclear detectors for sensing hazardous materials, hydrogen
storage properties of graphene, application of biofilms in seismic measurements,
the fundamental nature of nuclear decay, enhanced long-baseline imaging for
radio astronomy, seismic propagation in structures of geologic interest,
optimization of Compact Muon Solenoid detector for Large Hadron Collider at
CERN, and other current topics of importance. Interactions with the community of
scientists is emphasized with an interdisciplinary science seminar series, two
required public talks on their research, field trips to national facilities at
Fermilab and Argonne, plus picnics, ball games, and canoe trips. The weekly
seminar initiated and hosted by Physics Department combines Physics REU
participants with students from all other Purdue summer sites (REU & SURF at
Biology, Chemistry, Engineering etc.) to emphasize interdisciplinary
opportunities and interactions among students across many fields. Similar
objectives are desired for two RET participants, whose research activities will
be reflected in their subsequent classroom teaching, inspiring their own
students about careers in research.