* 0851847
* REU Site: Field Research on Bahamian Lakes: Exploring Records of Anthropogenic and Climatic Change
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Lisa Park Boush, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2015
* USD 491,112.00

The goal of the Bahamian Lakes REU site is to provide undergraduate students a
fieldwork and laboratory opportunity to learn first-hand about Earth as a system
and to develop skills in conducting and communicating scientific research
through studying modern limnologic systems and the environmental, geochemical,
and biological records of change recovered from lake sediment cores. We will
target sophomore to junior-level undergraduate geoscience and pre-service
teacher participants from urban comprehensive universities in the Great Lakes
and mid-continent region. Our regional recruitment will allow us to encourage
students of color from urban areas to participate as well as facilitating
participants to present their research at a common North-Central section meeting
of the Geological Society of America. We anticipate that this REU experience
will positively influence participants to complete a baccalaureate degree and
pursue graduate work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the dynamics of human-
climate interaction remains one of society's looming unanswered questions. The
role of natural climate variability and how it may differ from how humans may
have changed their environment and driven localized changes to climate is a
leading area of global change research. Our faculty will mentor students in the
collection, analyses, and interpretation of data from the modern subtropical
lake systems and past records of environmental change from sedimentary cores
recovered from lakes in the Bahamas. These data will be compared to
stratigraphic, biological, and chemical records derived from archaeologically
excavations in order to decipher the footprint of human occupation and how it
may have impacted the physical and biological environments. These data will be
used to build a deeper understanding of the history and nature of climatic and
anthropogenic environmental change through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Bahamian Lakes REU site has the potential of increasing both the number of women
and under-represented minorities completing gesoscience undergraduate degrees
and continuing on to graduate programs. We believe that our international
collaboration with the College of the Bahamas and the Bahamian Antiquities,
Monuments, and Museums Corporation and the international nature of the fieldwork
will provide an unparalleled avenue for cultural enrichment for the students as
well as an experience in global cooperation that will be invaluable for a
student's future success in an increasingly global workforce and
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of Earth
Sciences and the Office of International Science and Engineering.