* 0851997
* REU SITE:  Sustainable Energy in Chemical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Weidner, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal: 0851997&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: John W.
Weidner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the REU Site program is "Sustainable
Energy in Chemical Engineering" with technical emphasis on nanoscience,
catalysis and hydrogen technology (i.e. production, storage and use of hydrogen
for the hydrogen economy). It will engage ten students for a ten-week summer
program in cutting-edge research. A number of active researchers on the faculty
are engaged as mentors, which provides the students with exposure to leading-
edge research topics. The program will provide close personal mentoring of the
students. The objective is to encourage them to consider careers in research and
continuing study at the post-graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;In order to enhance the
research experience, the REU program will include several group activities for
the participants. The goal of these activities will be to enrich the
participants' educational and research experience and facilitate collaboration
and long-term relationships between them. The group activities will include a
Research Communication Studio (RSC), tours of industrial sites, participant-led
laboratory tours, workshops on graduate studies, a welcoming reception and final
research symposium, and a variety of social activities. Participants will
present their findings in a final poster session and technical presentation. The
content and format of these posters and presentations will be like that used at
technical conferences, such as the Annual and Regional student meeting of the
American Institute of Chemical Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator
(PI) will recruit participants nationally among rising juniors and seniors
majoring in chemical engineering. Special emphasis will be placed on recruiting
underrepresented minorities, as well as attracting students who would otherwise
not have an opportunity to participate in cutting-edge research. Participation
in this REU program will: (1) encourage students to continue their studies and
seek research careers; (2) enhance professional development and communication
skills; and (3) provide an enriching experience by exposing them to non-
classroom faculty-student interaction.&lt;br/&gt;