* 0851791
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates-Microbiology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Jon Roll, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 341,704.00

The University of Wisconsin REU Site will provide a research program for
undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2013. Eight students will be selected
to participate in the 10-week summer program administered by the Department of
Bacteriology. The goal is to provide an intensive, stimulating, and rewarding
research experience in microbiology, molecular biology and related fields. The
ultimate goal of the program is to attract talented undergraduates to careers in
science. The emphasis is on students who will broaden the pool of under-
represented minorities in science careers and those with limited opportunities
for research at their home institutions. Participants will spend the majority of
their time conducting independent research on a project in well-established and
well-funded laboratories where state-of-the-art equipment and scientific
approaches are utilized. In addition to research, a variety of educational,
graduate school preparation, and social activities are planned so students get a
rich, well-rounded and enjoyable summer experience. Students will publish a
final report of their results, present their findings at a Special Symposium,
and be encouraged to present their work at a regional, or even national
scientific meeting. Students are provided a stipend, housing and meals, and
travel to and from the lab. More information is available at
http://www.bact.wisc.edu/reu.php, or from the Program Director, Dr. Robin Kurtz,
(608) 263-1781, e-mail address rskurtz@wisc.edu.