* 0851933
* REU Site:   Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Tropical Biology in Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2013
* USD 564,635.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS)-Duke University
REU Site will provide a research program for undergraduates during the summers
of 2009-2014. A diverse group of 10 students will be selected each year to
participate in an intensive eight-week mentored research program at the La Selva
Biological Station in Costa Rica. The OTS REU Program is crafted to guide
undergraduate students toward independent field-based research in biology. The
program fosters student-to-researcher and student-to-student interactions, while
improving student understanding of the scientific method and practices, as well
as providing a window into the social and cultural life of Costa Rica. Under the
supervision of research mentors at La Selva, students will design and develop an
individual research project. The objectives of the program are to: (1) encourage
a diverse group of students toward careers in field research and tropical
biology; (2) establish a clear understanding of all aspects of the scientific
method; (3) introduce students to the importance of tropical ecosystems and
facilitate a more complete understanding of ecology and evolutionary biology;
and (4) increase student awareness of the ethical context of research in the
tropics. Additional information can be found http://www.ots.ac.cr/index.php?opti
on=com_content&amp;task=view&amp;id=317&amp;Itemid=440, or by contacting the
Project Director, Vivian MÃ©ndez, &lt;vmendez@ots.ac.cr&gt;, 919-684-5774.