* 0851109
* Collaborative Research: Radial Growth Responses Among Naturally Occurring Western U.S. Conifers Under Changing Environmental Conditions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Soule, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 182,953.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This research examines growth changes in the Douglas-fir and
ponderosa pine forests of the Northern Rockies (USA), which are growing under
conditions of an increasingly CO2- rich atmosphere and a projected warmer and
drier climate in the future. The researchers will investigate the growth
responses of two co-occurring and economically important western USA conifers
growing under natural conditions in relation to changing environmental
variables. Specifically, radial growth rates of Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine
trees will be compared at nine sites in the Northern Rockies where the trees are
co-dominant, where confounding growth factors are minimized, and where between-
site environmental variability is maximized. Matched tree-ring chronologies,
which show the average rate of tree growth annually, will be developed and
radial growth patterns examined prior and after atmospheric CO2 concentrations
became significantly elevated. This will be done using growth/climate regression
models, carbon isotope analysis, and analyses of growth rates during various
levels of drought severity. The purpose of this research is to determine if 1)
rates of intrinsic water-use efficiency (iWUE) of both species are trending
significantly upward during the past 200 years because of decreased stomatal
conductance associated with increasing levels of CO2; 2) increasing iWUE is
positively impacting the radial growth rates of these two tree species in water-
limited environments; 3) the influence of drought on the radial growth rates has
decreased over the time period of instrumental climatic records (1895-present);
4) there are differential responses to CO2 fertilization between the species and
spatial variation in these responses; and 5) radial growth rates of old-growth
trees are not significantly less than younger tree growth rates and thus, old-
growth forests may serve as important carbon sinks. Current climate models
predict that the study area will experience more frequent and severe summertime
droughts. Thus, a greater understanding of issues facing future ecosystems under
increased CO2 and warmer, drier conditions is critical.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing the specific growth responses of these two tree
species to prior climatic variations and rising atmospheric CO2 will provide a
better understanding of how these species will respond in the next several
decades. The potential positive impacts on growth resulting from increasing
atmospheric CO2 could be economically and ecologically significant because of
the great commercial value of these species, and their increased ability to
serve as carbon sinks. The project results will be broadly disseminated with a
goal that the study findings will assist in the development of management
strategies of conifer forests in the western U.S. The project will also provide
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as they will
participate in both the field and laboratory components of the study.