* 0851570
* Remittances and the Problem of Control:  A Field Experiment Among Migrants from El Salvador
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Dean Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 02/28/2011
* USD 231,471.00

This project tests whether putting more control over remittances into the hands
of U.S.-based Salvadoran migrants leads to improved well-being for remittance-
recipient households in El Salvador. The authors focus on improving the ability
of migrants to ensure that remittances are deposited and accumulated in savings
accounts in the home country. This project has developed and offered new savings
facilities that allow Salvadoran migrants to directly channel some fraction of
their remittances into savings accounts in El Salvador. To test the importance
of control over savings, the PI uses randomized field experimental methods:
migrants are randomly allocated to treatment conditions that vary in the amount
of control they have over the accounts. The project will measure impacts via a
panel survey of migrants in the U.S. and their corresponding remittance-
recipient households in El Salvador.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project examines whether innovative financial products,
that give migrants direct control over savings, encourage migrants to raise
their remittance amounts, savings levels, and ultimately improve the well-being
of their families back home. The first key contribution of this research is to
ask these new questions using randomized field experimental methods, so that
causal channels of influence are clear. The PI compares impacts across treatment
conditions that vary in the amount of control offered to the migrant, and so are
able to determine the causal impact of control on the migrant's financial
decision-making and on the outcomes of households in El
Salvador.&lt;br/&gt;Migration creates changes in household structure that
exacerbate intra-household information asymmetries. This project will contribute
to the intra-household decision making literature by investigating the role of
conflict and information asymmetries in saving and remittance sending decisions.
The results should also be of interest to scholars of international migration
and the economics of the family, as well as for economic theorists, in helping
determine whether control issues and asymmetric information are indeed important
determinants of resource transfers among family members. An additional
contribution of the project is the extensive survey work, which will encompass
both migrants in the U.S. and their corresponding family members in El Salvador.
Such matched migrant/source household surveys are rarely attempted, and so the
resulting dataset will be valuable for researchers in economics as well as other
disciplines interested in obtaining a complete picture of the socio-economic
situation of migrant families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This work reveals the potential of a new approach to
maximizing the impact of remittances on economic development in migrants' origin
countries. The PI documents the benefits that result when migrants are given
more control over how remittances are used by remittance recipients. Given the
large magnitude of remittance flows worldwide, a proven approach to enhancing
their development benefits can have substantial impact on policy and practice in
the international development arena. While the study focuses on enhancing
migrant control over savings, the insights from this study will suggest the
potential of facilities enhancing migrant control in other areas, such as
housing, education, and small enterprise funding. The work can help shape the
policies of development institutions such as the IADB and the World Bank, which
(for example) could provide technical assistance to government-owned and private
financial institutions that are seeking to develop financial products that give
migrants more control over remittance uses.&lt;br/&gt;The authors also aspire
for this project to encourage innovators in the development policy arena to
consider a broad set of interventions that target migrants in developed
countries, rather than just remittance recipients in the migrants? origin
countries. If our intervention leads to large gains in the well-being of
families in El Salvador, we hope this will facilitate other innovative
interventions targeting migrants in developed countries with an eye towards
improving the lives of families back home