* 0851557
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Sociocultural Analysis of Expectation and Decision Making by the Critically Ill
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Shauna Bowers, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2010
* USD 9,974.00

Graduate student Shauna Claiborne Bowers, supervised by Dr. Carolyn Sargent,
will undertake research on how new technologies are incorporated at the level of
the individual and their social networks into extant social, cultural, and
ethical codes. She will investigate how critically ill patients, who are
eligible for palliative care, form expectations and make decisions at the end of
life in a United States hospital. In biomedical institutions, biotechnologies
now enable individuals to live longer than ever with life-limiting conditions,
but also generate anxiety and conflict for patients who cannot be cured and must
confront the contradiction between culturally shaped expectations for a positive
outcome and the loss of hope. This research will help to understand how patients
negotiate this terrain created by technological
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two overarching objectives (1) to
examine the specific factors that influence how patients and their networks use
constructions of hope and denial to formulate expectations for the future; and
2) to understand how decision making power is negotiated between clinicians,
patients, and their networks, and what happens when there is disagreement about
the most appropriate plan of treatment. As a natural experiment, the research
design compares patients who interact with the palliative care team with those
who do not. The researcher will collect information through participant
observation, decision analyses, interviews with patients, people in patients'
social networks, and clinicians, to provide multiple perspectives. Central
research questions include: How do expectations for the outcome of
hospitalization emerge and change over time? How do hope and denial shape
expectations and decisions at the end of life? How do hope and denial evolve and
change throughout hospitalization? How do palliative care practices influence
these processes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to social
scientific understanding of how new technologies become incorporated in social
and cultural systems. Specifically, it will further theoretical understandings
of the formation of emergent expectation, the social construction of biomedical
knowledge, and the technology influenced illness experiences of critically ill
individuals. This research also will contribute to understanding the needs of
culturally and ethnically diverse critically ill patients and their social
networks, groups whose voices are often underrepresented. Focusing on
transitions from curative to palliative treatments will reveal factors that
shape expectations and decisions at the end of life. These institutional,
social, and cultural factors, especially those which may provoke ethical
dilemmas in the delivery of palliative care, will inform standards of care and
practices in delivery of palliative care and, therefore, have implications for
public policy.