* 0851368
* REU Site: Rice University Summer Institute of Statistics (RUSIS)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2009,10/31/2012
* Javier Rojo, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Noel Brady
* 10/31/2012
* USD 404,999.00

This award provides continued support for a successful 10-week summer REU site
within the Statistics Department at Rice University for the study of Statistics
and its applications. As the number of domestic graduate students in the
Mathematical Sciences continues to decline, there is a critical need to develop
human resources to continue supporting the United States' advantage in the world
of science and technology. The Rice University Summer Institute of Statistics
(RUSIS) has been successful in encouraging students to pursue graduate degrees
in Mathematics and Statistics. Roughly 85% of the students who have attended
RUSIS and have graduated, are now doctoral students in Ph.D. programs around the
country, and roughly 61% of them are members of underrepresented populations in
Mathematics. RUSIS has accomplished this through intensive courses, close
supervision of research projects, and visits to various research institutes and
agencies in Houston. Specifically, the program

Trains and mentors 17 (12 NSF- and 5 NSA-supported) selected underrepresented
minority students and students with no easy access to a career experience at
their institution, including community college students, through intensive core
courses in probability, stochastic processes, and statistical inference, with
special emphasis on areas of current interest. (e.g. multiple comparisons,
extreme value theory, multivariate survival analysis, risk-reliability-
sustainability of complex infrastructure systems, artificial intelligence,
statistical learning, statistical genetics, and general biostatistics).

Engages the students in research projects under close collaboration with
faculty mentors, and with the objective of producing joint publications.
Students present their results at national meetings and they are mentored in the
preparation and presentation of their talks. In addition, students meet with an
advisory committee composed of top scientists and present their work to them.

Teaches short courses on the use of Unix platforms, LaTeX, and software to be
utilized for research purposes such as Mathematica, Splus and/or R, and Matlab;

Organizes student and faculty visits to scientific facilities (e.g.,
Biomathematics and Biostatistics at MD Anderson Cancer Center, NASA) and a
series of lectures, by distinguished scientists, is scheduled. These lectures
cover a variety of topics ranging from applying to Graduate School to career
experiences by outstanding scientists, and discussion of cutting-edge topics in
Statistics.

Evaluates and monitors the progress of students for seven years (expected time
for them to finish graduate school) after their participation; annual evaluation
of the program by the participating students and an external advisory committee
is an integral and valuable part of the program.