* 0851255
* Role of Latent Virus Infection in Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* William Wilson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2013
* USD 549,105.00

The great abundance of viruses infecting marine phytoplankton is now well known.
Much effort has been focused on elucidating the biological significance of viral
lysis (i.e. killing of the host cell), and its effects on wide ranging global
processes, while another important aspect of viral infection, latency, has been
largely ignored. This is despite evidence from the 1970s indicating
phytoplankton carry latent infections. In latency, the virus is stably
maintained within the host cell: its genome replicating along with that of the
host, and being passed on to progeny cells. The crucial aspect of latency is
that the virus can be reactivated (usually by an environmental trigger), killing
the host and releasing new infective particles. Latency has implications in
lateral gene transfer and hence evolution and may confer advantages to infected
cells (e.g. resistance to other viruses). Latency could represent the most
important role of viruses in regulating phytoplankton dynamics in the ocean. The
most likely triggers for reactivation of latent viruses are increased
temperature and / or UV irradiation, hence latency in marine phytoplankton is
not only a crucial component of ocean ecosystems, but should be considered in
climate change models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test two
hypotheses: 1) latent phytoplankton viruses are highly diverse, abundant and
pervasive in marine systems; 2) increasing ocean temperature is a key trigger
for virus induction. The project will address these hypotheses by screening
phytoplankton (culture collection and field samples) for latent infections using
PCR-based methods and electron microscopy. Some samples will be induced (using
elevated temperature or UV irradiation to "switch on" the viruses) and the virus
particles will be detected by flow cytometry. The PIs will then use a
transformative approach of virus sorting, whole virus genome amplification and
sequence analysis, to design diagnostic probes to assess latency in the
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of this study will derive
mainly from interactions between the scientists directly involved in the
research and students/general public. For example, results of research from this
project will be discussed during an informal "Caf√© Scientifique" program
designed to share the latest scientific ideas with the general public. The PIs
will teach K-12 students the structure of viruses and the principles of
molecular probing using cardboard models during informal open days. The PIs will
also incorporate a further "order of magnitude" (virus DNA) into the Keller-
Bigelow Laboratory Orders Of Magnitude (BLOOM) program, designed to teach high
school students, from throughout Maine, functionality in marine ecosystems.
Outcomes from BLOOM include understanding methods of investigation and
broadening and strengthening the students' interest in science. The PIs have
links with local schools, having visited pre-K to 3 children to teach them about
phytoplankton and viruses and hosted a high school work experience student in
the laboratory, who helped to isolate and characterize viruses from a marine
hatchery. The PIs will host undergraduate interns and will interact with
postgraduate students through our collaborators during the course of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key product of this research will be
information on virus latency in marine phytoplankton, of which almost nothing is
currently known. Phytoplankton and their viruses are vital components in the
global carbon cycle. Findings from this project will further the understanding
of these important viruses, their propagation and survival strategies. Genome
sequence information of these viruses will encourage involvement from
biotechnology companies who are actively seeking novel enzymes, compounds and
processes in the marine environment. In addition, since some of the algal hosts
studied in this project (zooxanthellae) are coral symbionts, the findings will
also be relevant to coral biology, and in particular to the understanding of
coral bleaching, which results from loss of zooxanthellae, and is thought to be
associated with increased temperature. The fate of the World's coral reefs is of
great interest and concern to the general public.