* 0851113
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the Constraints on Virus Infection of Cyanobacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2013
* USD 299,798.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

It is well established that viruses play an important role in regulating the
structure and function of marine ecosystems. However, we lack a mechanistic
understanding of how bacteria cell receptors constrain virus infection, which
has implications for the ecology and evolutionary dynamics of marine microbial
food webs. This project will identify receptors for three known groups of
cyanophage (podo-, myo- and siphoviridae) on the on the outer membrane of the
marine cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. WH7803. The researchers will employ a
series of proven methods to generate virus-resistant Synechococcus populations
using chemostats, to narrow the mutants using fluorescent virus tags that
monitor surface attachment, and to characterize the outer membrane protein
compliment of the resistant populations using LC-MS/MS proteomic analyses. Once
the receptors are identified, bioinformatic analyses of existing databases will
be coupled with molecular biological queries of sample archives to document the
diversity and prevalence of the different receptors in marine cyanobacterial
genomes as well as of those expressed by natural populations. Lab studies in
chemostats swill examine the regulation of receptor expression (using
fluorescence viruses and qRT-PCR for gene expression) so as to begin to tease
apart the environmental controls on virus receptor expression in culture
populations of cyanobacteria. All information will be collected in a manner that
will make it suitable for analyses by ecological competition models, thereby
providing new insights on the cost-of-resistance to infection that cyanobacteria
face as well as new information on how virus infection of cells may be
constrained by environmental conditions.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this project include the training of a
new generation of marine scientists in interdisciplinary sciences of
microbiology, molecular biology and proteomics, marine geochemistry and
classical ecology of students at an EPSCoR Institution (The University of
Tennessee) and a research station (Kellogg Biological Station). The study will
provide opportunities for students to work with researchers from a major federal
research facility (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) where access to equipment
exists that is not available at most academic institutions. Information from
this study will be directly incorporated into course work, educational and
public outreach, and disseminated through a novel partnership with the Science
Journalism program at the University of Tennessee. One or more undergraduates
interested in science journalism will be recruited in order to generate
materials for paper and electronic dissemination on marine microbiology and
ecology that will be appropriate for K-12 students as well as the general
public. The PIs will continue their well-established history of recruitment of
underrepresented groups and participation in methods-oriented courses.
Scientifically the information generated by this study will be completely novel,
extending and transforming the foundations of marine microbiology and virus
ecology as well as providing insight into how shifts in the global climate and
ocean biogeochemistry might influence microbial proliferation and control by
marine viruses.