* 0851774
* REU Site: Building Interfaces for Tomorrow's Technology--The Virginia Tech Research in Human-Computer Interaction Program
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Donald McCrickard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2013
* USD 275,000.00

Human-computer interaction (HCI), already acknowledged as an important
discipline by computer scientists and those in related disciplines, will
increase in importance as technology becomes even more integrated into every day
life. With twelve faculty members in the area and state-of-the-art facilities
and equipment, Virginia Tech's Center for HCI is a leader in the development of
new interfaces and in the education of scientists and engineers who will build
and use them. Building on a long and rich history of undergraduate research, the
PIs and affiliated faculty seek to engage students from regional schools in
research endeavors-particularly those from schools that traditionally cater to
women and underrepresented minorities. Four regional schools (with whom the
group has partnered on other efforts) serve as partner institutions on this
proposal, hosting visits and open house events to encourage their students to
attend the program. At least ten students are involved during the eight-week
summer program, with the goal of providing the students with a broad look at the
discipline of HCI and an in-depth experience conducting research with
experienced faculty on the latest technology-ultimately leading to an informed
decision to further their education with a graduate degree from Virginia Tech or
elsewhere. The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will advance the field of HCI through the integration of unique
opinions of a diverse population. The discipline of HCI is highly
interdisciplinary, drawing success from the melding of computer science,
industrial and systems engineering, psychology, sociology, computer engineering,
architecture, art, and more-all fields in which the faculty listed on this
proposal have recent or ongoing projects. By drawing upon the strengths at
regional universities and leveraging the unique experiences of populations
typically not adequately represented in computer science or HCI, the project
will significantly advance interface development for emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;Central to this
proposal is the teaching, training, and learning for an emerging group of
leaders in HCI. Particularly important is participation of under-represented
groups: women and minorities at colleges lacking the research programs and
infrastructure present at Virginia Tech. The proposal leverages several recent
enhancements to the resources and infrastructure at our university-many funded
by the NSF-by building and enhancing external partnerships. As the program grows
and matures, a diverse and well-trained set of new leaders in research will
emerge from Virginia Tech.