* 0851987
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Optics and Lasers
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* David Hagan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 05/31/2013
* USD 318,638.00

Proposal: 0851987&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Winston V.
Schoenfeld&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This twelve-week summer Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site program in The College of Optics &amp; Photonics
(CREOL) at the University of Central Florida (UCF) will engage ten undergraduate
students in research and other educational experiences focused in the areas of
lasers, optics, and nanophotonics. The REU program will be comprised of five
basic components: 1) introductory informal coursework on basic principles of
optics, lasers, and nanophotonics; 2) research seminars; 3) industrial site
visits to several optics and laser companies in the Orlando area; 4) weekly
monitoring of the students' progress by the PIs; and 5) an ethics component.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ethics Component will be comprised of a series of four
workshops: 1) Workshop #1- An overview of the basic tools of ethics, students'
project topic assignment, and discussion of the relevance of ethics to everyday
research; 2) Workshop #2- Intellectual property; implied personal ethics,
research in ethics, crime and security, integrity and quality research; 3)
Workshop #3- Open discussions of student projects and findings; and 4) Workshop
#4- Preparation of a summary report of activities and findings. &lt;br/&gt;In
order to promote international exposure, participants in the international REU
program at CREOL will be invited to participate in many of the planned domestic
REU activities (i.e. seminars, industrial site visits), including a joint poster
session at the end of the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts
will focus on attracting women and minority participants who will be encouraged
to pursue graduate studies in the field of optics and lasers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, in an effort to improve the quality of the REU
program, a Program Review Committee, consisting of the Dean of the College of
Optics and Photonics, the Dean of Undergraduate Studies, and the Chair of the
Philosophy Department (Ethics), one senior and one junior CREOL faculty member,
and the PIs will be formed to annually evaluate the quality of the students'
experiences and the overall success of the REU
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;