* 0851708
* REU Site in Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering at the University of Kentucky
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ingrid St. Omer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal: 0851708&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Regina
Hannemann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three year Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at the University of Kentucky will engage
students in research focused in the fields of Electrical and Computer
Engineering. The program objectives are as follows: 1) provide underrepresented
students and those from institutions with limited research opportunities a
research experience that will increase their confidence and ability to
contribute to the body of engineering knowledge; 2) improve student
understanding of the nature of research practice and scientific reasoning; 3)
provide students with a collegial partnership experience with faculty, peers,
and research staff; 4) increase student appreciation of the importance of
coursework to the understanding of engineering research; 5) improve oral and
written comprehension and communication of technical knowledge; 6) expose
students to research instrumentation, measurement techniques, documentation, and
laboratory management; and 7) motivate students to pursue graduate studies and
research careers.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, students will participate in weekly
seminars, professional development workshops, field trips to local industry, and
social events. The 8-week summer research program will culminate in a
Departmental Research Symposium where students will present their work in
written an oral forms. Two students from each summer cohort will be awarded
travel grants to enable them to present their work in conjunction with their
research mentor at the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) and
Frontiers in Education (FIE) conferences. &lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts will
target women, underrepresented minorities, and students from academic
institutions with limited opportunities for research. Results will be
disseminated through presentations at conferences, journal publications, and
potential workshops regarding recruitment and retention of underrepresented
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to fostering the integration of
research and education through an immersive research experience, this REU
program will develop student's critical thinking, collaboration, and
presentation skills as well as provide students with an appreciation for the
advantages of long-term collegial relationships, advanced degree studies, and
lifelong learning.&lt;br/&gt;