* 0851128
* Collaborative research:  RUI:  Seismicity and 3-D velocity structure of Lo`ihi submarine volcano
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jacqueline Caplan-Auerbach, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/2013
* USD 193,543.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Lo`ihi is an active submarine volcano and the newest volcano in the Hawaiian
Chain. As the only example of the submarine phase of Hawaiian volcanism, Lo`ihi
represents an excellent opportunity to understand the evolution and activity of
a young hot spot volcano. However, while a great deal has been learned about
Lo`ihi's morphology, petrology, chemistry and microbiology, previous studies of
Lo`ihi seismicity and internal structure have been hindered by poor data quality
or a lack of instrumentation. Consequently, there is a major gap in our
understanding of what has been described as one of the world?s best-studied
submarine volcanoes. The primary goal of this project is to investigate
earthquake activity and the internal structure of the undersea Lo`ihi volcano by
installing a network of ocean bottom seismometers on the volcano to perform the
first high resolution study of Lo`ihi's seismicity, including a detailed 2-D
tomographic image of its internal structure. The project is a pilot study to
learn more about Lo`ihi with the goal of eventually performing a combined active
and passive source seismic study of the region to perform a full 3-D tomographic
study of Lo`ihi and the surrounding area and image the connection between this
submarine volcano and the Hawaiian plume ? a rising column of hot material that
is thought to be the cause of volcanism in Hawaii. The broader impacts of this
study focus on undergraduate research and education. Undergraduates will
participate at all levels of the project, from serving as watchstanders on the
cruises, to participating in data quality control, and analyzing data. As part
of their research experience, the undergraduates will act as guest instructors
in introductory geophysics courses, teaching their peers about seismic analysis.
Their work will culminate in the presentation of their research at local or
national conferences. Data from the project will also be used in introductory
geophysics curricula at the lead institution. Two masters students and a
postdoctoral fellow will also participate in the project. Also significant are
the fact the Western Washington University is a principally undergraduate
institution and that this project will support an early career female
investigator.