* 0851417
* Minnesota Research Data Center
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Thomas Holmes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,066.00

SES-0851417&lt;br/&gt;Catherine Fitch&lt;br/&gt;Lynn A Blewett&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Davern&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Homes&lt;br/&gt;Steven Ruggles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant establishes a Census Bureau Research
Data Center (RDC) at the University of Minnesota. The goals of the Minnesota RDC
are twofold. First, the RDC will help Minnesota researchers, working in
collaboration with the Census Bureau and the National Center for Health
Statistics, to support and improve basic data infrastructure for economic,
demographic, and health research. Second, the RDC will stimulate new academic
research that capitalizes on powerful restricted-access datasets to advance
understanding of the sources and consequences of change in American society. The
Minnesota RDC will be housed in the Minnesota Population Center (MPC), an
organization with a tradition of collaboration with the Census Bureau on
projects to improve and disseminate Census data products. The Minnesota RDC will
serve researchers from a broad range of academic disciplines, but will have
particular strengths in demography and public health. Minnesota has outstanding
researchers from social science and policy departments who will exploit newly-
available demographic data to study topics such as marriage, migration, and
family change. The University's top-ranked School of Public Health has unusual
strength in large-scale data analysis and improvement and the nearby Mayo Clinic
is developing new programs focusing on health data. Accordingly, a large pool of
nationally-recognized investigators will take advantage of the recent agreement
between the Census Bureau and NCHS and the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (AHRQ). The RDC will also serve traditional RDC researchers; economists
from the distinguished departments of Economics, Applied Economics, and
Industrial Relations--as well as the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank--will
focus on analysis of economic microdata. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability
of an RDC at the University of Minnesota will stimulate original and creative
research in an array of academic fields such as sociology, economics, public
affairs, and epidemiology. The restricted decennial and economic census data
provide powerful resources for studying the long-run restructuring of the
American population and economy. Social scientists at the University of
Minnesota will be able to address simultaneously the broad sweep of time and the
detail of spatial organization. Access to the internal NCHS and AHRQ data will
result in a substantial body of new scientific and policy-relevant research into
health behavior and disparities, access to and use of medical care, population
aging, progress toward public health goals, and many other topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because of MPC's history of collaboration
with the Census Bureau and NCHS on large-scale data infrastructure projects, the
Minnesota RDC will be uniquely positioned to benefit the entire RDC program and
to assist the statistical agencies with data improvement projects. The Minnesota
RDC will help users across the entire RDC network efficiently use restricted
population and health data files, some of which Minnesota investigators helped
to create. MPC researchers will continue collaborating with the Census Bureau
and NCHS on improving restricted and public-use data and documentation. All RDC
projects using Census Bureau restricted data will benefit the Census Bureau by
contributing knowledge necessary to improve data collection, processing and
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important reasons for
establishing an RDC at the University of Minnesota is to make this resource
available to graduate students. Many students will be trained in the process of
using the RDC--learning how to write successful research proposals, properly
safeguard private data, and efficiently analyze the RDC data--by working with
faculty members. Students from the University will also have free access to the
RDC to pursue their own research projects.