* 0851980
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Balancing Offspring Production and Care: Behavioral and Endocrine Correlates in Male Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Jeanne Altmann, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2011
* USD 6,355.00

NSF0851980 Altmann&amp;Onyango Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The context for
much field research, including that on primates, is provided by the
socioecological model. In its basic form, this model predicts that the
distribution of females typically follows that of ecological resources; and that
males track the distribution of females, thereby maximizing offspring
production. It is, therefore, generally assumed that mammalian males in multi-
male multi-female groups maximize fitness by mating with as many females as
possible so as to increase the number of offspring produced. However, recent
evidence indicates that males in some of these groups also provide care to their
offspring. In such cases, a male's perspective on fitness is expected to include
the survival and quality of his offspring rather than simply the number of
offspring produced. Empirical evidence on males' balance of investment between
offspring production and parental care is lacking, resulting in a significant
gap in current understanding of male life history strategies. This study uses an
individual-based approach to collect behavioral and endocrine data to measure
this investment balance in male savanna baboons (Papio cynocephalus). The
subjects include all 50 males in five wild-living study groups in Kenya.
Specifically, the study will examine the extent to which a male's age and number
of living immature offspring predict behavior and physiology that impact on (1)
offspring production and parental care, and (2) intensity of mating. In
addition, data will be retrieved from the long-term Amboseli Baboon Research
Project database (3) to evaluate the extent to which males transferring between
groups improve offspring production while foregoing fitness consequences of
providing paternal care in their prior group. By illuminating male life history
strategies this study will contribute to the formulation of a more rich
socioecological model. Technology transfer to Kenya will include noninvasive
hormone techniques. Prior K-12 teaching experience in Kenya will be used to
broaden the audience for dissemination of research results and implications.