* 0851743
* REU Site: High Performance Filesystems and Data Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Hans-Peter Bischof, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* John Reppy
* 04/30/2012
* USD 275,000.00

Simulations of galactic events such as black hole and galaxy mergers
&lt;br/&gt;allow scientists to understand the fundamental nature of the
universe. &lt;br/&gt;These simulations create terabytes of data, which are
extremely difficult &lt;br/&gt;and time consuming to analyze using traditional
mathematical tools and &lt;br/&gt;techniques. To address these challenges,
scientists often use data &lt;br/&gt;visualization, which provides a powerful
and effective approach to &lt;br/&gt;understand interactions and behavior of
simulations such as visualizing &lt;br/&gt;the radiation of gravity waves during
a supermassive black hole merger. &lt;br/&gt;Visualization systems require high
performance file-systems for efficient &lt;br/&gt;data management. Over the last
three years, a collaborative effort &lt;br/&gt;between the Computer Science
Department and the Center for Computational &lt;br/&gt;Relativity and
Gravitation at Rochester Institute of Technology resulted &lt;br/&gt;in a
visualization framework called Spiegel that has been used successfully
&lt;br/&gt;to analyze and visualize the simulation of a variety of galactic
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site provides students with the
opportunity, environment and support &lt;br/&gt;to conduct research in data
visualization and high-performance file systems &lt;br/&gt;using Spiegel as the
starting point. Working in a collaborative and &lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary
environment, students develop solutions to a broad set &lt;br/&gt;of research
problems in performing computation on massive amounts of &lt;br/&gt;multi-
dimensional data. Consequently, students gain knowledge in understanding,
&lt;br/&gt;critiquing, and presenting research literature. This project offers
students &lt;br/&gt;opportunities to work on state-of-the-art computing
techniques that are &lt;br/&gt;increasingly vital for solving research problems
in modern scientific &lt;br/&gt;disciplines. Undergraduate students are
encouraged to pursue interdisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;graduate studies in STEM
disciplines. With specific recruiting efforts that &lt;br/&gt;target
underrepresented groups such as women, minorities, and persons with
&lt;br/&gt;disabilities, especially deaf and hard-of-hearing students, this REU
program &lt;br/&gt;also aims to increase the size and diversity of the
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;