* 0851527
* Dynamics of a Rotating, Supercritical Large-River Plume
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* David Jay, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2014
* USD 386,534.00

This project analyzes the dynamics of the supercritical, rotating plume emerging
from the mouth of the Columbia River. The River Influenced Shelf Ecosystems
(RISE) project, funded by NSF, provides a new view of plume ecosystem dynamics
for the world's large rivers. The functioning of the plume depends vitally on
the linkage of small-scale processes, like the 50m-wide non-hydro-static plunge
and plume-generated non-linear internal waves (NLIW), to larger scales, e.g.,
the 10-30km wide tidal plume. This project combines analytical and numerical
models, remote sensing, and vessel data to address questions on multiple scales
and to integrate across scales in a manner that cannot be accomplished using
conventional models. The following questions will be investigated: &lt;br/&gt;1)
What are the dynamics and energetics of the tidal plume, and how does the
observed north-south asymmetry of the plume front influence plume energetics?
Langrangian frontal equations provide an elegant formulation of the dynamics of
a radially spreading plume, but the actual plume is somewhat deeper and slower
on its south side. This asymmetry influences frontal energetics and occurs
primarily because of an interaction of the plume with the underlying tidal
vorticity field. Asymmetry causes NLIW generation to begin on the south side of
the plume and progress clockwise. This project extends existing radially
symmetric, analytical and numerical frontal models to describe the dynamics and
energetics of the actual plume configuration. Models are verified using existing
data. &lt;br/&gt;2) What controls NLIW generation, and how can this generation
be related to specific frontal structures and dynamics? Whether NLIW can be
generated as the tidal plume front decays to a subcritical state depends on the
relative depths of the plume front and rotating plume state to which the front
decays. A generation criterion, based on plume front, plume near-field and NLIW
energetics, is defined so that the generation of NLIW can be predicted with
analytical and numerical models. &lt;br/&gt;3) How can the structure and
dynamics of the actual plume front be modeled, with its prominent plunge and
recirculation? Existing Lagrangian frontal theory does not describe actual
frontal structure ? like hydraulic control theory, it predicts the location and
properties of a transition without determining its structure, even though energy
loss to vertical mixing is part of the theory. Remote sensing and vessel data
motivate and guide development of new models that incorporates the non-
hydrostatic plume-front plunge. &lt;br/&gt;4) How does the tidal plume blend
into the near-field? How do the tidal plume and near-field mix into ambient
waters? When and where does nutrient input to the plume from below occur? The CR
is oligotrophic, but the plume is highly productive. Most plume mixing into
ambient waters and almost all nutrient input from below occurs in the tidal
plume and near-field. Mixing mechanisms include frontal processes, plume lift-
off, winds, and NLIW-mean shear interaction. This project uses fine-structure
and water mass analyses, SAR data, and wave theory to analyze the location,
timing and mechanisms of plume mixing. &lt;br/&gt;In summary, this project
explains how the small-scale processes of the tidal plume influence larger scale
processes that are reproduced by regional models. Thus, it provides a much
improved picture of how key elements of a river plume work and urgently needed
guidance for modeling of buoyant plumes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Buoyant plumes
are important in many contexts, and large rivers and their plumes play a major
role in the global carbon, nutrient and sediment budgets. RISE has shown that
the Columbia plume is a tractable example of a large-river plume, and that the
plume interacts with the upwelling eco-system in a way that enhances coastal
production. Human and climate-driven changes in flow seasonality are, moreover,
altering the interaction of the plume with coastal processes, likely affecting
the fate of carbon and nutrients from land. Much of the interaction between the
plume and underlying waters takes place in the tidal plume, a newly defined
structure that remains incompletely understood, and the plume-near-field into
which it merges. Moreover, juvenile salmonids (including those of endangered
stocks) feed extensively in the tidal plume and at its fronts. Thus, the
analyses carried out by this project both facilitate understanding of processes
with global significance and contribute to regional management efforts