* 0851158
* Globalization and Growth:  Lessons from British Trade Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Alan Taylor, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 439,792.00

This project will investigate the composition and evolution of British trade
flows over the years 1700 to 1899. It will do so by constructing a new and
highly detailed database of disaggregated imports and exports by commodity and
trading partner at ten-year intervals over two centuries, based on a decadal
sampling of British customs records. It will then use the data to study
the&lt;br/&gt;evolution of comparative advantage and its relationship to the
long-run economic growth of Britain and its trading
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The project will
assemble an original data set. The customs records have hitherto been used at a
highly aggregate level (sectoral groups) and only for selected (infrequent)
sample years. They have never been coded electronically. The data will be more
detailed and higher frequency, and this will be vital for systematic empirical
analysis of trade and growth models by future researchers.&lt;br/&gt;The project
will confront open questions about mercantilism in the 18th century. The period
of world trade before the Pax Britannica remains shrouded in mystery, especially
given the dearth of data. This project will enable researchers to see in more
detail shifts in the direction, level, and composition of trade flows, and to
see how well modern trade theories apply in an age when military power and
imperial aspirations were bound up with commerce. The project will confront open
questions about the origins of modern economic growth in the 19th century. The
Industrial Revolution remains the key event in economic history, yet our
understanding is still incomplete. One important and recurring dispute centers
on whether the event was localized in a few sectors or a broad advance. Other
controversies surround questions&lt;br/&gt;of how other countries eventually
caught up and surpassed Britain, the role of technology and endowments in that
process, and how inter- and intra-industry trade evolved during that transition
to eventually shape the world economy of today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;In 1700 Britain was a heavily agrarian power in a mercantilist
era. By 1899 Britain was the world's first industrial economy in an age of
globalization. The data to be gathered and the analyses to be undertaken will
help researchers better understand the emergence of modern economic growth and
the role of trade and globalization in that process. The study of that
historical process has an intellectual merit of its own, but the investigators
also expect to draw lessons from the past for contemporary challenges for
economic policymaking in a new era of globalization. Attacking these long-run
development questions is also an important goal for the project. Assembling and
coding a 200 year span of data from a consistent source will allow the
investigators (and future researchers) to confront key causes and consequences
of the Great Divergence between rich and poor nations, and the role of trade and
comparative advantage in that process.