* 0851414
* International Integrated Microdata Series
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Robert McCaa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 5,963,296.00

SES-0851414&lt;br/&gt;Steven Ruggles&lt;br/&gt;Ragui A. Assaad&lt;br/&gt;Deborah
Levison&lt;br/&gt;Robert E McCaa&lt;br/&gt;Matthew J Sobek&lt;br/&gt;University
of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues to build,
enrich, and freely disseminate a global microdata resource of unprecedented
scale and scope. The International Integrated Microdata Series (IPUMS-
International) is creating fundamental infrastructure for scientific research,
education, and policy-making. The project has produced the world's largest
population database, with information describing 263 million persons drawn from
111 censuses of 35 countries between 1960 and 2005. The next project phase will
dramatically expand the geographic and chronological coverage of the database,
continue to preserve data, and disseminate the data to users around the world.
There are four major activities: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (1) Data acquisition and
long-run preservation. The project will obtain and preserve the newest data from
the 2010 round of censuses and the oldest data from the 1960s through the 1980s,
most of which exist only on deteriorating magnetic tapes. &lt;br/&gt; (2) Data
cleaning and processing. Before data can be released, it is necessary to draw
samples, correct errors, apply confidentiality edits as needed, and make the
data interoperable. &lt;br/&gt; (3) Documentation. Comprehensive documentation
is essential to provide guidance to users on the meaning of census responses and
their comparability across time and space. &lt;br/&gt; (4) Dissemination. The
project will improve the web-based dissemination system, implement online data
analysis and collaboration software, and conduct a program of education and
dissemination activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Richly detailed
population data spanning the globe over multiple decades are indispensable for
creating the next generation of demographic, economic, and environmental models.
IPUMS-International data have already stimulated new research that transcends
national boundaries and static interpretation. To keep the database a cutting-
edge source of information, the project will add the latest material from the
2010 census rounds, process data from additional countries, and recover data at
risk of destruction. By doubling the scope of the database to 250 censuses the
next project phase will leverage the NSF's previous investment and make IPUMS-
International an even more powerful resource for understanding the causes and
consequences of the sweeping transformations of the human population that are
reshaping the planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a
transnational resource of unprecedented power for understanding human society on
a global scale. This infrastructure will multiply the quality, quantity,
accessibility, and interoperability of information about the changing human
population. By freely disseminating the data, the project will enhance
scientific understanding of critical policy-related issues, such as population
aging, international migration, climate change, and the effects of government
programs on economic development and well-being. The project promotes teaching,
training, and learning through three mechanisms. First, the project develops new
tools for online data analysis for sharing curricular materials for teaching at
all levels, bringing the excitement of discovery into the classroom. Second, it
will conduct training workshops and develop online training modules to provide
direct instruction in use of the data. Third, the project will employ a diverse
group of graduate and undergraduate research assistants' including members of
underrepresented groups'who will develop valuable new skills in a stimulating
interdisciplinary environment