* 0851539
* REU Site in Molecular Biosciences
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Carol Gross, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 05/31/2013
* USD 430,892.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The University of California -- San Francisco (UCSF) REU
Site will provide a research program for undergraduates during the summers of
2009-2012. Ten students will be selected each year to participate in a ten-week
program in the area of molecular biosciences, specifically biochemistry, cell
biology, genetics and genomics. The REU program combines an outstanding
laboratory research experience with activities designed to foster scientific
communication and facilitate a transition to graduate school. The programs will
take place at Mission Bay, a state-of-the-art research facility housing more
than 200 research laboratories. The centerpiece of the UCSF summer research
program is an intensive laboratory research experience in which students are
paired, based on their research interest, with UCSF faculty mentors. Students
receive hands-on training using cutting edge biological techniques to creatively
solve problems in modern biology. The research program includes daily
interaction with a graduate/PhD level research co-mentor, faculty research
presentations, a mentored journal club component, and oral/poster research
presentations. The second component of the REU program is a co-curriculum
designed to foster scientific communication skills, increase scientific breadth,
and prepare students for the graduate school admissions process. The co-
curriculum includes faculty-led sessions focused on preparing a graduate school
application, interviewing skills, scientific oral and poster presentation
skills, and a workshop focused on issues related to diversity in the biological
sciences. An optional GRE preparation course is available. In addition, students
will have the opportunity to share their research experiences and mentoring
skills with high school-level summer interns at UCSF. The program culminates
with widely attended student poster and oral research presentations. Students
will be recruited nationally and applications from under-represented minority
and disadvantaged (economically or first in college) students are strongly
encouraged. Students receive a stipend, dormitory-style housing, travel to and
from the program, passes for local public transit and access to free campus
transportation services. Further information and application materials are
available on the program website: http://saawww.ucsf.edu/diversity/REU, or by
contact The Program Director, Dr. Carol Gross, or the Program Coordinator, Kalai
Diamond, at (415) 514-0840, Kalai.Diamond@ucsf.edu.