* 0851812
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Computer Science for Students at Undergraduate Institutions
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Scott Thede, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* John Reppy
* 04/30/2012
* USD 218,910.00

The primary objective of the investigators is to encourage talented
undergraduate students to pursue graduate study and research careers in computer
science. The program directly impacts students by giving them first-hand
experience with some of the most rewarding activities that characterize graduate
study and research careers: conducting research as a team, disseminating
results, and participating in a community of scholars. The research projects are
drawn from a number of important fields of computer science. The importance of
teamwork and participating in a scholarly community is emphasized to the
students. It should be noted that all of the student participants in this
program are enrolled at undergraduate-only institutions. Thus, the program
extends research experiences to students who are not enrolled in large research
institutions, and who thus might not have the opportunity to participate in
research otherwise.

The particular projects vary with the specialties and interests of the faculty
members participating in any given year. Project areas include pen-based
computing, computer-supported cooperative work, assistive technology (text
navigation for the visually impaired), natural language processing (text
summarization), functional programming languages, wireless sensor networks,
programming pedagogy, and virtual reality. In addition to providing an
orientation to their research projects, faculty mentors sponsor orientation
activities to help the students appreciate the nature of research and the value
of working cooperatively. Students are encouraged to collaborate formally and
informally. Students have several opportunities to present their work to other
REU participants as well as to external audiences. Finally, students learn about
the graduate school application process in part by visiting a major research
university.