* 0851532
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Land-Use Change on the Production of Ecosystem Services in Páramo Grasslands
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Kathleen Farley, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2013
* USD 154,951.00

Growing interest in terrestrial carbon sequestration and increasing demand for
water and hydropower have focused international and regional attention on
ecosystem services. This project examines those services provided by the high
altitude páramo grasslands of the northern Andes. The concept of Payment for
Ecosystem Services is being implemented in Ecuador, leading to tree planting in
páramo grasslands to sequester carbon and alteration of traditional burning and
grazing regimes to enhance water resources. However, the biophysical outcomes of
these and related changes in land use and management are poorly understood, and
in some cases well-intended changes may not be producing the desired outcomes.
In this project, the researchers will systematically investigate the effects of
land use change on the production of soil-related ecosystem services, quantify
potential tradeoffs among ecosystem services, and evaluate policy implications
of different land management strategies. The primary objectives are 1) to
determine how land use change affects carbon storage, water storage, and water
transmission in Andean páramo soils and 2) to evaluate which land uses maximize
ecosystem services related to both carbon and water in páramo grassland soils.
The researchers will integrate field observations and in situ experiments at two
páramo study sites, Zuleta (northern Ecuador) and the Nudo del Azuay (southern
Ecuador), with laboratory analyses of soil samples, and assessment of synergies,
trade-offs, and relevant policies to quantify and predict effects of land use
change on carbon- and water-related ecosystem services.

This research will provide essential data for predicting ecosystem responses to
land use change and will have immediate societal application by improving the
scientific basis for Payment for Ecosystem Services programs. The results will
provide key data for conservation organizations on the appropriateness of
forestation as a form of land restoration in the study region, and will inform
policies and programs intended to enhance both terrestrial carbon sequestration
and water provision in the Ecuadorian Andes. The research also will provide
educational opportunities for several graduate students and a middle-school
science teacher from the U.S. and for participating undergraduate students at
the University of Azuay in Ecuador, and it will strengthen the collaboration
between the investigators and their Ecuadorian partners.