* 0851711
* REU Site:   Expanding Minority Research Opportunities in Cross-Disciplinary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Thomas Gilmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 368,752.00

This Boston University REU Site will provide research internships to
undergraduate students during the summers of 2009-2012. This REU Site is
supported by the NSF REU Program and by the Department of Defense through the
Awards to Stimulate and Support Undergraduate Research Experiences (ASSURE)
program. The program, coordinated by the Undergraduate Research Opportunity
Program (UROP) will award Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF) to
ten students, especially those from underrepresented minority groups, who will
be provided support for a 10-week research experience each summer. Applications
from well-qualified students within all STEM disciplines (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics) are welcome. Research projects available to
students use cross-disciplinary approaches to biological problems, primarily as
they relate to effects of environmental cues on organismal or cellular
responses. Molecular, cellular, behavioral, ecological, chemical, computational,
and engineering methods are used to address biological problems. Students will
acquire in-depth knowledge of a number of related areas and learn skills
required to integrate information from several disciplines. Students will be
matched to research teams consisting of a faculty and graduate student mentor
within a given research lab. Students will attend weekly summer workshops on
scientific publication, graduate school admissions, and scientific ethics.
Students will also give several oral presentations during the summer and will
return to Boston University in the fall semester to present at the Annual
Undergraduate Research Symposium. Social events designed to integrate students
into the research environment are included. Research stipends, housing and
travel are provided. More information is available from Professor Tom Gilmore,
Director (Tel 607-353-5444, gilmore@bu.edu) or Kate Sutlive, Program Manager
(Tel 617-353-2020, urop@bu.edu), or by visiting http://www.bu.edu/surf.