* 0851678
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Astrophysics, Nuclear and Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* David Cinabro, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2012
* USD 287,291.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award supports an REU site at Wayne State University,
with project opportunities offered at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory,
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, and locally at Wayne State University. The
REU program primarily recruits local students and the program starts with a
preparation phase at Wayne State University involving a one-hour course given
over the winter to student participants. The course introduces the students to
the physical, mathematical and computational concepts relevant for the summer
experience. It includes a computer training homework and an ethics component.
The PI and Co-PI plan/organize the students travel to FNAL and SLAC. The
participants merge with other existing REU programs at each site for social
activities and lectures on various scientific topics. Students are mentored by
PhD researchers working on leading edge physics topics and/or technologies
chosen for good mentorship qualities as well as their leadership in their
respective scientific fields. Students are required to submit a report in the
form of a paper at the end of their experience and deliver oral presentations.
This program will motivate the students to take interest in fundamental physics
and attract them to careers in science and engineering.