* 0851815
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Genetics of Human Facial Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Denise Liberton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 09/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Human facial features are clearly under strong genetic control. Identical twins
often have nearly indistinguishable facial features, and related individuals
show notable familial resemblances. Persons affected with particular Mendelian
conditions have consistently distinctive facial features. Human facial features
also exhibit extensive normal variation throughout the world. Anthropologists
have long been able to use morphometric measures to quantify this variation,
finding many similarities within and differences among populations from around
the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much is known about morphological
variation in facial features among populations, the underlying genes that are
responsible for these traits have yet to be identified. Abundant evidence
suggests that some alleles have strong phenotypic effects on facial morphology,
but very little is currently known about these genes. The aim of this project is
to investigate the relationships among morphological variation of the face,
genetic ancestry and candidate genes in a sample of admixed individuals. Through
a process known as admixture mapping, it is possible to identify genes for
traits which vary between the parental populations that contributed to the
admixed population. To accomplish this, facial variation will be quantified from
three-dimensional images using several morphometric methods and genetic
variation will be measured via a panel of ancestry-informative markers. A list
of candidate genes will be identified from the literature and tested for
signatures of non-neutral evolution. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in these
candidate genes will be tested for effects on facial variation while controlling
for genetic stratification resulting from admixture. The results of these
analyses will be the identification of some of the first genes involved in
normal variation in facial morphology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
evolutionary and anthropological significance of the human face, understanding
normal variation in human facial features is an important direction for future
genetic exploration. Finding genes involved in facial variation can and should
provide new insights into our understanding of modern human variation and
presents a new avenue for investigating the evolution of human facial variation.