* 0851799
* REU Site:  Earth, Wind, and Fire:  Sustainable Energy for the 21st Century
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Larry Erickson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/29/2012
* USD 269,445.00

Proposal: 0851799&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Keith l. Hohn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
three year REU site program at Kansas State University (KSU) will provide
undergraduate students research experiences focused around the theme of
sustainable energy. Specific learning objectives of this program include: 1) to
develop and apply knowledge and skills in the areas of mathematics, science,
engineering, and research methods; 2) to develop an understanding of
sustainability as an applied multidisciplinary field encompassing economics,
science, technology, and the social, political, and ethical issues facing
society; and 3) to develop a recognition of the need for and ability to engage
in life-long learning by increasing the capacity for self-directed learning and
original investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to enhance the hands-on
laboratory research experience, a variety of additional activities have been
incorporated. These include the following: 1) weekly seminars on sustainability
and professional development; 2) weekly brown bag lunches and evening social
activities, various field trips to unique sites such as a wind farm and the
nuclear reactor at KSU; and 3) students will give oral presentations at a
research symposium which will allow them to present their work in a friendly and
supportive environment. Seminars will include topics such as laboratory safety,
laboratory research notebooks, multidisciplinary teamwork, writing a scientific
paper, patents and patent applications, technical presentations, poster
presentations, graduate education and career paths. As part of the professional
development seminars, students will be asked to maintain a journal where they
reflect on their REU experience. At the end of the summer, the participants will
be asked to review their journal entries, and synthesize the materials into a
paper describing how their perspectives, attitudes, and understanding of
sustainability, science and engineering, and research have been impacted by
their participation in the REU program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to
enhance diversity, the Principal Investigator will recruit undergraduate
students from the Haskell Indian Nations University, other Native American
universities, and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The
research conducted by the REU students under the guidance of their faculty
mentors will advance the state of knowledge in sustainable energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;