* 0851892
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Astronomy at the Maria Mitchell Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Michael West, Nantucket Maria Mitchell Association
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2014
* USD 347,750.00

Under this award, Dr. Vladimir Strelnitski (Maria Mitchell Observatory, MMO)
will continue to provide an REU site for performing professionally guided,
3-month summer research in astronomy and astrophysics at the Maria Mitchell
Observatory. The scope of the student research projects will be broad, including
the continuing monitoring of the unique "lasing star" in optical and radio
domains (team project); broad photometrical, spectral and polarimetrical studies
of UX Ori-type stars; monitoring of blazers; studies of exoplanets; studies of
methanol and other masers in star forming regions; theoretical study of possible
stellar lasers; observational and theoretical studies of supersonic turbulence
in star forming regions. All of the optical monitoring projects will be
accomplished using the two new MMO telescopes funded by the NSF. Other types of
observations will be done with other national astronomical
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extensive follow-up study shows that the
MMO/REU experience crucially influences the career choices for many students.
Most of them, after graduation, continue onto graduate school in astronomy or
physics, and more than a half of them eventually receive their doctorate. An
active search for young talented people, with an emphasis on underrepresented
groups, women in particular, teaching them how to do research and how to convey
their knowledge to peer colleagues and to the public at large, helps create a
national pool of educated, experienced and highly motivated professionals. This
REU Site will provide such formative experiences to at least 30 young talented
people during the 5 years of awarded support.