* 0851841
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Computer Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2013
* USD 352,400.00

This project is a continuation of a Research Experience for Undergraduates site
in Computer Vision which has operated successfully at the University of Central
Florida for the past twenty-one years. Approximately two hundred and ten
undergraduate students from forty-three institutions all over the country have
participated in this program over the years. The research focus area is Computer
Vision. The current proposal is to have 10 participants per year, for three
years. Each year, students will participate in a 12-week duration full-time
Summer program. From lessons learned in prior years, the proposed model includes
round-the-clock mentoring by a team that includes a professor, and a post-
doctoral fellow or a graduate student; a streamlined short course that lets
participants start their research projects sooner; and daily meetings with
mentors to plan activities throughout the day. Participants take the short
course, match themselves to a project topic that they most desire, and spend
sufficient time in focused research. They then can opt for follow-through over
the year by working with the professors to write a technical report on their
project, to prepare for the GREs and to apply to graduate programs. In past
years, a substantial fraction of our REU participants have been able to prepare
a paper for submission to a refereed conference, have the paper accepted and
then attend the conference to present the paper. The site is Co-funded by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Development of new
algorithms for solving scientific problems in learning scene models, super-
resolution enhancement, object detection, tracking, activity and event
recognition. Both theory and practice is involved with an interest in
mathematical modeling and analysis of difficult vision problems and developing
algorithms, while at the same time building real systems for demonstrating those
solutions in real life situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to preparing a work force of
young scientists in order to maintain America's previously-held strategic
position of command in Science and Engineering. Participants will be trained in
Computer Vision, in particular they will learn fundamentals of image science and
vision, which plays an important role in security/surveillance, gaming,
entertainment, healthcare, defense, and manufacturing. Through this project we
will able to provide opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduates, many
from predominantly undergraduate institutions, to spend a summer with a highly
successful research group. This model for REU will be disseminated among other
Schools.