* 0851663
* Vorticity and Thermodynamic Budgets in Easterly Waves -- PREDICT Participation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Raymond, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 329,150.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology will participate in the planning, field, and
data analysis phases of the PREDICT (PRE-Depression Investigation of Cloud-
systems in the Tropics) project. This field project will use the NSF/National
Center for Atmospheric Research high altitude research aircraft to deploy
dropsondes and make various other measurements in easterly waves and other pre-
cyclone disturbances in the central and western Atlantic as well as the
Caribbean, in order to understand better the development of tropical cyclones
out of these disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of a tropical
cyclone involves the spinup of a circulation at low levels in the atmosphere.
This spinup results (mainly) from the imbalance between the inflow of absolute
vorticity in the development region, which tends to spin up the system, and
surface friction, which tends to spin it down. In this project we focus
particularly on the factors which favor or disfavor the import of absolute
vorticity. Mass convergence at low levels is a primary factor governing the
vorticity inflow. This in turn is related to the moisture convergence and the
net rainfall (rain minus surface evaporation). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work
has helped elucidate the factors controlling the rainfall over tropical oceans.
An extremely important factor is the saturation fraction of the tropical
troposphere, defined as the precipitable water divided by the saturated
precipitable water. The moist entropy budget of the target region controls the
saturation fraction, and this will be derived from the dropsonde observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third factor in tropical cyclone formation is the shape
of the virtual temperature profile, with cooler temperatures in the lower
troposphere and warmer temperatures at higher levels favoring stronger
precipitation. This structure is controlled by quasi-balanced dynamics even at
low latitudes, and also will be derived from the dropsonde
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project will explain
how deep atmospheric convection interacts with the ubiquitous easterly waves of
tropical, oceanic regions, and in what circumstances these waves amplify into
tropical cyclones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will help
isolate those processes which need to be accurately represented in treatments of
deep convection in large-scale numerical atmospheric models. Significant
progress toward the goal of accurately representing convection in these models
will be made as a result of observational programs such as PREDICT.