* 0851646
* REU Site:   Undergraduate Research Program in Wireless Ad hoc Networks and Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Loretta Moore, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2012
* USD 319,989.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site in the
Department of Computer Science at Jackson State University (JSU) provides
research experience for students in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks and Sensor
Networks. This department at JSU produces one of the largest groups of African-
Americans with computer science BS and MS degrees in the US. This project is one
of the few REU programs in Computer Science located at a US Historically Black
College and University (HBCU). JSU invites ten highly-talented students who have
completed their sophomore year in Computer Science or other closely related
field each year. These student participants reside on the JSU campus, spend a
minimum of 40 hours per week on research and other related activities for a 10
week period. Students are trained to conduct both individual and collaborative
research in a common laboratory. They are mentored in groups and individually by
a well coordinated group of computer science and computer engineering faculty
members, graduate students, and visiting scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research projects are on advanced
state-of-the-art research areas in wireless networks. The proposed projects are
designed to spark the student?s interest in research. Student participants learn
the basics of conducting research such as literature search, problem
formulation, algorithm design and analysis, performance modeling, and
simulations. Students are also actively trained in communication skills through
a seminar series and by preparing and delivering a talk, writing a paper (in
standard ACM format) and presenting a poster on their work at the conclusion of
the summer program. Student participants are strongly encouraged to publish
their work in regional, national and international conferences and journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The REU site mainly recruits
underrepresented women and minority African-American student participants from
HBCUs and instruction-oriented institutions. Thus, the REU site encourages and
motivates a student population that would otherwise have limited opportunities
to participate in research during undergraduate studies. JSU prepares a cohort
of undergraduates with skills necessary to pursue a successful research career.
In addition to working on specific research projects with faculty mentors,
students take a series of weekly seminars to help them to apply to graduate
school, understand the advantages of having a graduate degree, and realize the
wide range of career opportunities available for MS/PhD graduates in Computer
Science and related disciplines. The REU students return to their home
institutions with research experience and knowledge, and they are strongly
encouraged to stay in touch with their research mentors and continue to do
research work under the supervision of instructors at their home institutions.
This REU program provides a model for a successful undergraduate research
program that can be developed at other institutions.