* 0851704
* Combinatorial Voting
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2014
* David Ahn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 391,514.00

Many elections decide multiple issues simultaneously with a single ballot. The
desirability of certain issues depends on how others are resolved: a typical
California ballot includes spending initiatives, bond measures, and tax
propositions which jointly impact the fiscal positions of state and local
governments. With such nonseparabilities, strategic voting over multiple issues
introduces subtle considerations absent from single-issue elections. For
example, a voter might support a school bond measure only if a proposition to
increase the sales tax is also approved to mitigate the fiscal burden of
financing the bond. Then, in deciding her vote on the bond measure, she should
consider the probability of the complementary tax increase being approved.
Moreover, since her vote on the bond measure matters only if she is pivotal, she
should condition the likelihood of the tax increase under the assumption that
the other voters have split equally on the bond measure.

This project commences the equilibrium analysis of elections with interdependent
issues. Existing models of strategic voting either consider a single issue or
assume that preferences are separable across issues. For the more general
environments considered in this proposal, the following fundamental questions
regarding strategic voting are yet unresolved: Does a voting equilibrium exist?
How is this equilibrium characterized? How does it behave as the electorate
becomes large? How efficient is this equilibrium? The researchers study these
questions in a voting environment with uncertainty, modeled as a Bayesian game.
The project seeks to compare the expected efficiency of different mechanisms for
these environments. For example, voting sequentially over issues one at a time
progressively resolves uncertainty and may improve expected welfare. Second, the
project aims to understand interdependent values and information aggregation
with multiple issues. In particular, if each voter receives a noisy signal
regarding the common values of different combinations, will the most desired
bundle pass almost surely as the electorate (hence the amount of information)
becomes large?

Broader impacts. Twenty-four American states and numerous localities use
referenda to decide an array of propositions, ranging from property taxes to
affirmative action. Any progress towards institutional improvements in referenda
could yield large social benefits. The popularization of direct democracy
presents voters with an ever-increasing number of issues, along with the
accompanying multiplication in the number of potential interdependencies. This
project seeks to understand the strategic effects of nonseparabilities on
voting, and their consequent impact on outcomes and welfare.