* 0851724
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: The Bacchus Effect: A Mechanism to Explain Risky Choice Under Intoxication
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Julie Downs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2010
* USD 25,094.00

Alcohol use is associated with risky behaviors, such as reckless driving, binge
eating, and unprotected sex. In addition to the negative health effects of these
behaviors, such as sexually transmitted diseases and obesity, there are
significant economic costs to society of such risky behavior. For example, drunk
driving costs the American public over 100 billion dollars annually, including
monetary costs and lost quality of life, with the majority of this cost borne by
people other than the drunk driver. Beyond health and financial costs, there are
also costs to emotional well-being, such as the regret, guilt or shame felt
after drunken behavior. If we want to prevent or reduce these negative outcomes
by targeting alcohol use, we must understand alcohol?s role in risky
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wisdom holds that alcohol blinds
people to the risks around them, and many millions of tax dollars have been
spent to create educational programs based on this premise. The scientific
evidence, however, does not unambiguously support the conventional view. Some
research has shown that people are no less able to understand risk information
when they are drunk than when they are sober and people may even seek out or
find some intrinsic value in risk when drunk. If the conventional model is
wrong, then many existing curricula waste time and money, and may even risk the
lives of those who believe that such strategies will help them to avoid negative
situations, and thus fail to take more effective precautions. This research
project tests an alternative model of the mechanism by which alcohol affects
risky decisions, focusing on emotional and motivational processes involved when
people consider both the risks and the benefits of different situations when
they are drunk versus when they are sober. We explore several different kinds of
behaviors that are commonly linked to alcohol use, including sexual behavior,
food choices, and interpersonal negotiation. If our results show that alcohol
leads to risky behavior by changing how much people want an attractive option,
rather than affecting people?s ability to understand the risks associated with
that option, then we would recommend that educational programs switch from
highlighting risks to a new focus on undermining benefits.&lt;br/&gt;