* 0851912
* REU SITE: Engagement of Undergraduates in Theory, Algorithm & Applications of Science and Engineering in Information Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2013
* Kami Makki, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* John Reppy
* 01/31/2013
* USD 314,997.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduate Site at the University of Toledo
provides a unique opportunity for 10 undergraduate students to perform
supervised research and obtain rich experiences in a diverse and multicultural
environment. In this program, each student carries out an independent research
project under the close guidance of a faculty mentor during 10 weeks of summer.

The research projects cover a wide range of research topics in the field of
Information technology such as computational algorithms, software engineering,
architecture, graphics, optimization, information security, image processing and
multimedia. Supervised research experience has been shown to motivate students
and encourage higher levels of academic achievement leading to increased
retention and graduation for undergraduate students, especially for
underrepresented minorities. The participants are also strongly encouraged to
present their research at regional and national scientific meetings. In addition
to gaining research experience, students will participate in other activities
designed to promote other skills such as communication skills, technical writing
skills, as well as presentation skills. This program will also expose
participants to the possibility of graduate study and encourage them to choose
this step in their career paths, which will increase their employment
prospective. The end result will be a strong set of graduates who can satisfy at
least some of the needs for Engineering and IT professionals in research and
industry. The undergraduate participants in this program will be recruited
nationwide, particularly from minority-serving and other small colleges. Also,
underrepresented groups, including minorities and students from small colleges
and universities with little research opportunities are strongly encouraged to
apply.

