* 0851735
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research Experiences in Cellular and Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* David Hackney, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2013
* USD 415,263.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Carnegie Mellon University REU Site for Undergraduate
Research Experiences in Cellular and Molecular Biosciences will provide a
research program for undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2012. Ten
students will be selected each year to participate in an intensive 10-week
research program in the areas of molecular biology and genetics, cell and
developmental biology, biochemistry, biophysics, structural biology, and
computational biology and bioinformatics. Students targeted for participation
include rising juniors or seniors from small colleges and universities that do
not have extensive research programs, and students from groups underrepresented
in the sciences. The core of the program is the opportunity to carry out an
individual research project, tailored to students' interest. The program
includes faculty research talks, presentations and discussions by students of
articles from the scientific literature, presentations on career options and
scientific ethics, and a concluding symposium in which all students give formal
talks about their research. Students are encouraged to consider careers in
biological research, and are taught experimental, communication, ethical, and
critical thinking skills needed for success. Mellon Institute and other
university facilities provide all necessary resources for conducting research,
and an abundance of professional and social events immerse REU participants into
the Carnegie Mellon experience. REU students are provided with a stipend,
housing, a meal allowance, and funds for travel to and from Carnegie Mellon
University. Additional information can be found at
http://www.cmu.edu/bio/undergraduate/research/SURP/reu.shtml, or by contacting
Emily Stark at vestark@andrew.cmu.edu (412-268-6181) or the Program Director,
David Hackney, at ddh@andrew.cmu.edu (412-268-3244).