* 0851153
* Testing the Effects of Professional Grassroots Lobbying Campaigns on Civic and Political Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Edward Walker, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2010
* USD 74,507.00

SES-0851153&lt;br/&gt;Edward T. Walker&lt;br/&gt;University of
Vermont&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How has the civic and political participation of
American citizens been changed by the growth of paid efforts to lobby the
public? No study to date has examined systematically how professional lobbying
of the public is changing participation. This project will help to overcome this
limitation by studying the activities of Professional Grassroots Lobbying Firms
(PGLFs), which are organizations that, for a fee, use communications
technologies to subsidize public participation on issues of interest to
businesses, trade associations, interest groups, political parties, and
government agencies. These organizations help to lower the perceived costs of
participation by, for example, providing targeted activists with a ready-made
message that could be easily sent to one?s local, state, and/or federal-level
representatives. Through a systematic survey of N=233 PGLFs (each asked about
ten recent campaigns over eight years, allowing for analyses of 2,330 firm-
campaigns), follow-up interviews, and analyses that tie the survey results to
state-level civic and political data, the intellectual merit of the proposed
study is to greatly expand our understanding of the effects of paid,
professional mobilization of the public. The study asks three major research
questions: (1) Do the campaigns of PGLFs exacerbate participatory inequalities
by subsidizing the participation of those that are already overrepresented in
the political system? (2) Do these campaigns further political polarization and
reduce citizens? social capital? (3) How effective are these campaigns in
shaping public participation and, ultimately, legislative decision-making?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three broader impacts of the study. First, this
research will help to bring rigorous social scientific data to bear on the
theory that public life is becoming increasingly privatized. Second, it will
analyze the unique survey responses from sampled PGLFs, in conjunction with
external data sources, using innovative panel models. Finally, the results of
the research will hold great potential for informing policy through
understanding how professional mobilization either augments or mitigates
participatory inequalities as well as the political power of the firms?
institutional clients.