* 0851880
* REU Site:  Collaborative Chemistry Research at the University of Memphis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Abby Parrill, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 220,300.00

The University of Memphis Chemistry REU site, Collaborative Research in
Chemistry, will provide a ten-week intensive research experience for eight
undergraduate students each summer. The research projects focus on collaborative
research in chemistry, involving the synthesis and characterization of
materials. The focus on collaborative research builds on existing collaborations
between departmental faculty members, as well as with other institutions and
industrial collaborators. This focus will provide students with a realistic
picture of the growing reality of scientific partnerships, rather than
individual efforts. Participant recruiting efforts will focus on the state of
Tennessee and directly neighboring states due to a scarcity of chemistry REU
sites in this area, as well as prior experience indicating that over 50% of our
previous participants derive from this region. An important addition to our
current recruiting plan is a partnership with chemistry faculty at regional
historically black colleges and universities (HBCU) who will nominate minority
students who may not have previous exposure to research careers in an effort to
provide valuable research experience opportunities to this underserved
population. The main focus of the program is a ten-week intensive research
experience complemented with social activities, industrial site visits, and
weekly one-hour sessions devoted to research support skills, such as literature
searching, critical reading of the scientific literature, writing, scientific
ethics, and presentation skills.&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merits of the
program include contributions to diverse sub-disciplines of chemistry. REU
participants will synthesize materials with various properties and potential
applications. Results from the proposed projects will be disseminated through
publications and presentations. Travel funds for REU participants will promote
presentations at national and regional meetings during the year following their
research experience. This REU site will broadly impact training in chemistry,
participation of underrepresented minorities in chemical research, and will
promote partnerships between the University of Memphis and regional HBCU
institutions.