* 0851671
* REU Site: Collaborative research: International REU Program in Smart Structures
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Juan Caicedo, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 04/30/2013
* USD 107,683.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ten-week collaborative international REU site program
will establish a Smart Structures Undergraduate Research Collaboratory where
students at the Universities of Akron, South Carolina, and Connecticut will
partner with the Korean Advance Institute for Science and Technology (KAIST) to
gain access to world class facilities in Smart Structures and by doing so this
will enhance the scope of the undergraduate research. A challenge faced by the
Smart Structures community is the fact that structures vary in different
geographical regions due to local building practices, availability of materials
and dynamic loads likely to be experienced in the region. Ideal Smart Structure
solutions should be universal in order to achieve the desired performance for
various structures in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing structural
damage due to natural and made-made hazards in is vital to the safety and
economic viability of society. Smart Structures which are those structures that
can sense their environment and react accordingly, can provide more resilient
designs, more effective construction, and extend overall the safe life of our
built infrastructure. This collaborative project will further advance research
on universal solutions in Smart Structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
will engage six undergraduate students over ten weeks in these research
activities: 1) formal training in structural dynamics, health monitoring and
control; 2) experience conducting laboratory experiments in Smart Structures; 3)
travel to KAIST in South Korea to experience international collaboration and
gain access to world class facilities in Smart Structures; and 4) participate in
site visits and cultural events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will focus
recruitment efforts on students from underrepresented groups at minority
institutions. Undergraduate students will work directly with U.S. and Korean
graduate students gaining valuable insight about research and graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;