* 0851837
* REU Site: Practices and Perspectives
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Suzanne Ruder, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2012
* USD 228,756.00

This award by the Chemistry Division supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Virginia Commonwealth University for the summers of
2009-2011. The program director is Suzanne Ruder who is assisted by co-PI Sally
Hunnicutt. Eight students will participate in the REU program that begins with a
three-day training period teaching basic skills common to all scientific
research, and developing the perspectives and career planning components. Full-
time research begins after this three-day period. Development of the
perspectives component continues with regular meetings and presentations from
faculty and from local industrial collaborators. The students' oral and written
communication skills are developed throughout the program by completing a
written proposal, revising their personal statements submitted as part of their
application and preparing and presenting a poster of their work at the halfway
point and an oral presentation for the final symposium. Written reports of the
students research results are also submitted at the conclusion of the program.
Student participants are encouraged to present their research results at their
home institutions and/or at local high schools to encourage other students to
develop research interests. Students are also encouraged to present their work
at a professional meeting such as an ACS regional or national meeting.