* 0851630
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research on Aging at Washington
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Mitchell Sommers, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2010
* USD 62,539.00

Interdisciplinary Research on Aging at Washington University was developed to
extend meaningful research opportunities in aging to talented undergraduates.
This proposal was developed out of the belief that, commensurate with its
history of outstanding research in aging, Washington University should take a
leading role in promoting and developing careers in aging for talented
undergraduates by providing them an opportunity to gain access to and experience
with issues in aging. The proposal calls for recruiting 10 undergraduate
participants for an 8-week summer program at Washington University designed to
provide research experience and instruction in a diverse set of areas related to
aging. The activities will fall into three categories. First, the majority
(80-85%) of the student's time will be spent with their mentor in the laboratory
setting. Researchers in the fields of psychology, biology, social work, civil
engineering, and graphic design will serve as mentors. The students will work on
a hands-on project during the eight-week session and present their project with
their mentor during a research symposium the final week of the program. Second,
the remaining 15-20 % time will be spent in seminar sessions, informal
discussion sessions, lab tours, and brown bag "lunch and learn" ethics in
science sessions. Third, the students will have the opportunity to participate
together in social outings outside of the training program, including a St.
Louis Cardinal's ballgame, a botanical garden tour, and an overnight retreat.

Intellectual Merit. Most undergraduates have limited opportunities to gain
information about, and experience with, current issues in aging. The proposed
REU site in aging has been designed to address this problem by providing an
opportunity for extensive collaboration between an established investigator in
aging and students interested in one or more aspects of the discipline. We have
developed the program to be multifaceted so that participants will increase
their familiarity with the extant literature, gain general research skills,
obtain experience with investigations in aging, and understand some of the
ethical considerations specific to aging research. An important aspect of this
application is developing an appreciation for the multidisciplinary nature of
aging research in the next generation of aging investigators. We also view the
establishment of an REU site administered through the Center for Aging as an
opportunity to complement many of the ongoing activities in WUCFA. For example,
an undergraduate research program in aging will encourage even greater
interaction among WUCFA faculty and has the potential to facilitate
collaboration in developing new research projects related to aging.

Broader Impacts. The proposed REU site will have a number of broader impacts for
the participants, faculty, WUCFA, and Washington University. First, the
intensive collaboration between faculty and participants provides an ideal model
for integrating discovery and teaching. By contributing to state-of-the-art
research projects, REU participants and faculty will have the opportunity to
make important contributions to different fields of aging. At the same time,
faculty will provide intellectual and professional role models for participants
and thereby encourage and support the next generation of researchers in aging.
In this regard, an important aspect of the current proposal is the fostering of
long-term relationships between mentors and participants. We have therefore
included a number of components, such as a provision to provide support for
participants to attend conferences and a long-term follow-up plan, as critical
elements in maintaining strong professional relationships between mentors and
participants.

Second, a strong emphasis will be placed on recruiting underrepresented groups
and individuals with limited opportunities to conduct research. Thus, the
proposed REU site will attract highly capable minority students and other
individuals who would not typically have an opportunity to enter the field of
aging. With the average age of the population increasing for the foreseeable
future, the ability to provide opportunities for gifted students with limited
research opportunities to enter the field is essential to optimize research
leading to productive and healthy aging. Moreover, attracting highly qualified
individuals from underrepresented groups will serve to strengthen already strong
ties between WUCFA and underserved groups within the community.