* 0851703
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Nanomaterials and Nanoscience at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jeffrey Shield, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2013
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new REU Site at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) offers a ten-week summer research program for
undergraduate students in the area of functional nanomaterials and
nanostructures and makes use of the facilities of the Nebraska Center for
Materials and Nanoscience. Research projects are focused on the synthesis and
study of nanoclusters, nanoparticles and nanowires that have potential
applications in biomedicine and solar energy conversion, as sensors and
catalysts and involve faculty mentors from chemistry, engineering and physics.
The program is designed to expose students to multidisciplinary research,
impacts of science and technology on society and provide a sense of how broad
education is important for a scientific career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program targets students from primarily undergraduate institutions and will
train 30 students over three years. Minority recruitment and fostering of
professional skills needed for REU participants to become independent
researchers are among the stated goals of this program. Students will work on
well-defined, challenging individual projects and will participate in
professional development activities such as training to improve communication
skills, instruction in instrumentation, introduction to entrepreneurship and
technology transfer, Graduate Record Exam preparation, and research symposia.
REU participants are also encouraged to present their research at professional
society meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site program is funded by the
Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.