* 0851094
* Collaborative Research:   Structural, Functional, and Ecological Characterization of the Prochlorococus Carboxysome, the Ocean's Primary Molecular Module for Carbon Fixation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Cheryl Kerfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2014
* USD 498,113.00

The cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus is profoundly important to the global carbon
cycle and the ocean's food web, since Prochlorococcus numerically dominates the
oligotrophic oceans and contributes an estimated 50% or more to marine primary
production in certain regions. Prochlorococcus carries out the first step of
carbon dioxide fixation in a specialized organelle called the carboxysome.
Carboxysomes are self-assembling metabolic modules, composed entirely of
protein. Although the polyhedral shape of carboxysomes has been well documented
by electron microscopy, their protein composition is known for only a few non-
photosynthetic model organisms. Structural studies that address the relationship
between carboxysome architecture, which appears to differ among high and low-
light adapted Prochlorococcus strains, and its role in enhancing the catalytic
efficiency of the carbon dioxide-fixing enzyme (RubisCO) that it encapsulates,
have only recently been initiated. We will focus on two Prochlorococcus model
strains, MIT9313 and MED4, which represent important ecotypes that have distinct
physiological characteristics and ecological distributions. Our preliminary data
suggest that MIT9313 and MED4 have evolved key structural and compositional
differences in their carboxysomes, and these differences are expected to impact
carboxysome function and thus, the carbon fixation capabilities of these
strains. In order to achieve an integrative understanding of the role played by
carboxysomes in carbon metabolism in these Prochlorococcus strains, we are
combining biochemical, biophysical and genetic approaches to analyze
interactions between carboxysome components and to examine the relationship
between structure and function of individual proteins and of the entire
carboxysome. This includes purification of carboxysomes from both
Prochlorococcus strains, characterization of their specific protein composition,
and the use of recombinant proteins to determine the structures and test the
functions of individual carboxysome gene products. Moreover, these data will be
placed in physiological and ecological contexts via a combination of in vivo
gene and protein expression studies under different environmental conditions and
metagenomic surveying of content and expression of genes involved in carbon
fixation in the open ocean.

Broader Impacts Our research will advance our fundamental understanding of the
mechanisms by which Prochlorococcus concentrates and fixes carbon dioxide in the
oceans. Furthermore, this study will contribute to our knowledge of the
contribution of carboxysomes to optimized carbon fixation by autotrophic
bacteria in the water column. This multi-disciplinary research project will
benefit from the complementary expertise of the PIs in microbial ecology and
physiology, structural biology, biochemistry, molecular biology and
bioinformatics. We expect our study to reveal novel insights into the role of
carboxysome architecture in optimizing carbon dioxide fixation in the open
ocean. This could lead to optimization of or design of other specialized
bacterial organelles to enhance carbon dioxide fixation. Undergraduate students
will be involved in analyzing DNA sequence and expression data from an ocean
survey. The project will provide interdisciplinary training and networking
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students including women and
members of under-represented minorities at the three cooperating institutions.