* 0851756
* DDI: Evolution Of The Face In Mid Pleistocene Homo--3D Surface Analysis Of Development, Integration And Phylogeny
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Katerina Harvati, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2011
* USD 14,520.00

Facial morphology features figure prominently in species identification and
phylogenetic reconstructions of the human fossil record. However, its use
remains controversial, as the evolutionary significance of facial features is
not well-understood. An improved knowledge of the development, integration and
variation of the human face is necessary in order to assess the value of facial
morphology in defining species and its usefulness in phylogenetic
reconstructions. Questions addressed in this study include: Are there
population-specific changes in facial shape during modern human ontogeny? Are
facial traits developmentally integrated in modern humans? How do particular
facial traits vary ontogenetically between individuals and populations of modern
humans, and among Pleistocene hominins? Is the mid-Pleistocene Homo (H.
heidelbergensis s.l.) facial form more variable than that of modern humans? Is
the same true for H. neanderthalensis? Is there a phased time-sequential
development of Neanderthal-like facial traits among European Pleistocene
hominins? Is there a similar trend in Africa? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer
these questions, this study uses a cutting edge semilandmark geometric
morphometric method involving analysis of facial surfaces, rather than just
landmarks, to quantify subtle facial features frequently used to define
Pleistocene taxa. Patterns of adult and ontogenetic variation and co-variation
of these features will be established within recent human geographic samples and
used as a framework for interpreting the Pleistocene hominin fossil record. This
novel approach for the first time enables the rigorous quantitative analysis of
facial morphology and the evaluation of its evolutionary significance. This work
has important implications for the use of facial morphology in assessing the
human fossil record and helps elucidate the evolutionary processes of the later
stages of human evolution and modern human origins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;