* 0851797
* REU Site:  Nanoscale Science Undergraduate Research Experiences (NanoSURE) at UNC Charlotte
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Banita Brown, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2013
* USD 240,200.00

This award by the Division of Chemistry supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte for
the summers of 2009-2011. The site director is Banita Brown who is assisted by
Sherine Obare as co-PI. Eight students will be recruited to conduct individual
nanoscale science research projects or work as part of a research team centered
on interdisciplinary nanoscale science research. Targeted student participants
will range from rising freshmen to rising juniors from the Greater Metropolitan
Charlotte Area as well as from a broader region. Nanoscale science research
faculty from the Departments of Chemistry, Biology, Physics and Optical Science,
or Mechanical Engineering and Engineering Science will provide well defined
projects related to the nanoscale science theme. This project responds to the
national need for developing a suitable nanoscale science workforce. In addition
to the research activities, the REU students will participate in weekly
workshops on various topics including research ethics for physical scientists
and engineers, graduate school preparation, GRE test-taking strategies, and
careers in nanoscale science, as well as attend and conduct mini-seminars
related to recent developments in nanoscale science. The summer will conclude
with an Undergraduate Research Symposium event where the participants will
deliver poster and oral presentations of their research results.