* 0851044
* The Black Carbon Cycle: Budget and Fluxes of Black Carbon in South Atlantic Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Rainer Lohmann, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 392,493.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the
University of Rhode Island will attempt to determine the origin and fluxes of
black carbon (BC) in marine sediments from the South Atlantic. Black carbon in
the atmosphere is a key driver of global climate change; it is second only to
CO2 in its contribution to global warming. The proposed work is thus relevant
and timely for our understanding of the carbon cycle, a key component of our
ability to forecast climate and its change. The major sources of BC on the
global scale are fossil fuel and biomass burning, which are both prominent in
Africa and South America. Hence, it is proposed to account for soot BC, char and
charcoal residing in sediments from the South Atlantic by combining thermal,
chemical and petrographic isolation methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has three main hypotheses: (1) Soot BC constitutes a significant fraction of the
total organic carbon in deep sea sediments of the South Atlantic, and dominates
total BC in those sediments; (2) Biomass burning is the dominant source of the
soot BC present in deep sea sediments of the South Atlantic; and (3) For the
South Atlantic, atmospheric deposition of soot BC is as important as riverine
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study represents a first attempt to account
for BC sinks on an Ocean scale. It thus holds promise to make a major step
forward towards being able to mass balance sources and sinks of BC. Previous
studies suggest that BC reaches the oceans predominantly from riverine sources.
In the case of the South Atlantic, the research team hypothesizes that
atmospheric transport and deposition is at least as important. The proposed
research will compare different BC determination procedures for deep sea
sediments, thereby improving our understanding of the different constituents of
the BC cycle. Similarly, organic marker molecules are often used for source
apportionment. This study will explore if this still holds true for deep sea
sediment samples, as preliminary data found discrepancies arising from molecular
marker analysis and isotopic analysis. Lastly, accounting for soot BC in deep
sea sediments will also aid in identifying more of the uncharacterized
sedimentary OC . &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of this work
are expected to aid atmospheric and earth system science modelers in refining
their atmospheric and oceanic transport models for BC, including its relation to
global climate change. The project will enhance infrastructure for research and
education by establishing research collaboration between URI and international
partners at the University of Bremen, the MPI for Meteorology, Hamburg, and the
University of Tuebingen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;