* 0851548
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Going Green: Conflicts over Ecologically Sensitive Mining in the Ecuadorean Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Charles Hale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2010
* USD 9,226.00

University of Texas graduate student, Teresa A. Velásquez, under the supervision
of Dr. Charles R. Hale, will investigate the local impacts of "green"
development schemes and the reasons why local residents often are divided in
their support. The research will be carried out in Ecuador where Iamgold
Corporation of Canada, with the support of Ecuador's new government, proposes to
build an environmentally and socially responsible gold mine in the Ecuadorian
Andes. Iamgold promises to protect nature and provide jobs and social services
to agrarian families. Rural residents disagree about the benefits of the mine
and conflict has ensued. Three factions have emerged: a group of residents who
support the mine, a second group that opposes the mine, and a third group of
residents who remain ambivalent. The divisions are transforming social
relationships and changing political dynamics in this rural community, making it
an approrpriate site for understanding the local social and political impacts of
sustainable development projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Velásquez hypothesizes
that Iamgold's plans may animate pre-existing community divisions, and transform
them into debates over local support for the mine. She will carry out her
investigation using ethnographic research methods, including participant-
observation, oral history interviews, and family history interviews. These data
will allow her to examine the relationship between access and control over land
and water resources, ideology, and the history of state-community relations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will provide a
conceptual and methodological framework for other researchers interested in
making sense of how communties respond to new development projects.
Additionally, the research will benefit policy analysts interested in promoting
peace in areas of natural resource conflict. The award also supports NSF's goals
of increasing diversity in science by supporting the entrance of women and
Mexican-Americans into social science research.