* 0851288
* RUI: High throughput culturing and ecophysiological analyses of low light adapted Prochlorococcus ecotypes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lisa Moore, University of Southern Maine
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 445,331.00

The marine cyanobacterium, Prochlorococcus, is the smallest yet most abundant
known phototroph on the planet and contributes significantly to primary
production and biogeochemical cycling in the world's open oceans. Since its
first description 20 years ago, this organism has become a well-studied marine
microbe that is being developed as a model system for cross-scale systems
biology. At least 26 isolates have been obtained since 1988, from which two
distinct ecotypes were identified based on the relative photophysiological
characteristics: high-light (HL) adapted and low-light (LL) adapted. More than
80% of the isolates belong to the HL adapted ecotype, which is composed of at
least two distinct phylogenetic clades. The other isolates (6) are considered LL
adapted and are spread among several phylogenetic clades, two of which are
represented by single cultured isolates. Evidence indicates that the two HL
adapted clades likely evolved from differences in temperature optima resulting
in distinct horizontal distributions of their populations. What is not clear are
the phenotypic and/or ecological underpinnings of the different LL adapted
clades and the distributions of these clades in space and time, in large part
because there are so few isolates representing each clade. Thus, despite the
relatively large number of isolates and data on Prochlorococcus, only half the
story, that of the more dominant HL adapted ecotypes, is understood in terms of
the phylogenetic relationships and distributions. This project will study the
physiological characteristics that contribute to the ecology and evolution of
different phylogenetic clades that make up the LL adapted Prochlorococcus
ecotype. This characterization will be achieved through high throughput
culturing and physiological assessment experiments that utilize multi-well
plates for purifying new LL adapted isolates, physiological determinations, and
a 96-well sampling system attached to a flow cytometer.

Broader Impacts: This project will isolate new, axenic cultures with
accompanying ecophysiological and phylogenetic information that could be used by
biological oceanographers, biogeochemical modelers, microbiologists and
evolutionary biologists for further studies of natural population distributions,
physiological mechanisms, genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics of the
world's most abundant phototroph. For instance, the 16S-23S rRNA sequences can
be used to redesign or develop new primers for environmental detection of LL
adapted Prochlorococcus populations and specific ecotypes, which in turn will
enable researchers to begin to understand their ecological role in the deeper
euphotic zone. New Prochlorococcus isolates will be made available to other
researchers as well as deposited in a larger culture collection such as the
Center for the Culture of Marine Phytoplankton. Gene sequences will be deposited
in the public database, GenBank, and the results from this study will provide
information to choose specific strains for further genome sequence analysis. In
addition, this project will also provide research opportunities and financial
support for several undergraduates to carry out research projects, a MS student
in Biology, and the first University of Maine System Cooperative PhD student in
Microbiology at USM.