* 0851194
* REU SITE: Professional Excellence and Development in Science Through Undergraduate Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Graham Peaslee, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 185,540.00

The theme of this REU site proposal is "Professional Excellence and Development
in Science Through Undergraduate Research." Attention will be focused on the
recruitment of underrepresented minority students and students from nearby
2-Year Colleges (2YCs). All REU students will have access to a rigorous research
experience that prepares them to enter into the competitive STEM fields. The
individual student research projects are innovative, have the potential to yield
publications that are transformative in their respective fields, and are quite
capable of being completed by undergraduate students. The students involved in
the research enterprise receive a full complement of experiences in literature
review, hands-on training with modern chemical instrumentation, data analysis,
and in the dissemination of results through group meetings and formal oral and
poster presentations. The specific research projects span a wide range of areas
that include designing electrochemical sensors, using ion-beam analysis
techniques and lasers to study protein structure and protein dynamics, and
designing and synthesizing anticancer agents. The research activities as well as
the professional development activities will be used to help to form a cohesive
community of research scholars equipped with the research skills needed to
investigate current research problems that have local and global
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student activities for professional
development have been refined to better serve the diverse career interests of
students and to provide a broader base of mentors outside of academics via a
Student Advisory Board consisting of professionals from local industry, medical
doctors, and attorneys. The PI and co-PI have learned that the quality of
mentoring, the availability of a diverse set of mentors, and the active building
of professional skills such as public speaking, scientific writing and ethics
discussions, greatly benefit students and help increase retention in the
sciences. This REU experience will have a significant impact on underrepresented
minority students and students at 2YC who do not have research experience
opportunities at their home institution, in addition to enhancing diversity at
Hope College. By providing access to significant professional development
resources within their research cohort experience, students will be encouraged
to pursue careers in the STEM fields.