* 0851599
* REU Site: Laser-Matter Interactions on Atomic and Nanoscales
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Kristan Corwin, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2012
* USD 339,000.00

This award supports the renewal of the REU site at Kansas State University which
will have research opportunities for undergraduates focusing on interactions of
laser light with matter at atomic and nanoscales. The participants will engage
in significant research projects and related experiences during the summer. At
the core of the program are the research projects with mentors from the faculty.
Participants will do research on how atoms and molecules behave in intense and
ultra-fast optical and xray pulses, how scattered laser light reveals the
structure of nanoparticle crystallization and gel formation, and how light
interacts non-linearly in optical fibers; they will develop computer codes for
calculations of atomic interactions in Bose-Einstein condensates and codes for
modeling nanoparticle self-assembly from lattices to gels. This experience will
be supplemented by a small series of lectures that provide the background these
students need to carry out their projects. The participants will gain experience
in explaining their research work to a variety of audiences and will also engage
in reading on and discussion of ethical behavior in science. Social activities,
both organized and spontaneous, will enrich this undergraduate research
experience. This award is supported by the Physics Division and the Division of
Social and Economic Sciences.