* 0851045
* Guerrilla Insurgencies: The International and Domestic Sources of Resource Mobilization and Coercive Bargaining
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Mark Lichbach, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 255,386.00

The principal investigators (PIs) use an innovative theoretical and empirical
study of guerrilla insurgencies from 1980-2007. The theoretical models draw upon
both bargaining theories of war developed by international relations scholars as
well as collective action theories of resource mobilization utilized by
comparative politics scholars. The PIs use the models to analyze how domestic
and international forces influence guerrilla insurgencies across three
sequential stages. In the first stage, the central question is whether a low-
level guerrilla armed conflicts escalate to large-scale civil war. In the second
stage, the analysis focuses on understanding patterns of coercive bargaining
between guerrillas and regimes in which combatants choose different strategies
of armed attacks and negotiations. In this stage the central outcomes of
interest include the duration of the war, the severity and targets of violence,
and the frequency and timing of talks. In the third stage the PIs analyze the
dynamics of how civil wars come to an end via negotiated agreements, military
victories, or de-escalation without any settlements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
each of these three stages, the PIs utilize their theoretical framework that
draws upon IR bargaining theory and collective action theory to explain varying
patterns of behavior. The PIs expect bargaining theory to be especially
important to understanding outcomes resulting from strategic interaction and
joint responses, while collective action theory will be most helpful in modeling
how the actions and choices of individual combatants contribute to the joint
outcomes. They expect international factors to be particularly significant to
the initiation and termination of guerrilla insurgencies, while domestic factors
will be more important to the dynamics of insurgency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
test the hypotheses derived from their theory of wartime bargaining and
collective action, the PIs construct an original data set on a random sample of
guerrilla insurgencies drawn from the population of 173 such insurgencies from
1980-2007. The hypotheses are tested through a series of statistical analyses of
new fine-grained datasets and the results of the project will make important
contributions to basic research on the dynamics of guerrilla insurgencies,
scholarly literatures on bargaining models of conflict and collective action
theory, and develop new datasets that should be of widespread interest to other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition to contributions to basic
research, the findings from this project should be of relevance to policymakers
in the US and abroad who seek timely interventions to manage and control
internal armed conflicts in other states. For example, the findings should help
policymakers to anticipate: (1) when low-level internal conflicts will escalate
to civil wars, (2) when civil wars will lead to humanitarian crises and large-
scale violence against civilian populations, and (3) whether combatants are
likely to be coerced by outside threats and sanctions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;