* 0851486
* Development and Testing of a Coastal Autonomous Profiling and Boundary Layer System (CAPABLE)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Murray Levine, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2012
* USD 884,252.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

CAPABLE (Coastal Autonomous Profiling and Boundary Layer System) development
began three years ago under OTIC funding with a partnership between Oregon State
University?s College of Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences (COAS) and Western
Environmental Technology Laboratories Inc. (WET Labs). This effort was initiated
to design and build the next-generation, multi-parameter oceanographic sensing
system. CAPABLE is equipped with sensors to measure ocean temperature, velocity,
salinity, nitrate content, dissolved oxygen level, suspended particle load, and
chlorophyll concentration. Knowledge of these parameters is critical to
assessing the state of the coastal ecosystem and for monitoring changes due to
natural and anthropogenic forcing. CAPABLE is aimed at fulfilling the need for
autonomous profiling in coastal ocean observatories, including NSF?s Ocean
Observatories Initiative.

The existing CAPABLE system has been tested off Oregon in 50 m of water,
demonstrating ability to cycle up-and-down using the electric winch mounted
inside the X10 AMP, to compensate for surface wave heaving by software control,
to recharge the X10 AMP batteries using an inductive charging system, and to
offload data inductively. However, further engineering refinements and field
testing are needed to make CAPABLE an operational system. The main goals of this
renewal are to 1) demonstrate longer endurance, 2) fully populate and operate
CAPABLE?s multi-parameter sensor suite, and 3) test survivability, profiler
control and near real-time data acquisition in winter-time storm conditions.
These goals will be accomplished by making mechanical and software modifications
to the system. A series of four field tests over two years will be performed off
the Oregon coast.