* 0851077
* Multi-Scale Observational Analyses within the "Marsupial Pouch" of Pre-Depression Tropical Disturbances
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Michael Montgomery, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2012
* USD 615,890.00

The prediction and understanding of tropical cyclogenesis remains one of the
most challenging problems in the atmospheric sciences. A multitude of tropical
disturbances emerge from the West African coast every year near the Cape Verde
islands, but only a few of these develop into tropical depressions, storms, or
hurricanes. To further understanding of these potentially high impact events,
the PRE-Depression Investigation of Cloud-systems in the Tropics (PREDICT) field
experiment will deploy the NSF G-V aircraft in the Atlantic basin to explore
multi-scale interactions that may promote or hinder the development of a
tropical depression vortex. The PREDICT team will coordinate research with
concurrent NASA and NOAA projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on
the synthesis, analysis and interpretation of the observational datasets
obtained by the G-V, NOAA and NASA aircraft. Tropospheric dropwindsonde
observations, radar data, and in situ data at multiple flight levels will offer
a unique dataset for examining the development and growth of tropical cyclone
precursors. By combining data from multiple instruments and platforms, mesoscale
and synoptic scale composites of vorticity, divergence, moisture, and potential
vorticity will be used to diagnose the structure and evolution of disturbances
in the Atlantic. Multiscale analyses of the datasets will be accomplished
through the use of objective and variational techniques that allow for
quantitative study of the structures and budgets of key quantities related to
the primary hypotheses. Multidimensional composites of temperature and humidity
have so far been limited or non-existent in most pre-depression disturbances,
but the G-V aircraft provides an ideal platform for obtaining the measurements
needed to construct these syntheses. The high-resolution vertical structure
obtained from dropsondes and the microwave temperature profiler complements the
significant horizontal coverage of in situ data from the Gulfstream aircraft,
allowing for unique compositing opportunities. The cloud and precipitation radar
data from the G-V and NOAA aircraft will provide unprecedented opportunities for
investigations into the wave-to-vortex transformation process. The research team
will also compare and contrast these results with data obtained from other
hurricanes in different locales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Recent theoretical, logistical, and technological advancements allow for testing
new dynamical/thermodynamical hypotheses on the role of tropical waves,
mesoscale and convective processes in tropical cyclone development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will be in close
collaboration with other principal investigators and students in order to obtain
the maximum synergy between the observational analyses, theoretical
understanding, and numerical modeling and prediction. Successful completion of
this research could result in improved forecasts of tropical cyclones.