* 0851727
* REU Site: Islands of Change
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Thomas McGovern, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,147,782.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of
this collaborative international REU is to engage New York City undergraduates
in cutting-edge investigations of past and present global change through
fieldwork in two very different Atlantic islands combined with intensive
coursework, seminars, and laboratory research at CUNY and the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH). The island research at the core of this project presents
strong contrasts in scale, history, ethnicity, and natural environment which
will provide students with varied and stimulating comparative experiences, but
common themes and processes connect these islands in both past and present.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For the Islands of Change program, a combination of
graduate level course work, intensive lab participation, formal and informal
education on the practice and culture of interdisciplinary science, intensive
seminar visits by international scholars, distance learning, well supervised and
carefully prepared field experiences, will be provided to a diverse group of
undergraduates. This project has a strong commitment to peer-mentoring and hands
on learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Participation in the Islands of Change REU
will provide students with skills and immersive experiences to jump start
careers in science, broaden their understanding of both human and natural
dimensions of rapid global change. This project will reach beyond the student
participants by engaging them in the vital work of communicating scientific
results to the wider public through outreach and education both abroad and in
the Discovery Room at AMNH . The Islands of Change program will work to connect
local and global educational efforts with exciting new field science to provide
lasting benefits to local communities as well as CUNY
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The islands today are faced by challenges
associated with rapid global change- climate change, sea level rise, changes in
plant and animal life, and the social and economic disruptions caused by
dramatic shifts in world economy. They also share histories of external
colonization, local adaptation, human impacts on landscape and resources, and
changing impacts of past global economic connections. These islands are products
of complex historical interactions which affect their potential for future
sustainability and face common twenty first century challenges of educating
citizens and nurturing young scientists with strong social commitment.