* 0851902
* REU Site:   Microbiology in the Post Genome Era
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Susan Faulkner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2013
* USD 302,157.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Virginia Tech REU Site will provide a research program
for undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Ten students will be
selected each year to participate in an intensive 10-week research program in
microbiology. The program will introduce participants to projects using genome-
based technologies as well as focused approaches in analyzing a wide range of
microbiological phenomena. Recruitment will emphasize the inclusion of members
from underrepresented groups, and those at institutions where opportunities for
research are limited. The program will include i) a student-led independent
research project; ii) discussion sessions and seminars given by faculty members
and external speakers; iii) career sessions on gaining admission to a Ph.D.
program and pursuing graduate studies productively; iv) visits to companies and
laboratories that utilize or study microbiological processes; and vi)
presentation of research results by each student in a poster and/or seminar
format at a campus-wide research symposium. During the 2nd and 3rd year of the
program, two high school teachers will participate in all activities and
interact with the REU participants. In addition, the teachers will develop
focused projects applicable for introducing the students to microbiological
phenomena in the classroom. The program provides a stipend, travel to and from
the site, and room and board. Additional information is available from the
Program Director, Dr. Biswarup Mukhopadhyay (e-mail: biswarup@vt.edu, phone: 540
231 8015) or online at http://microbiologyreu-ret.vbi.vt.edu/.