* 0851849
* REU Site Program in Functional Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal: 0851849&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Daniel Schwartz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three year REU site program will engage
nine undergraduate students each year in hands-on-research in the area of
functional materials. In addition, two international participants, from the
Technological Institute of Monterrey, will join the student cohort and will be
supported by the University of Colorado (CU) Chemical and Biological Engineering
Department. The students will pursue fundamental investigations of the synthesis
and characterization of novel materials designed to have specific properties.
Examples include nanocomposites, biomaterials, catalysts, polymers, gels,
ceramics, thin films, and membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key components of
this REU program include a one-day orientation program, a research project
chosen by the student and advised by a faculty member and graduate student or
post-doc, a weekly seminar series, organized social and cultural events designed
to complement the research activities, and a REU Student Poster Competition to
provide feedback on student work, and to recognize exceptional achievement.
Participants will also be encouraged to present a technical paper/poster within
one year after participating in this program at the Annual AIChE meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program aims to encourage students, in particular
women, underrepresented minorities, and students from primarily undergraduate
institutions to go on to graduate school in order to pursue careers in
engineering research. The Co-Principal Investigators have a proactive recruiting
strategy to improve diversity that involves a partnership with the University of
Colorado -Boulder's Multicultural Engineering Program and Summer Multicultural
Access to Research Training Program.