* 0851431
* Undergraduate Summer Research in Seismology - REU Site
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* John Taber, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2013
* USD 401,455.00

The Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS), a consortium of
over 110 research universities and institutions dedicated to monitoring the
Earth and exploring its interior through the collection and distribution of
seismological data, will provide 12 undergraduate students with research
experiences as part of its 9-11 week internship program. Students will have the
opportunity to work with leaders in seismological research, to travel to exotic
sites for fieldwork, and to produce research products worthy of presentation at
large professional conferences. Given the Consortium's distributed nature, the
program employs an approach that blends mature telecommunications technology and
recent research on distance learning to achieve the spirit of a traditional REU
site. The resulting blended REU model will create novel opportunities for
interns to communicate with one another to more fully develop and express their
understanding of the process of research. Students will also receive consistent
professional development throughout the internship, and connect both in person
and via technology to create and maintain a cohort experience while benefiting
from the resources of the IRIS Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU model
has the opportunity to contribute to the growing body of knowledge regarding the
application of telecommunications for distance learning, community building and
the implementation of the skills associated with metacognition. The success,
documentation and dissemination of this model will enable other organizations to
apply geographically distributed resources to the development of their human
capital. Additionally, this project presents an opportunity to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in the study of seismology. IRIS
continues to work closely with minority professional organizations to raise
awareness of the study of seismology as a potential career path. A key mechanism
for achieving this goal lies in creating personal connections between the
program and potential applicants through a lecture&lt;br/&gt;series that targets
students in physics classes at minority serving institutions and features alumni
of the internship program that are advanced PhD
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is co-funded by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.