* 0851984
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Algorithm Design and Analysis for Students in Undergraduate Institutions
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Ping Chen, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2013
* USD 308,288.00

This award provides funding for a new Research Experiences for Undergraduate
site focused on algorithm design and analysis at the University of Houston ?
Downtown. The University of Houston-Downtown has been recognized as a Hispanic
Serving Institution as well as a Minority Serving Institution by the U.S.
Department of Education. The objective of the REU site is to provide talented
undergraduate students genuine research experience and place them into the
pipeline from college to graduate school and scientific-based employment. The
project recruits students locally and nationally from undergraduate institutions
with emphasis on minority and women students. Each year 8 students participate
in on-going research to investigate problems related to algorithm design and
analysis. The students receive10-week intensive training in the research areas
as well as basic research skills including effective literature review,
algorithm design and implementation, experiment setup, result analysis,
technical writing, and presentation. Teamwork and collaboration is emphasized
and encouraged. The mentor team consist of both faculty and industrial experts
to provide students both academic and industry research experience and career
opportunities.

Intellectual merit: The proposed projects represent innovative research on a
level in which undergraduates would not normally participate, and their work
should advance the state of knowledge in the field of algorithm design and
analysis. There is potential for computer science curricula to benefit from the
adoption of class projects and class modules spawned from the research projects.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the project include providing a quality
research experience to undergraduate students, particularly women and students
from underrepresented groups. The participating faculty members are committed to
including under-represented minority students in their research. Thus this
project has the potential to produce new computer science graduate students and
faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding while promoting
learning.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).