* 0851156
* Processes Controlling the Release of Iron from Continental Margin Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Martial Taillefert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2012
* USD 491,111.00

Iron is a limiting nutrient, and it is generally accepted that the atmosphere
and continental margin sediments are the main source of iron to the oceans.
Interestingly, most investigations have focused on the distribution and
speciation of iron in the water column. The flux of iron from sediments has only
been sparsely measured and only in upwelling zones because of the likelihood
that these environments provide a source of iron to surface waters. To establish
whether the flux of iron from sediments has important implications for primary
productivity, possibly rivalling atmospheric inputs, it is necessary to
demonstrate that a flux of iron occurs from a variety of continental margin
sediments, including in areas where upwelling is not significant.

In this study, researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology will test
three hypotheses to determine whether the flux of iron from continental margin
sediments is significant: (1) A significant concentration of iron is produced at
the sediment-water interface of continental margins where upwelling is not
important. (2) Soluble organic Fe(III) complexes constitute the most important
fraction of the iron flux. (3) The flux of iron is indirectly regulated by the
organic matter content of the sediment and the intensity of bioturbation which
control the extent of iron and sulfate reduction. To test these hypotheses, the
flux and speciation of dissolved Fe(III) will be quantified across a gradient in
organic content and bioturbation intensity in the sediments of the Carolina
depocenter using in situ measurements and state-of-the-art voltammetric
techniques. In addition, the biogeochemical processes regulating the flux of
iron across the sediment-water interface will be determined using in situ
measurements and sediment incubations. This study will assess the importance of
the iron flux from continental margin sediments exposed to fully oxygenated
waters in zones where upwelling is not significant. Studying these processes in
sediments of different organic composition and bioturbation intensity will
demonstrate what geochemical conditions induce a flux of iron.

Broader Impacts: This study will potentially modify the underlying paradigm that
upwelling and low oxygen levels are required to generate an iron flux to the
overlying waters and establish whether continental margin sediments should be
considered an important source of iron, possibly rivaling atmospheric inputs to
fuel primary productivity in the open ocean. This study will also expand our
previous work and provide capability for autonomous deep-sea in situ profiling
of most terminal electron acceptors and reduced metabolites at a relatively low
cost. This instrumentation will be compact and adaptable to any benthic lander,
such that deployments in deep-sea sediments on cruises of opportunities could be
performed. In situ measurements become a necessary component of oceanographic
research, and two Ph.D. students will develop expertise in state-of-the-art
voltammetric technology, in situ deployments, and kinetic modeling. Finally,
this project will have an important educational component with efforts to
integrate undergraduate engineers and scientists in oceanographic research,
provide research experience to a teacher every summer and give her the
opportunity to bring a new prospective into the classroom, and continue taking
up to 20 students to sea each year.