* 0851285
* Experimentation in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* James Druckman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2010
* USD 94,949.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise of randomized experiments is
one of the most notable methodological developments in political science over
the past decade. Scholars from every subfield now regularly turn to experiments.
The recent penchant for experimentation means that political scientists face a
variety of distinct challenges. The design, implementation, and analysis of
experiments raise a number of issues that political scientists are not
historically accustomed to addressing. This is particularly the case for
political science due to the breadth of the discipline, the varying contexts in
which experiments are implemented (e.g., laboratory, survey, field), and the
distinct methods employed (e.g., psychological or economic approaches to
experimentation).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to ensure that the discipline
maximizes its return on experimental methodology, this project supports a
unifying conference, "Experimentation in Political Science" and the publication
of the first Handbook of Experimental Political Science that will contain the
papers from the conference. The conference and volume include contributions from
more than twenty-five leading political scientists. The basic goals of the
conference and volume are to situate experiments in the broader discipline, to
present important methodological issues, and to review the contributions of
prominent experimental research. The volume serves as a reference for both
teaching and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important contribution will
involve student involvement in the conference. Graduate students from around the
country will attend the conference and participate in a mentoring program with
the faculty attendees. This provides students with a solid basis for pursuing
future experimental research. The project ensures that political science
experiments approach the highest level of intellectual rigor, thereby enabling
political scientists to make substantial contributions to policy-makers in the
usage and interpretation of experiments (e.g., in the evaluations of social
programs, policies, institutions, and mass
communications).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;