* 0851602
* Field Experiments on the Provision of Incentives for Blood Donation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Mario Macis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 192,587.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Securing a high and stable supply of
blood and blood components is indispensable not only to face emergencies such as
accidents and surgeries, but also to meet the increasing demand for blood for
chronic diseases and certain types of cancer. The over 16 million units of blood
annually collected in the United States, however, are not able to guarantee the
emergence of frequent situations of blood supply shortage. Quite strikingly,
while the majority of the adult population is eligible to supply blood, only 5%
of the eligible population donates. Just like the eligibility requirements to be
a donor do not explain this low donation rate in the population, so a lack of
information on the importance of blood donations and on the frequent situations
of supply shortage is not a plausible explanation, given the widespread ad
campaigns by numerous organizations and public agencies, and the fact that a
large share of individuals have had or will have a blood transfusion. If poor
health conditions and lack of awareness are not plausible causes of the low
level of blood supply, then other explanations, such as high opportunity costs,
low ability to commit and low motivation appear as alternative explanations. If
these causes are relevant, then economic incentives may increase the number and
frequency of donations by the eligible population. While recent empirical
research suggests economic incentives could be effective, several scholars and
observers have argued against offering explicit (e.g. financial) incentives to
stimulate the supply of blood (and it remains illegal for some organizations
such as the American Red Cross to pay for blood). Providing material incentives,
it is argued, would reduce the overall quality of the supplied blood, as it
would attract bad types of donors, and might also crowd out the intrinsic
motivations of people to undertake pro-social activities. The project studies
the impact of material incentives on the quantity, frequency and quality of
blood donation, through a series of field experiments on multiple blood drives,
in collaboration with the North East Ohio Chapter of the American Red Cross. The
project examines: a) whether the provision of material incentives to blood
donors leads to an increase in potential donors and effective units collected;
b) whether the presence of incentives at a given point in time has a habit-
formation effect, whereby individuals repeat their donation even when incentives
are no longer present; c) whether the presence of incentives attracts blood
donors of lower quality; and d) what is the shape of the supply of blood for
different levels of material incentives. The analyses not only focus on the
immediate effects of incentives, but also focus on aggregate effects by
examining whether the presence of incentives at a given location and time
increases the overall donations in a geographical area, or instead incentives
shift donors from drives without incentives to drives with incentives, and
delays donations to later drives in the same locations without incentives. After
accounting for spatial and temporal substitution (and crowding) effects, the
total effect of the incentives in a given site may be substantially smaller or
even negative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the largest and most
comprehensive study to date on incentives for blood donations, and more
generally one of the largest studies of the effects of incentives on the
performance of pro-social behavior and provision of public goods. Through the
use of controlled experiments over a large and representative population, and
the use of promotions similar to the ones already in place, this study offers
results that are both well-identified and generalizable to other contexts. The
current empirical evidence is largely based on laboratory experiments, small-
scale field experiments (or experiments targeted to narrow questions), and
publicly available data sources. This study has the potential to provide more
grounded answers to the effects of incentives on pro-social behavior. The size
and variety of the sample also allows testing a wide series of incentives,
varying in type and size, and will allow testing for habit formation as well as
for substitution effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study helps
design mechanisms to encourage blood donation and reduce the recurrent
situations of shortage, in the US and elsewhere, while at the same time
safeguarding blood quality. The study also informs policy makers, companies and
non-profit organizations on the role of material incentives for the performance
of pro-social activities and the provision of public goods.