* 0851447
* Determining seasonal and interannual controls on air-sea carbon dioxide flux in a highly productive marginal sea
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* James Irish, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2013
* USD 741,910.00

Coastal margins are home to the most productive and dynamic ocean ecosystems and
play a key role in regional and global carbon cycling. However, establishing the
air-sea carbon flux in these settings has been difficult because of gaps in
observational coverage and the ability to assess and model the processes
involved. Scientists from the University of New Hampshire have at their disposal
a unique set of carbon dioxide data from 2004 to present from monthly shipboard
measurements made on the inner, mid, and outer shelf, as well as hourly data
from a moored platform. The field data would be combined with a 3D
circulation/biochemical model to test the hypothesis that the seasonally
stratified Gulf of Maine is a source of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere even
though the area has significant net production of phytoplankton. This research
would provide the first annual and interannual estimates of carbon dioxide flux
that occurs in this region. Results would also lead toward an improved
understanding of seasonal impacts on coastal air-sea exchange and would provide
more information on global climate-sensitive controls including storm-induced
vertical mixing and terrestrial runoff. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader
impacts, results from the study would be linked with data from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration buoys located at other coastal sites of
the United States. Outreach efforts include the design of a ocean carbon module
for the National Science Foundation Globe Carbon Project aimed at a K-12
audience.&lt;br/&gt;