* 0851982
* Understanding how global warming will select for zooxanthellae phenotypes
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Paul Falkowski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2013
* USD 606,694.00

Symbiodinium (= zooxanthellae) is a cosmopolitan dinoflagellate genus of
tropical and subtropical latitudes, and an integral member of coral reef
ecosystems. As the obligate endosymbionts of corals and a variety of other reef
organisms, Symbiodinium is the main contributor to coral reef primary production
by fueling their host's metabolism and growth. In this delicate symbiosis the
symbiont functions as an autotroph, releasing most of its photosynthetic
products as food for their host, while the corals provide protection, a stable
environment, and metabolic waste that the algae use to grow. The fragility of
this relationship has become increasingly apparent in recent years due to rising
ocean temperatures. Coral 'bleaching' events, a process by which corals release
their symbionts in response to stress, are becoming a global environmental
crisis. During this process, Symbiodinium becomes stressed, releasing reactive
oxygen species and losing photosynthetic abilities. Prolonged exposure causes
irreversible damage and expulsion of zooxanthellae from their hosts. Persistent
and recurrent bleaching events can have catastrophic consequences to coral reef
health, resulting in the death of coral colonies and a collapse of trophic
structure. However, some corals appear to withstand these events unharmed, and
laboratory research has shown that some Symbiodinium are tolerant of heat
stress. While recent work has revealed a vast genetic diversity of Symbiodinium
in coral reef ecosystems, how the diversity is related to stress tolerance is
poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to
describe the relationship of Symbiodinium genetic diversity to stress phenotypes
in both free-living and symbiotic strains, and to determine how some strains
tolerate high temperature stress and resist bleaching in their hosts. Another
goal is to find stress-sensitive genotype markers that can be used to evaluate
coral reef health and susceptibility to heat stress. Using a combination of
biophysical, molecular biological and biochemical assays, the PIs propose to
sample the largest number of Symbiodinium strains to date, to experimentally
determine how genotype is related to phenotype diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include advancing Ocean Science
Literacy by educating the general public about coral physiology, and explaining
how anthropogenic activities may impact the health of marine organisms.
Education and outreach activities will be developed through current partnerships
between Rutgers, the Liberty Science Center, and COSEE-West. The research may
also have implications for coral reef management. Finally, results will make
significant contributions to the fundamental understanding of the ecology and
evolution of Symbiodinium.