* 0851796
* REU Site: SENSORS--From Design to Implementation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Caroline Schauer, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal: 0851796&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Caroline L.
Schauer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed three-year renewal REU
site will provide research experiences for ten undergraduate students per year.
The primary focus of the research projects is in the area of sensors and sensor
networks. REU participants will be exposed to the entire exploration process of
creating a viable sensor network for various real life applications. Sensors and
sensor networks have become a significant part of nearly every aspect of our
daily lives by supplying information for numerous applications, such as
medicine, transportation, manufacturing, national security, food safety, and
environmental sustainability. Faculty mentors for this REU program come from
various disciplines, including medicine, as well as materials, chemical,
architectural, mechanical and electrical engineering. Students will work closely
with faculty mentors and their research group on a specific research problem
that falls within the "design to implementation" theme. &lt;br/&gt;The program
provides not only stimulating research opportunities, but it also offers a
variety of additional educational and enrichment activities. These include: 1)
research workshops covering various sensor and network related research topics;
2) technical communication workshops; 3) ethics workshops; 4) field trips to
demonstrate how research findings are transformed into industrial products; and
5) a poster contest and original research white paper exercise. The
undergraduate students will be required to synthesize their knowledge from both
in the lab and workshops by creating a poster and mini-proposal. The posters
will be displayed during the final week's poster session and will be judged by
the faculty and graduate students and a prize will be awarded for the best
poster. The research mini-proposal is similar to the original research section
of the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) application, where the
students develop and original research idea using the skills learned throughout
the intensive ten-week summer program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
accomplish the recruitment goals of the program, the PI will target students who
are juniors (rising seniors) who are in the process of pursuing a science or
engineering undergraduate degree and have not necessarily chosen to go on to
graduate school. This program will encourage underrepresented minority
participants to pursue careers in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
disseminate the project results through presentations in a variety of
international and national meetings (e.g., the American Chemical Society,
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers, and Materials Research Society annual meetings, etc.) and
publications in international and national journals (e.g. Journal of Chemical
Education, Journal of Materials Education, Journal of Engineering Education,
etc.). In addition, all SENSORS-related information will be posted on the
SENSORS website (http://www.mse.drexel.edu/programs/sensors/).&lt;br/&gt;