* 0851084
* Political Networks:  Conference and Infrastructure Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* John Scholz, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 178,236.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to stage a
set of yearly conferences at Harvard University starting in June 2009 to bring
together scholars studying networks in political science. Although network
analysis tools have expanded dramatically in the past decade, most have been
developed outside of political science. The purpose of the conference is to
allow scholars who have been dealing with the unique problems of network
analysis in political science to explore common problems that arise in this
analysis. The participants will include political scientists who struggle with
the complexities of network analysis, believe that the development of network
analysis will contribute significantly to the ability of political science to
analyze critical relationships that fall between individuals and formal
institutions, and believe that current individual efforts will benefit
substantially by creating opportunities to work together on these problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Political science applications offer important theoretical
challenges to network analysis because the specific variables of interest and
approach in political science differ from those in sociology and other fields.
At the same time, the application of network methodology will help to bring
political science more actively into collaboration across these intellectual
communities and help bring important theoretical and infrastructure advances in
both political science and network studies. A conference will increase the pace
of development and spread of innovations, so available approaches (theoretical,
empirical, analytical) will be applied more rapidly to the range of political
science issues that are not readily analyzed with the current emphasis on
individual behavior and formal institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project's broader impacts include the training of at approximately 40 graduate
students and faculty not already trained in network analysis. The conference
will also broaden the dissemination of the most recent advances in network
analysis to a political science audience, to ensure that current analyses of
policies and the political system have these techniques available for studying
the broad range of topics affected by networks or relationships.