* 0851824
* REU Site: Software Language Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Allen Parrish, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2013
* USD 306,111.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site hosts ten students each
year to engage in software language engineering research for eight weeks in the
summer. This builds research and technical communication skills in the students
through training and practice during the summer program and through experience
at their home institutions. The students also engage in a professional
conference after the summer program concludes. At the beginning of the summer
program the students are provided with orientation and team building exercises
to embolden students to initiate team projects and to engage with the faculty
mentors and their graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Software language engineering is the application of a software engineering
approach to the development, use, and maintenance of software languages.
Specific student projects are involved with the maintenance of multi-language
software systems, the development of pedagogical functional programming
languages, and language constructs and libraries for programming embedded
systems. The PIs have a strong track record of research in this area and have
demonstrated experience in leading undergraduate student
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A principal objective of this
REU Site is the recruitment of a diverse group of talented students. Via a
focused recruitment effort this site engages students from underrepresented
groups and undergraduate institutions in computer science research. During the
recruitment process, the PIs establish contact with faculty and students at
community colleges, undergraduate institutions, women's colleges, and
historically black colleges and universities and give presentations about
opportunities available at the REU site and, more generally, in computer science
research. Once students are accepted for participation in the REU Site, the
faculty mentors and their graduate students guide the participants through
research projects and also encourage them to consider attending graduate school
and remaining active in the computer science research community. After returning
to their home institutions the participants give presentations to their fellow
undergraduate students, further broadening the group of students impacted by the
proposed REU Site. In addition, all participants have the opportunity to attend
a professional conference and to disseminate the results of their research,
either informally through conversations with other attendees, or formally
through an oral or poster presentation.&lt;br/&gt;