* 0851478
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Culture Change, Women, and Diabetes in the United Arab Emirates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Sarah Trainer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Arizona graduate student, Sarah Trainer, with guidance from Dr.
Ivy Pike, will undertake anthropological research on the relationship between
culture change, weight, and disease. Her reseach will be carried out among
Emirati women in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), with a focus on type 2
diabetes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will take a context-driven
approach to understanding how social change can affect biology. She will employ
mixed methods, including focus-groups, structured and semi-structured
interviews, and anthropometric measurements. The goal is to obtain
anthropologically grounded information regarding recent shifts in behavior
related to the emergence of obesity and associated health problems. Particular
areas of interest include how urban women in Dubai cope with local gender role
ideals; the increased availability of non-traditional, "fast" foods; changing
work patterns; evolving ideas about body image, risk, and health; and
conflicting messages about Emirati identity. The meshing of the biological and
cultural is a pivotal aspect of the study and will provide a unique perspective
on obesity and diabetes in the UAE, as well as on the impact of the globalizing
and local processes occurring there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
important because the World Health Organization estimates that by 2030, seventy
percent of all deaths globally will be the result of chronic disease. Many
countries remain ill-equipped to face the social, political, and economic
repercussions of these increases in chronic disease. Although this study focuses
on the local context of these processes, its methods and perspectives can be
used to consider the effects of development-driven changes in other populations
around the world. The research also will contribute to the education of a social
scientist.