* 0851973
* REU Site: Sustainable Energy Alternatives and the Advanced Materials (SEAM)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sylvia Thomas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,991.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 0851973&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Sylvia
Thomas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;The renewal
REU site award will provide research experiences for 10 undergraduate students
each year over a three year period. The students will be engaged in state-of-
the-art interdisciplinary research projects in the fields of solar cell
characterization, developing nanofibrous and nanospherical conducting polymeric
materials for hydrogen storage to be used in mobile applications, renewable
production of hydrocarbon and hydrogen fuel production, organic solar cell
arrays for on-chip application, and solar energy conversion. The primary
emphasis of the program is to encourage talented undergraduate students, in
particular women, minorities, persons with disabilities, and community college
students, to pursue graduate studies in the interdisciplinary STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program provides not only stimulating research
opportunities, but it also offers a seminar series, enrichment activities,
workshops and journal club sessions on ethical and societal research impacts,
graduate education spotlights, and career strategy highlights. Faculty and
graduate student mentors will also be afforded professional development
opportunities. They will attend a mentoring workshop where they will receive
invaluable lessons in skills assessment, providing supportive environments for
underrepresented minorities, and mentoring. This REU program will culminate with
a Research Summer Fest, where students will participate in a poster session and
conduct oral presentations. All REU participants will be encouraged to submit
research abstracts and papers to publications and regional and national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish the recruitment goals
of the program, the Principal Investigator will work closely with minority and
female student organizations, targeted institutions with significant minority
student populations and community colleges. This REU program aims to increase
the number of US advanced degree holders, especially for underrepresented
minorities, females, and an underutilized pool of talent from community
colleges. A long-term study will be conducted to investigate the impact of
undergraduate research participation on the students' careers.