* 0851313
* Collaborative Research: Data Integration for Repository Services in Biodiversity Informatics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Gregory Riccardi, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 483,582.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida State University, University
of Texas at Austin and the University of Kansas are collaborating to create a
distributed information system that integrates image-based morphological data to
improve species and specimen identification. In order to accomplish this, the
project combines three existing information resources including; digital image
repositories (Morphbank), biological collection management systems (Specify) and
ontology management systems (Morphster). The interoperability of these systems
will be leveraged to enable the integration of a wide variety of large and small
repositories of biological information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
creates an economic model that leads to long-term stability. The benefit to the
biodiversity research community will be the increased ease of collection,
organization, management, and sharing of research information and the increased
ease of discovering and re-purposing information from other research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will demonstrate the usefulness of
the approach by coordinating the use of the three projects to create a rich
example of morphological data, based on specimens and images, which will improve
the quality of specimen identifications and provide greater uniformity in the
application of terms from ontologies. The project team will illustrate a
character state data matrix for the 520 southeastern US species of legumes using
specimen metadata in Specify and images in Morphbank. The legacy character and
state descriptions will be incorporated into Morphster ontologies and tied to
image annotations in Morphbank. These annotations will be available to users of
all three systems, so that researchers will be able to find specimens for their
research needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The images and annotations found in
Morphbank (http://www.morphbank.net), the specimen data in Specify
(http://specifysoftware.org), and the ontology browsing capabilities of
Morphster (http://morphster.org) provide valuable resources for educators and
tools for communication between the scientific community and the public. This
project will foster and augment these inherent strengths in collaboration with
the Brogan Museum of Arts and Sciences (Tallahassee, FL). The combined systems
will be valuable tools for those interested in identifying unknown organisms,
including species that are potentially toxic, invasive, endangered, or sensitive
environmental indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;