* 0851569
* REU Site: EXPLORING OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE: DEVELOPMENT AND EFFICACY OF ONLINE LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Thomas Naps, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2012
* USD 261,167.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for a new
Research Experiences for Undergraduate site focused on open-source software
development at the University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh. The objective of the REU
site is to provide talented undergraduate students genuine research experiences
developing and evaluating effective open-source learning systems. The JHAVE
open-source algorithm visualization platform, a highly interactive approach to
online learning in computer science, is the foundation for the open source
explorations. The project recruits students from the 26 institutions in the
University of Wisconsin system, with a focus on recruitment of women. Each year
8 students receive 9 weeks of intensive training in the research areas, support
from peer and faculty mentors, and professional development opportunities. This
award is co-funded by the Office of Cyberinfrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
potential contributions to the field of open-source software development and
learning systems. The project has an excellent faculty leadership team that has
an outstanding track record in the development of algorithm visualization
systems and their effective use within computing education. The topics are
current and of interest to both students and the research community at large and
well suited to undergraduate exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the project include providing a quality research experience to
undergraduate students, particularly women and students from underrepresented
groups. The participating faculty members are committed to including under-
represented minority students in their research. Thus this project has the
potential to produce new computer science graduate students and faculty members
and to advance discovery and understanding while promoting learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;