* 0851200
* Collaborative Research: Robust Predictions In Games With Private Information
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Dirk Bergemann, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 03/31/2013
* USD 234,556.00

In many economic environments the participants do not have the same information
about the relevant aspects of their situation. For example, in a financial
market each investor may have different pieces of information about the
underlying value of an asset or a company. In product markets, each competiting
firm may have private information about its cost structure. In auctions, such as
the wireless spectrum auctions organized by the Federal Communications
Commission or the offshore oil tracts auctioned off by the U.S. Department of
the Interior, the bidders have private information about their valuations and
also some, possibly noisy, information about the valuations of their
competitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The private information of an agent, whether
it is about his/her own valuations or the valuations of the competing agents
will determine the behavior and the strategy of the agent. But in practice, the
theoretical and/or empirical analysts do not have a clear understanding of what
the economic agents know and, in particular, what they do or do not know about
each other. The missing and incomplete information si also highly relevant from
a policy perspective as the supervising or regulatory authority in many markets
face similar informational constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs develop
methods that allow predictions about the behavior of economic agents and the
reulting market allocations in such settings. These predictions are robust to a
large class of private information structures by the agents. They identify
conditions on the nature of the interaction and the market under which it is
possible to make unique predictions about economic behavior. When these
conditions are not met, the PIs establish robust bounds on the distribution of
possible economic outcomes, especially the mean and the variance of the
outcomes. They use these bounds to predict the welfare impact of information
sharing in markets. They also use the bounds to design robust mechanisms, such
as auction and voting methods, that perform well in many information
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an economic theory that
can lead to practical solutions to market and mechanism design problems. It also
provides a theoretical foundation for future work in econometrics aimed at
testing models in situations where the researcher does not know the market's
information structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have broader
impacts for the many different areas of social science that use game theory as a
fundamental tool. In addition, the project has direct implications for antitrust
policy, since whether or not to allow sellers to share information is a question
for price-fixing policy.