* 0851662
* REU Site: A Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP) on Design and Delivery of Polymer-Drug Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Theresa Reineke, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 03/31/2014
* USD 468,580.00

This award continues the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site
program at the macromolecules and Interface Institute, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University. This eleven-week program supports 12
undergraduates for 11 weeks each summer during 2009 to 2011. Faculty and
graduate student mentors drawn from departments of Chemistry, Chemical
Engineering, Physics, and Wood Science and Forest Products will train the REU
students. The program offers interdisciplinary research experience in the areas
that bridge macromolecular materials design, pharmacological applications and
biophysical interactions. Research focus is at the scientific junction of
polymers and life sciences and projects are designed to instill teamwork,
communication, and leadership skills in a cutting-edge research environment.
Students will work on the synthesis of well-defined polymers for drug delivery
systems, characterization of polymer-drug complexes and their properties, and
study of the interactions of these materials with biological cells. Other
activities in the program include leadership workshop for graduate student
mentors, community building retreat for all participants, ethics workshop, short
courses on polymers, drug delivery, and training for technical communication
skills development. The program also offers opportunities for REU participants
to mentor and work with middle school students on science demonstration projects
and take their research to the local community through presentations at a public
event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Division of
Materials Research and Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate of National Science Foundation,&lt;br/&gt;