* 0851709
* REU Site: Mobile Actuator and Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2009,10/31/2012
* YangQuan Chen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 10/31/2012
* USD 282,789.00

&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
renewal of the previously funded REU Site NSF Award No. 0552758. This 10 week
REU Site program in MAS-net (Mobile Actuator Sensor Networks) provides eight
undergraduate students an opportunity to participate in the ongoing research
activities of faculty members in the Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department at Utah State University. This early exposure to research activities
substantially furthers the undergraduates? learning process, significantly
enhances their research experience, actively promotes their interests in MAS-net
related research, and quickly develops their research skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed work is focused on
several MAS-net related techniques and their importance in interesting and
crucial applications of high interest to the student participants. The work
addresses challenging issues in the field of MAS-net using hands-on and
stimulating research projects such as: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Development of
Consensus Algorithms for Coordination of Multiple Robotic Vehicles,
&lt;br/&gt;2. Development of Plume Tracking Algorithms with Networked Mobile
Sensors &lt;br/&gt;3. Development of Design Methods for Swarm Emergent Behaviors
in MAS-net. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site applies an intellectual approach to
encourage REU students in active learning, free and open exchange of ideas, team
spirit, and recognition and rewards for achievements. In addition to the
research, the REU students participate in weekly individual meetings, weekly
research group meetings, bi-weekly REU group meetings, bi-weekly ?expanding your
horizon? seminars, and social events. They learn to assimilate latest research,
assess their own research, present their own work and experimental results,
prepare publications, and prepare for admission to graduate school (GRE
preparation tutorials). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research
directly helps undergraduate students by: &lt;br/&gt;1. Exposing them to the
intellectual excitement involved in research and professional meetings;
&lt;br/&gt;2. Teaching them to think creatively and independently in a ?learn by
doing? research environment; &lt;br/&gt;3. Empowering them with general research
methods, and specific MAS-net skills; &lt;br/&gt;4. Giving them hands-on
experience in real world applications, and teaching them to apply MAS-net
related technologies to real-world problems; &lt;br/&gt;5. Teaching them to
effectively assimilate latest research, critically assess their own research,
cogently present experimental results, and effectively prepare publications; and
&lt;br/&gt;6. Helping them to establish a sense of self-assurance and team-
spirit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research are
to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Attract a diverse student population to the field of MAS-net.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Kindle students? interests in the area of MAS-net. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Increase the number of future professionals in the area of MAS-net.
&lt;br/&gt;4. Stimulate enrollments in graduate studies. &lt;br/&gt;5. Promote
collaborative ties between students? home institutions and USU. &lt;br/&gt;6.
Provide a basis for future cooperative studies and research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At least four of the eight participants are
underrepresented students and at least four students are from other
institutions, recruited from those institutions where research programs are
limited. This active national and regional recruitment plan helps
underrepresented students and students with limited exposure to research to be
acquainted with interesting research projects and to gain confidence in their
pursuit of baccalaureate degrees, in seeking industrial technology related jobs,
and in continuing to advanced degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;