* 0851022
* Comprehensive Approach to Watershed Characterization Focusing on the Source of New York City Water
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Shafiul Chowdhury, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2013
* USD 308,646.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The State University of New York - New
Paltz (SUNY New Paltz) and the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) will sponsor an eight week summer research experience for 12
highly motivated undergraduate students conducting a comprehensive watershed
characterization and management study. This interdisciplinary investigation of
watershed and stream characterization will be focused on the upper Esopus Creek
watershed, which is one of most important drinking water sources of New York
City. The principal objectives of the SUNY New Paltz REU program are to promote
the professional development of our undergraduate students and instill a better
understanding and appreciation for the complexity of watershed characterization
and management. The REU participants, individually and in small groups, will be
mentored by the program's four faculty members on research projects addressing
surface and ground water hydrology, geomorphic assessment, aquatic chemistry,
biogeochemistry (nutrient cycling, hydro-geochemical evolution), and
invertebrate ecology (Benthic Macro Invertebrate-BMI). An integrated watershed
approach will be applied to examine the geological, chemical, hydrological, and
biological controls on hydrologic response variables and ecological communities
within fluvial and riparian ecosystems and their cumulative effects throughout
the watershed. This approach will be applied to identify the areas within a
watershed that most significantly affect water quality and to develop a science-
based Stream Management Plan. GIS technology in this program will be a critical
tool for modeling and visualizing information to develop policy-making decisions
based on the sustainable use of natural resources. This REU project will provide
baseline for ecosystem status that can be utilized to make informed watershed
management decisions throughout the Catskill Region. The interdisciplinary
approach to natural processes used in this program provides opportunities for
students who pursue graduate study and careers in geology, environmental
science, natural resources management and environmental policy.