* 0851718
* REU Site:   University of Maryland Eastern Shore REU in Marine and Estuarine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Joseph Love, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 05/31/2012
* USD 231,521.00

The University of Maryland Eastern Shore REU Site will provide a research
program for undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Eight students,
particularly rising sophomores, will be selected each year to participate in an
intensive 10-week research program in marine and estuarine science. Students
will be offered a broad range of mentorship in disciplines ranging from
environmental chemistry to fish ecology. Students will receive a stipend, free
housing and board at the University and supply money for conducting research
with a faculty mentor. The program is supported with funds from the National
Science Foundation Directorate of Biological Sciences, in partnership with the
Division of Ocean Sciences. In addition to research, weekly workshops will be
conducted to train students in writing a research proposal, analyzing data,
scientific ethics, and various contemporary topics such as global climate
change. The workshops will be led by experts at the University or with NOAA.
Apart from weekly workshops, REU interns will also participate in field trips
involving canoeing along the pristine Pocomoke River, and hiking through an
internationally recognized wetland on the lower eastern shore of Maryland. At
the end of the summer, REU interns will present research they have conducted
with their faculty mentors during a symposium that will be held at the Paul S.
Sarbanes Coastal Ecology Center. Interns will prepare a short report of their
research which will be culminated into a publication of symposium proceedings.
Students with limited opportunities for research, particularly in coastal
systems, and from groups under-represented in science are particularly
encouraged to apply. Additional information on the REU internship can be found
at www.umes.edu/lmrcsc/reu, or by contacting the Project Director, Dr. Paulinus
Chigbu at tel: (410) 621-3034, email: pchigbu@umes.edu, or Project Coordinator,
Dr. Joseph Love at tel: (410) 651-6023 or email: jlove@umes.edu.