* 0851136
* Collaborative Research:  The Effects of Terrorist Threats on Democratic Support in Liberal and Illiberal Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Elizabeth Zechmeister, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 195,508.00

The threat of international terrorism is a salient and growing fixture of modern
times. As a result, citizens are increasingly making political evaluations and
decisions under the specter of terrorist threat. This project examines the
extent to which terrorist threats affect support for democracy and how these
effects vary across type of democracy (liberal versus illiberal) and information
environment (with or without reminders of democratic values). Illiberal
democracies are those in which formal democratic procedures operate, but in
which civil liberties and other democratic provisions are not extensively
protected. Few studies have looked specifically at general threat contexts, most
have not considered terrorist threats specifically, and none explore effects
across different types of democratic and information environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators expect support for democracy to decrease
in illiberal and liberal democracies in the presence of a terror threat absent
contextual reminders of democratic values. However, these shifts are expected to
be more comprehensive in illiberal settings. When reminders of democratic values
are presented, those in liberal societies are expected to maintain relatively
high support for democracy both in the abstract (i.e., support for free speech)
and with respect to specific situations (i.e., support for protests in the war
on terror). In illiberal societies, in which diffuse support for democratic
values is not well-engrained and does not resonate, such reminders will have no
effect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess these expectations, the investigators
perform a series of ten survey experiments in eight countries representing both
liberal democracies (the U.S., the U.K., France, and Spain) and illiberal ones
(Albania, Turkey, Bolivia, and Ecuador). The experimental design varies the
salience of the terrorist threat brought to mind by having participants read a
randomly assigned newspaper article that either invokes or decreases the
terrorist threat level. Also varied is whether or not the article is accompanied
by a reminder of democratic values. The survey respondents are then queried
about their level of support for democratic values, procedures, and
institutions. This type of experiment provides the cleanest test of a cause-
effect relationship. Some surveys are taken over the internet, others are taken
on a computer in a lab; the use of these parallel approaches improves the
reliability of findings by drawing on different subject pools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several broader impacts. Given that
international terrorist plots and attacks have grown in number, size, and
geographic scope, it is critical to understand how the shadow of a terrorist
threat affects the ways that citizens around the world understand and engage in
politics. With respect to liberal democracies, evidence that reminders of core
democratic values reduce the otherwise negative effects of terrorist threat on
support for democracy carries the public policy implication that such reminders
in the face of a real threat may provide important balance, helping to keep
citizens from losing confidence in democratic practices. With respect to
illiberal democracies, evidence for an unconditional negative effect of
terrorist threat on support for democracy carries with it the warning that
citizens may withdraw their support for democracy, which may lead to political
instability. However, if reminders of democratic values do prove effective even
in illiberal societies, this would be an important lesson.