* 0851172
* Functional Diversity of Subsurface Deposit Feeders
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Jumars, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 499,198.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benthic community composition is
changing at an alarming rate in many coastal regions. At the extreme of
macrofaunal change, "dead zones" are growing in number, frequency and extent.
Ecological extinction is occurring in many localities before the functional
roles of the lost species are understood even crudely. Subsurface deposit
feeders dominate particulate bioturbation and control the burial of organic
matter, the primary process by which carbon is removed globally from contact
with the biosphere and locked away for geological time. Very little is known,
however, regarding the mechanics, spatial geometry and selectivity of their food
acquisition and their mechanisms of particle translation. The absence of that
information effectively blocks the use of sophisticated, agent-based or
automaton models that project deposit-feeder effects on substrata from
ecological to geological time. Two principal obstacles have blocked
understanding. One is the difficulty of making direct observations through mud.
The second is a lack of understanding of the mechanics of the medium on the
space and time scales of animal burrowing and feeding. Both problems have been
greatly alleviated simultaneously, making this work possible
now.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics of the medium constrain what is possible. They
also determine in concert with other features (e.g., food quality of the medium)
what behaviors and processing rates are optimal. The investigators have two
simultaneous goals. One is to test hypotheses about how subsurface deposit
feeders free particles from the medium that they crack, and the other is to
measure the per-event and per-individual sedimentary consequences in the context
of particulate bioturbation. They will systematically do so in the major
polychaete groups of subsurface deposit feeders and opportunistically do so in
other subsurface deposit feeders. Explicit hypotheses to be tested (phrased as
the more interesting alternative hypothesis rather than the null) include: that
crack propagation produces elastic-plastic deformation, mixing sediment at the
crack tip; that crack propagation displaces particles gravitationally, that
friction of animal surfaces with crack boundaries displaces particles; and, that
unsteady flows in the burrow created by pressure pulses associated with crack
propagation free particles from the matrix and displace
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include a better understanding
and development of updated diagrams for textbooks showing what seabed
invertebrates do and how they do it. In addition, the investigators will work
with COSEE-OS to produce compelling and accurate graphics about the role of
bioturbation in complicating interpretation of the geological record and in
gating the step in the carbon cycle that removes carbon from contact with the
current biosphere. This outreach is designed to cover the spectrum of
specialists and interested students of all ages who want to be informed about
the ecology of the seabed and its role in global carbon cycling.