* 0851573
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Risky Business: A Theoretical Model Applied to the Advancement of Executive Women
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Susan Cabrera, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 03/31/2010
* USD 4,800.00

Despite the fact that women now represent nearly half of the U.S. workforce, a
majority of college graduates and more than a third of mid-level managers and
new MBAs, their representation in positions of leadership within the business
world remains relatively low. This research uses a risk assessment model to
identify the processes underlying executive advancement and consider how these
processes operate to create very different outcomes for men and women. Several
key propositions of this risk assessment model will be tested through two
experimental lab studies. The first study is an experiment aimed at determining
1) whether decision makers attribute higher risk to hiring or promoting
individuals that are perceived as less competent, congruent, committed and
credible; and 2) whether women are perceived as less qualified on each of these
dimensions than men with objectively identical qualifications, and as a result
are seen as carrying higher risk in hire and promotion decisions than men. The
second study is a series of four identical experiments with varying participants
(undergraduates, MBAs, executive MBAs and executives) aimed at testing whether
greater perceived risk is attributed to hiring women than men and whether this
higher perceived risk translates to women being hired and promoted less
frequently.

The research question being addressed in this project is a complex one, as the
phenomenon is likely driven by multiple processes operating simultaneously to
disadvantage women. Unlike most previous work, this project takes a systemic
approach appropriate to the problem by simultaneously considering the impact of
perceptions of competence, congruence, commitment and credibility upon risk
perceptions and hiring decisions. As a result, the research will clarify not
just whether women are perceived as riskier than men, but also why. Further, by
integrating research from the fields of both gender studies and risk and
decision-making, this research takes a novel approach that may make the
development of policies aimed at reducing gender inequality more tractable. Most
business organizations are adept at making risk/reward tradeoffs and decisions
across many contexts. By enabling organizations to see gender inequality through
a lens with which they are familiar, this project may help them to develop and
enact more effective policies in their efforts to create gender equality.

