* 0851328
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Work, Factionalism, and Citizenship in  South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Ira Bashkow, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2010
* USD 5,538.00

University of Virginia graduate student, Jason Hickel, supervised by Dr. Ira
Bashkow, will undertake anthropological research on the relationship between
labor organizing, local culture, and citizenship, through a case study of the
sugar industry in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. He will focus his investigation
on longstanding factional conflict between unions aligned with a national
political party and independent unions comprised of rural Zulu migrants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methods will include surveys, interviews, and
archival investigations. Hickel will explore the history of these two forms of
unionism in the sugar industry and trace their development and differentiation
since the legalization of African unionism in 1979. Using participant
observation methodologies, he will examine links between migrant political
attitudes and their lived experience of a labor system that requires them to
move repeatedly between industrial workplaces and their natal homesteads in
rural hinterlands. As an anthropologist, he also will examine homestead-based
rituals that involve exchange and sacrifice, healing rites performed by diviners
and prophets, and gift economies supported by wage remissions, to determine the
relationship between cultural notions of the social good in home communities and
the political consciousness of migrants as workers and
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance understanding of the
relationship between work, culture, and labor politics by focusing on the
culturally particular values that underwrite worker consciousness in this South
African case. Elucidating the factors that lead Zulu migrants to reject
affiliation with the liberal-democratic platform of the political unions in
favor of their own independent unions, will help to illuminate more general
causes of labor variability and conflict. Thus, the research will contribute to
social science theory that can aid efforts to promote more peaceful industrial
relations, and help develop more culturally appropriate strategies for
interacting with rural workers internationally. The research also will
contribute to the education of a social scientist.