* 0851835
* REU Site:   Ecology, Evolution, and Genomics of Grassland Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Bruce Snyder, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 05/31/2012
* USD 210,720.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Kansas State University will host an REU Site program in the
Ecology, Evolution, and Genomics of Grassland Organisms during the summers of
2009-2011. Eight undergraduate students will be selected each year to
participate in a 10-week summer program, and will have the opportunity to
conduct independent research projects that tackle questions in evolutionary
ecology with the tools of molecular biology. The summer program has three
components that will contribute to the professional development of undergraduate
participants: i) independent research projects that train students in field
methods, lab techniques, and experimental design, ii) a weekly 3-credit research
seminar that introduces students to emerging questions in the biology of
grassland ecosystems, and iii) a research symposium that will develop student
presentation skills. Major research resources for this REU Site program include
the Ecological Genomics Institute and Konza Prairie Biological Station. The
Ecological Genomics Institute includes state of the art scientific facilities
for genotyping and DNA sequencing, gene expression and workshops in microarray
technology. Konza Prairie is a tallgrass prairie preserve and a key research
site in the Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) Program. Additional resources
at K State include facilities for analyses of stable isotopes, a range of
laboratory and field equipment for specialized ecological research, and mentors
who are research leaders in ecological genomics and grassland ecology. The
research theme of this REU Site emphasizes applications of molecular techniques
to investigations of ecological and evolutionary processes in the biota of the
tallgrass prairie, where research results will have conservation implications
for predicting and mitigating the consequences of global change. This program
provides unique opportunities for interdisciplinary research that can take
advantage of long-term field experiments that have been running for over 30
years! The program welcomes applications from students of underrepresented
groups (minority, first-generation or non-traditional), and students at smaller
colleges where research opportunities may be limited. Prospective applicants are
invited to obtain further information and application forms from the Program
Coordinator (Dr. Brett K. Sandercock, PH: 785-532-0120, EM: bsanderc@ksu.edu) or
by visiting the program website (http://www.ksu.edu/bsanderc/reu).