* 0851942
* Collaborative Reseach: Creating Carbon Markets in Brazil and India:  A Comparative Study of Firm Environmental Investment Decisions Under the Clean Development Mechanism
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Simone Pulver, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2010
* USD 53,020.00

Markets for environmental services are being advocated as solutions to local
and global environmental problems. The most ambitious of environmental markets
is the evolving and overlapping network of carbon markets that seek to reduce
global emissions of greenhouse gases linked to climate change. This research
examines why and how developing-country firms decide to participate in carbon
markets. The research focuses on firm decisions to generate and sell carbon
credits under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol,
in the sugar and cement sectors in Brazil and India. By comparing firms that
choose to initiate CDM projects with peer firms that do not, we assess drivers
of firm CDM participation, trace the processes by which firms enter new carbon
markets, map firm perceptions of CDM project risks and benefits, and identify
salient characteristics of the emerging carbon markets in Brazil and India. The
cross-national, cross-sector comparative design enables a comparison of the
effects of both level of state intervention (Brazil-high; India-low) and degree
of sector concentration (cement-high; sugar-low) on firm carbon market
participation. Data will be collected through context interviews with key carbon
market informants and through firm interviews with approximately 150 CDM and
non-CDM firms.

The research comes at a critical juncture in the evolution of US and
international climate policy. Developing-country economies will play
increasingly important roles in shaping international environmental treaties and
determining global environmental quality. Understanding the decision and risk
management processes by which developing-country firms undertake CDM projects
can contribute to improving developing-country private sector support for
continued international action on climate change. With negotiations for a post-
Kyoto climate agreement expected to intensify in 2009 and 2010, the research
will be of direct interest to national and international climate policy
negotiators.

