* 0851291
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Cognitive Development in Bonobos and Chimpanzees
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Victoria Wobber, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 10/31/2010
* USD 14,800.00

Bonobos (Pan paniscus) and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) are equally related to
humans but present contrasting models of the last common ancestor (LCA) of
humans and the genus Pan. Bonobos' distinctions from chimpanzees have been
argued to be paedomorphic, or juvenilelike, with support for this hypothesis
coming largely from cranial morphology but also from certain elements of bonobo
behavior. It is currently unknown whether bonobos also exhibit cognitive
paedomorphism relative to chimpanzees. This hypothesis will be tested by an
investigation of cognitive development in bonobos and chimpanzees. The proposed
research will systematically compare infants of both species on a variety of
cognitive tasks previously utilized in humans and adult apes. Results will
inform the hypothesis that bonobos have undergone selection for a broad spectrum
of paedomorphic traits relative to their LCA with chimpanzees. More generally,
this work will illuminate how developmental parameters have changed in recent
ape evolution, including what features of humans are unique. &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal consists of original research synthesizing areas that have not
frequently been linked: anthropology, evolutionary biology, and developmental
psychology. The results will provide insight into the evolution of human
cognition and behavior, the comparative ontogeny of cognition across species,
and the effects of shifts in developmental timing on cognitive traits.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried out at African ape sanctuaries,
contributing to conservation by supplying funding to care for these apes and
providing employment in range countries of chimpanzees and bonobos. Sanctuaries
are a key conservation resource, providing refuge for apes that otherwise would
have been casualties of the bushmeat trade. Ongoing collaboration with Congolese
doctoral students will increase the prospects of ape sanctuaries as research
sites where local students can develop skills that will allow them to contribute
to international scientific dialogue on human evolution and great ape
conservation.