* 0851293
* REU SITE: An Undergraduate Research Program in Biomedical Applications in Computer Science
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Jipping, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2013
* USD 320,686.00

&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hope
College REU program in Computer Science provides promising undergraduates with
an intensive and meaningful research experience that encourages them to consider
a career in computer science research. The three year summer program exposes
students to the techniques, attitudes, and rewards of computer science research,
and provides encouragement and direction in the pursuit of research careers
through close collaboration with faculty mentors on significant projects. The
project engages students in projects that are focused on the intellectual theme
of biomedical applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, the project
supports the ten students, at least five of whom are from institutions other
than Hope College. The students spend a minimum of 40 hours per week for 9 weeks
on research activities. These students join at most five Hope College
undergraduates on research teams that work with four faculty mentors. The
mentors each lead a team of undergraduates in working on a research project that
is usually part of the mentor?s research program. The study of the mechanics of
research is a key component. Participants prepare a research report, a poster
representing their work, and an online presentation of their research work and
results. They also give presentations of the research at their home
institutions. This continuing site (17 years) is redoubling efforts to recruit
female and minority students and mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The research projects are drawn from a number of important fields of
Computer Science including bioinformatics, algorithms, wireless networks, and
programming environment research, with focus on modern biomedical applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This program provides a model for a
successful undergraduate research program that encourages the development of
other strong programs involving a diverse group of faculty and students. It also
prepares a cohort of undergraduates for successful research careers.&lt;br/&gt;