* 0851966
* REU Site for 2-Year Undergraduates in Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University- Commerce
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ben Jang, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 219,000.00

This award by the Chemistry Division supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce for the summers
of 2009-2011. The program director is Ben Jang who is assisted by co-PI Stephen
Starnes. Ten students each year will be recruited from 2-year community colleges
in the Northeast Texas area, with total enrollment of over 220,000 and more than
60,000 majors in chemistry, physics, pre-professional, and pre-engineering and
non-science majors taking science courses. Ten selected student researchers,
eight supported by NSF and two by Texas A&amp;M U.-Commerce are required to go
through basic training and project-based instrumentation training followed by
working intensively with mentors on redesigned collaborative research projects.
Experiences and momentum gained from the REU program in 2006-2008 will be used
to expand the impact on student participants. A Special Topic course will be
required for students to increase their level of preparation for productive
research. At the end of the program, every student will participate in a poster
session open to university community and their home colleges, to summarize their
research accomplishments. The project is a novel way to reach community college
students with a local setting for efficient follow-up. It is expected that the
REU site will be a model to provide opportunities to 2-year college students in
underserved regions of the nation for effective STEM recruitments.