* 0851536
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Finding the Common Place of Anti-Doping. An Ethnographic Case Study of Legal Consciousness in New Zealand.
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Justin Richland, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 11/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

In light of recent scandals regarding drug use by high-profile athletes to
enhance their sport performance, there is heightened public awareness of the
regulation of and sanctioning of "doping" in sport. By definition, doping
encompasses any performance enhancing methods used by athletes that are
considered unethical or undermine a level playing field in sport. In the attempt
to regulate and deter doping, the World Anti-Doping Code outlines the
international standards for anti-doping procedures, while the World Anti-Doping
Agency (WADA), an international nongovernmental organization, ensures their
implementation. Though these mechanisms are considered forms of alternative
dispute resolution, anti-doping rules mimic aspects of law, even at times taking
on the appearance of law. Violations often lead to suspensions that can last for
years, potentially ending an athlete's career and sometimes leading to criminal
charges. In light of these punishments, arbitration mechanisms have been
established to hear the appeals of athletes who have tested positive for banned
substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the implications of
anti-doping practices by studying the arbitration hearings of athletes who
appear before the Sports Tribunal of New Zealand. The Sports Tribunal is
uniquely positioned, because it is an independent national body, made up of
members with specialties in law and sport, which determines disputes for the
sports sector, including anti-doping violations. Through observations of
meetings and interviews with tribunal members, athletes, lawyers who represent
athletes, and sports administrators, this dissertation research examines the
arbitration process and the meanings attributed to anti-doping codes versus law
and other rules in sport. As these law-like practices are indicative of a
broader global trend in which nongovernmental organizations act to change and
regulate social practices, often in reaction to law's inability to provide
remedy or assistance within a specific arena, the significance of this research
is not limited to sporting contexts.