* 0851035
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Investment Choices, Changes in the Built Environment, and Quality of Life in Buenos Aires, Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Nicholas D'Avella, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,700.00

University of California at Davis graduate student, Nicholas D'Avella, working
with the guidance of Dr. Donald Donham, will undertake research on how
homeowners and architects respond to local changes in real estate investment
practices under changing national and international economic conditions. The
research will be conducted in Buenos Aires where real estate investment
practices are remaking the material landscape of the city. In the years
following Argentina's latest economic crisis, Buenos Aires has witnessed an
intense construction boom driven by the redirection of investment capital and
personal savings out of banks and into real estate. During this time, buildings
have taken on an unprecedented significance as financial investments. New forms
of financing construction have changed the work of architecture significantly,
as the field's changing relationship with the market offers architects both new
opportunities as well as new restrictions in the practice of their art. At the
same time, the residents of neighborhoods most impacted by the boom have reacted
strongly to changes in their lives, and have begun to protest against further
construction.

Research will be conducted at schools and professional conferences for both
architects and investors; within an architectural studio; and in a rapidly
changing Buenos Aires neighborhood. Data collection will involve a mix of
archival research, surveys, ethnographic observation, and in-depth interviews.

The research is important because it will help social scientists understand the
different strategies that people use in a world of increasing economic
globalization. It will also provide a better understanding of the material
formation of contemporary cities, which speaks not only to the concerns of
social scientists, but also to the residents of many cities today. The research
will also contribute to the education of a social scientist.