* 0851749
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Program in High Performance Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Nagaraj Neerchal, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2011
* USD 194,283.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Mathematics and
Statistics at the University of Marlyand-Baltimore County will host an REU site
for eight students. This REU Site will ignite the interest of talented students
majoring in mathematics, statistics, or computer science in (i) high performance
computing, (ii) its use in interdisciplinary research, and (iii) will provide
integrated training in crucial professional skills. The REU activities will
include three weeks of intensive instruction in scientific, statistical, and
parallel computing, with significant cross training between participants with
different backgrounds. The following seven weeks consist of team work on
projects from application areas mentored by professionals from industry,
government agencies, or other academic departments. Also during the project
phase, we will provide integrated professional development on subjects including
interaction with peers and professionals from within and outside of own academic
major, project and team management basics, informal verbal progress reports to
mentor and other teams, technical writing skills in the sciences for technical
reports&lt;br/&gt;and journal articles, formal presentation techniques with
visual aids, academic integrity and ethics, and graduate school preparation
through a GRE preparation course, among other topics driven by project and
student needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific, statistical, and parallel
computing skills are critical to the 21st century workforce. Equally crucial are
skills in interacting and communicating in teams and in interdisciplinary
projects. This REU will provide a comprehensive program integrating these
elements under the guidance of the two PI/co-PIs and two graduate assistants,
all of whom have extensive experience with client-focused interdisciplinary
consulting provided by students through the Center for Interdisciplinary
Research and Consulting (www.umbc.edu/circ). By leveraging UMBC?s extensive
connections through its Meyerhoff Program, Minority Access to Research Careers
Program, Center for Women in Information Technology, Women in Science and
Engineering, and other programs, we are committed to creating a student cohort
that is diverse in gender, racial/ethnic background, academic major, and skill
set, in order to ensure powerful experiences of synergies in the research teams.