* 0851272
* Paleontological Investigations to Recover Fossil Monkeys from the Middle Cenozoic of South America
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Richard Kay, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2013
* USD 172,470.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The pattern of monkey evolution in South America is poorly
documented and little understood. Some argue that New World monkeys
(Platyrrhini) known from 16-20 million year old rocks of Patagonia predate the
origins of the modern families, that is, they are 'stem platyrrhines'. Others
argue that they are early representatives of the modern platyrrhine families.
The two alternative interpretations have profound implications for how the
evolutionary radiation of platyrrhines is viewed. Further fossil material of
early platyrrhines will contribute to resolving this debate. A joint team of US
and Argentine paleontologists will search for fossil primates in ~16 million-
year-old rocks of the Santa Cruz Formation and its equivalents in Patagonian
Argentina. Collecting will concentrate on proven localities and expand
collecting efforts to other lesser-known sites said to be richly fossiliferous
from the Atlantic coast inland to the Andean front at 50-55 degrees South
latitude. &lt;br/&gt;Analysis of the existing materials and recovery of even
more complete specimens of primates will offer a rare insight about the
phylogeny and adaptations of these early anthropoid primates. A phylogenetic
analysis will clarify the pattern of diversification of South American
platyrrhine monkeys and help to refine hypotheses about the origins of the
modern platyrrhines families. To reconstruct adaptive profile of the various
extinct species, a team of scientists from the US, Argentina and Brazil will
study various aspects of the teeth, skulls and limb bones to reconstruct
important details of the each species' adaptation and life history.
&lt;br/&gt;Collections of other faunal remains by the field group will fill out
the environmental context in which early platyrrhines evolved. A second team of
research specialists headed by the Argentine scientists will study the
functional anatomy and ecomorphology of non-primate fossils. Much work already
has been undertaken to study the sloths and armadillos. Using these established
approaches as a model, the research group will extend this work to encompass
other major mammal groups including rodents, notoungulates, and marsupials.