* 0851651
* REU Site:   Ecology and Behavior of Honey Bees and Solitary Bees
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John Barthell, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 06/30/2013
* USD 316,436.00

The University of Central Oklahoma REU Site will provide a research program for
undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2012. Six students will be selected
each year to participate in an intensive eight-week research program that
involves collaboration by an international team of scientists from the United
States, Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey. We pose behavioral and ecological
hypotheses that use honey bees and solitary bees as model systems. The questions
we address are basic in nature but have clear relevance to applied
(agricultural) systems in the region where we work. Specifically, we address
topics germane to invasive species in pollination systems, decision-making by
foraging honey bees and learning patterns in honey bees as influenced by
environmental factors. These investigations have direct application to crop
pollination and the apicultural industry in Eurasia where honey bees and the
solitary bees we study are native. Prior to departing for the field portion of
the program, students will be immersed in a one-week course that focuses on
experimental design and the history and nature of science; students also
participate in the publication process and are supported in their development
toward post-graduate studies. We intend to support a generation of scientists
who understand the developing world and the relationship between the diversity
of human culture and intellectual innovation. Students therefore participate in
enrichment activities that include exposure to some of the most significant
locations in human history that include archaeological sites along the
Dardanelles (near Istanbul), the Aegean islands and throughout western Turkey.
Since many large-scale ecological issues (including invasive species and
associated pathogens) originate from outside the United States (a result of
agricultural enterprise), the international and multicultural collaborations in
the program represent a key ingredient in training our student participants to
study biological systems in the modern world. This program is supported by funds
from the National Science Foundation?s Directorate of Biological Sciences and
Office of International Science and Engineering. Additional information can be
found at http://cms.uco.edu/REU/, or by contacting the Principal Investigator,
Dr. John F. Barthell, at 405-974-2481; jbarthell@uco.edu.