* 0851553
* Doctoral Dissertation:  "Transnationalizing Gangs: Expertise, Advocacy, and the Politics of Policymaking"
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Constance McGuire, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

In 2007, the U.S. government named gangs as a transnational problem and a threat
to the U.S., in "The U.S. Strategy to Combat Criminal Gangs from Mexico and
Central America." Decades of research in the social sciences evidence "gangs" as
locally-specific, neighborhood-based phenomena (Thrasher 1927, Whyte 1943, Lewis
1961, Vigil 1988). US government employees, advocates with non-governmental
organizations, and academic gang experts contributed to the Strategy through a
collaborative policymaking process, which drew upon knowledge from diverse
institutions. By naming gangs a transnational problem in U.S. foreign policy,
this set of actors is redefining the gang problem and in turn is shaping
proposed solutions in the U.S., Mexico, Central America and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For twelve months, the researcher will examine the
micropolitics of the emergence of the Strategy in order to analyze the logic
which produces gangs as a transnational threat at the exclusion of other ways of
framing the problem and its solution. She will work with people in three
categories (government officials, advocates, and gang experts) and will use
three methods (semi-structured interviews, participant observation, and document
analysis.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropologists traditionally work in
neighborhoods to examine how and why gang violence emerges and is perpetuated
(Vigil 2003). What we do not understand about gangs is the social process
through which they have been named and framed as a problem in policy. Policy
framings are particularly important because they shape solutions that have
powerful material consequences for gang members and communities affected by gang
violence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to understanding
the shift in framing gangs as a local problem with local solutions to framing
gangs as a transnational problem in need of transnational solutions. The US
government recently negotiated $500 million in security and aid packages with
Mexico and Central America in which transnational gangs were named as a key
target. The transnationalization of gangs in policy impacts youth at risk of
joining gangs, gang members themselves, affected communities, as well as the
larger community of citizens in the U.S., Central America, and Mexico.