* 0851421
* REU Site:  Biosphere-Atmosphere Interactions in a Changing Global Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Karowe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 630,602.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global change drivers, including warmer
temperature, changing precipitation, increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide and
ozone, deposition of reactive nitrogen, invasive species, and habitat loss, are
affecting all ecological systems. Multiple drivers often act synergistically;
e.g., global warming and atmospheric nitrogen deposition may facilitate the
spread of invasive species. Such biosphere-atmosphere interactions are not well
understood despite being crucial components of global change ecology. Therefore,
it is important to train young researchers to identify and experimentally
address these interactions in order that they ultimately are able to help solve
the complex global environmental problems of the 21st Century. This project
continues a Research Opportunities for Undergraduates (REU) program at the
University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS). Students experience a truly
interdisciplinary program focused on the ecological and atmospheric causes and
consequences of global change. They receive extensive mentoring from both
ecologists and atmospheric scientists who teach and conduct research at UMBS,
and they are immersed within a large, interactive and intellectually diverse
community of senior researchers, graduate students and other undergraduate
students. REU students benefit from a unique collection of scientists,
facilities, and ongoing field studies focused on global change. Examples are (1)
the UMBS Forest Carbon Cycle Research Program, (2) the Program for Research on
Oxidants: PHotochemistry, Emissions, and Transport (PROPHET), (3) projects
focused on elevated carbon dioxide effects on plant-herbivore interactions, (4)
projects focused on measuring biosphere-atmosphere exchanges of carbon,
nitrogen, and volatile organic compounds, and (5) projects focused on invasive
species. The program provides comprehensive training via an intensively mentored
individual research project, a series of workshops in ecology, atmospheric
chemistry, global change, experimental design and statistics, professional
ethics, and communication; a weekly biosphere-atmosphere reading group; and
attendance at UMBS research seminars. The program emphasizes active
participation by students in all phases of high quality research, from project
conception through presentation of results. In addition, aggressive recruiting
practices have resulted in the participation of women (&gt;60%) and
underrepresented minorities (24%) in the current UMBS REU Site Program.
Recruitment efforts are being expanded to include partnerships with
underrepresented minority-serving institutions, a recruiting event at UMBS, and
support for prior REU students to act as student ambassadors for the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;