* 0851554
* Tropical Cyclogenesis in the PRE-depression Investigation of Cloud-systems in the Tropics program (PREDICT): The Marsupial Paradigm in Action
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Michael Montgomery, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2012
* USD 257,121.00

Intellectual Merit: Tropical cyclogenesis remains one of the outstanding
mysteries of the tropical atmosphere, yet a proper understanding of how
hurricanes and typhoons are born is the first of several steps in relating the
effects of climate change on these storms and the impact of severe weather on
coastal regions of eastern North America. Fundamentally a mesoscale process,
tropical cyclogenesis integrates the large-scale circulation, synoptic waves,
and mesoscale processes (ranging from critical layer formation in tropical waves
to vortical hot towers on the cloud scale) into a hurricane monolith at
intermediate scales (20-200 km). Although many of the relevant dynamical and
thermodynamical processes at this scale have been investigated, virtually
nothing is known about their relative importance, chronological sequence and
mutual interaction in the various stages of tropical cyclogenesis. A field
campaign (PRE-depression Investigation of Cloud systems in the Tropics; PREDICT)
has been designed to obtain in situ measurements of mesoscale processes in
developing tropical depressions in the western Atlantic. Data from the PREDICT
field campaign will be analyzed in conjunction with operational and
retrospective meteorological analyses, short-term forecasts and satellite
imagery in order to address mesoscale issues and the interaction of physical
processes across multiple scales. A new "marsupial paradigm" developed by the
Principal Investigator and colleagues at the Naval Postgraduate School will be
applied in real time to the PREDICT data acquisition and interpretation efforts.
This paradigm focuses on the role of the tropical wave critical layer (outer
mesoscale, 200-2000 km) in genesis, and on key environmental conditions that are
necessary for development within the "gyre-pouch" of a parent wave. This study
is concerned mainly with mesoscale processes operating in the gyre-pouch, and
how these processes are affected by environmental conditions nearby and within.
A null hypothesis of PREDICT is that mesoscale processes do not vary across a
wide range of synoptic patterns in which tropical cyclogenesis occurs. According
to this idea, it is the precise way that mesoscale processes interact with, and
within, the gyre's moist vortical environment that determines whether storm
development is successful. The marsupial paradigm provides the necessary
Lagrangian framework for interpretation of high-resolution atmospheric data and
for improved understanding of processes. Post-analysis of field data will be
integrated with large-scale analyses to refine and extend the marsupial
paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Public education on severe
weather is important to help society utilize weather information and to help
them understand their environment. A longer-term concern is to understand how
our changing climate has, and will, affect these storms and their impacts. An
improved scientific understanding of how to interpret the data input stream will
be passed on to the public in terms of a more reliable classification of storm
status and better prediction of the likelihood of storm formation and
intensification when these systems, in many cases, are still far from land.