* 0851879
* REU SITE: Educating the culturally-sensitive industrial engineer:  A complex interdisciplinary systems perspective to global IE issues
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Viviana Cesani, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2012
* USD 363,640.00

Proposal: 0851879

PI Name: Viviana I. Cesani

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This proposed three year REU site program at the University
of Puerto Rico Mayaguez (UPRM) will provide research experiences for
undergraduate students focused in the area of industrial and systems
engineering. Students will be recruited from US universities such as the
University of Missouri-Columbia, Texas State University, University of Central
Florida, and Virginia Tech to participate in a six week summer program and
students from the University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez to participate in a fifteen
week program during the academic year.

This REU site will take advantage of the unique location of Puerto Rico with a
distinct Hispanic Caribbean culture and a highly industrialized manufacturing
environment to expose the participants to some of the challenges of working in a
global economy. The proposed activities are aimed at providing students an
opportunity for developing culturally sensitive management skills most needed to
excel in today's business world by working on inter-cultural work teams on
research problems that require a more profound understanding of society and the
environment as a complex system. Students will learn to use IE analytical
techniques in non-traditional and non-structured very complex societal problems,
service-delivery systems, manufacturing facilities and complex mathematical
modeling.

In addition to the hands-on research experience, the students will participate
in the following educational activities: 1) workshops on research skills,
graduate school preparation, scholarly writing and presentation skills; 2) plant
tours to a pharmaceutical company and a large biomedical devices manufacturer;
and 3) a scientific site visit to the Department of Marine Sciences (DMS) of the
University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez. Finally, a variety of social-cultural
events will be available to enhance the cohort experience.

The broader impacts of this REU site arise from the participation of
undergraduate students who are women and underrepresented minorities. For UPRM
students, access to present their work in international research conferences
will greatly enhance their oral and written presentation skills and will expose
them to the wider array of scientific opportunities in other universities.

