* 0851193
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvment Grant:  Gendered Responses to Development and Climate Change: Women and the Ganges River
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Georgina Drew, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2010
* USD 7,470.00

Doctoral student Georgina Drew, with the guidance of Dr. Dorothy Holland, will
undertake research on local interpretations of, and gendered socio-cultural
responses to, ecological change in water resources. Her investigation will be
conducted in the Indian Himalayans along the primary tributary of the Ganges
River. Using a comparative ethnographic approach at different sites, from
river's melting glacial source to the district capital of Uttarkashi, she will
investigate local responses to development and climate change. She will pay
particular attention to women's activities, discourses, and mobilization
efforts, and their relation to the work of environmental initiatives, such as
those coordinated by social movements and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Analyses will assess the extent of, and the potential for, women's inclusion in
debates about natural resource management in a case where the future of a
resource of great symbolic, religious, and economic importance is in question.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will employ a wide range of social
scientific methods. These include semi-structured interviews, surveys, focus
groups, observation of daily practice, event-based participant observation, and
elicitation of life histories. Multi-media documentation will incorporate audio,
photo, and video recording. Using the method of photo voice, disposable cameras
will be distributed to women so that they can collaboratively document their
perspectives on the river as well as their experiences in social movement and
NGO processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has both theoretical and
practical significance. Through the exploration of women's resource-related
knowledge and concerns, it will broaden interscalar analysese of how global
processes are experienced at the local level. The focus on women's physical and
discursive mobilization efforts can also be employed to strengthen gender
inclusion in environmental initiatives. Research insights will have relevance
for policy formation in the Himalayas and elsewhere throughout the world where
contestations over changing water resource availability are emerging. The
research also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.