* 0851210
* New Developments in Social Choice and Bargaining Theory:  Welfarism and Incomplete Information
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Geoffroy de Clippel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 109,990.00

This research project has two main objectives. First, it offers an economic
foundation of some classical solutions in the theories of social choice and
bargaining by dropping the welfarist assumption. Second, it suggests possible
ways of extending these two theories to problems with incomplete information.

Most contributions in axiomatic bargaining and social choice are phrased in
utilities. It is thus assumed, often implicitly, that two problems must have the
same solution if they coincide in the utility space. Unfortunately, this
welfarist assumption lacks both a clear normative and positive content, and is
thus hard to accept as an axiom. This research project offers a better
foundation of social choice and axiomatic bargaining by characterizing some of
its main solutions in non-welfarist environments.

Informational issues have long been recognized as central in economic theory.
However, their implications on cooperation are still not yet well understood.
Accordingly, Professor Aumann listed this topic as an important direction for
future research in his 2000 presidential address to the Game Theory Society. To
be more precise, an impressive amount of work has already been devoted to
understand which contracts are feasible under asymmetric information, cf. the
theory of mechanism design. Professors Hurwicz, Maskin, and Myerson were awarded
the 2007 Sveriges riksbank prize in economic sciences in memory of Alfred Nobel
for their path-breaking contributions on the topic. Yet very little is known
about what specific contract, among those that are feasible, should or will be
chosen. This project investigates many different avenues to extend the theories
of bargaining and social choice to incomplete information.

The theories of social choice and axiomatic bargaining are widely applied, yet
the welfarist assumption on which it is founded is not compelling without
justification. The present research project will show how some classical
axiomatic systems can be completed to derive welfarist solutions in non-
welfarist frameworks. Very little work has been done so far on social choice and
bargaining under incomplete information, yet there is a clear need of going
beyond the mere description of what is feasible.

Broader Impact: This research proposal is foundational in its focus. The
importance of the questions considered implies that it could have a significant
impact on many different practical economic problems. The normative analysis
under incomplete information should guide the economic and social debates,
concerning, for instance, public health insurance, taxes, or cost sharing. Part
of this research will be developed in collaboration with researchers from three
other universities: Camelia Bejan (Rice U), David Perez-Castrillo (Universitat
Autonoma de Barcelona, Spain), and David Wettstein (Ben Gurion University,
Israel). The results of this research project will be integrated into a
graduate-level course on information, risk and uncertainty that the investigator
teaches at Brown University.