* 0851901
* REU Site: MetroBotics: undergraduate robot research at an urban public college
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Elizabeth Sklar, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2013
* USD 345,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0851901&lt;br/&gt;REU Site: REU Site: MetroBotics:
Undergraduate Robot Research at an Urban Public College&lt;br/&gt;PI: Elizabeth
Sklar, CUNY Brooklyn College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for a new Research
Experiences for Undergraduate site focused on agent-based systems at CUNY
Brooklyn College. In this academic year program undergraduate students perform
hands-on experiments dealing with multi-agent and multi-robot systems while
working in the Agents Lab environment at Brooklyn College. The project is lead
by a faculty team with a history of involvement of undergraduates in research.
An Advisory Board of faculty across the greater New York City area provides
oversight and assistance with recruitment of students who attend New York City
area public colleges. The goal is to provide meaningful research experiences and
professional development opportunities to a diverse student population that has
been unable to participate in traditional summer resident research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the research focus of agent-based systems, a topic that is of current interest
and importance and that is also attractive to undergraduates. The experienced
leadership team is providing a research environment and guidance to the
undergraduates that could lead to new discoveries and results that impact the
field of robotics and multi-agent systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the project include providing a quality research experience to a
diverse group of undergraduate students, including students from community
colleges. The participating faculty members are committed to including under-
represented minority students in their research. Thus this project has the
potential to produce new computer science graduate students and faculty members
and to advance discovery and understanding while promoting learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;