* 0851848
* REU Site: Verification and Validation for Software Safety
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Weichen Wong, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* John Reppy
* 03/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

Software safety is critical to many projects conducted&lt;br/&gt;by both private
industry and the government. After the&lt;br/&gt;Challenger accident, NASA
adopted a safety policy based&lt;br/&gt;on a National Research Council report
that requires every&lt;br/&gt;project to take an organized and systematic
approach to&lt;br/&gt;identify safety hazards or unsafe situations and
practices,&lt;br/&gt;and to follow appropriate steps to assure adequate
safety.&lt;br/&gt;At the REU site to be established undergraduates
participate&lt;br/&gt;in research on verification and validation for
software&lt;br/&gt;safety: from, initially, a series of training seminars
on&lt;br/&gt;the necessary background knowledge, to becoming
involved&lt;br/&gt;in one of several specially designed research
topics&lt;br/&gt;according to their interests. Topics include safety
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;model construction and simulation, validation test
generation&lt;br/&gt;and execution, etc. Interaction between the students
and&lt;br/&gt;faculty mentors is emphasized. Follow-ups are also
conducted&lt;br/&gt;with the students after the summer program to prepare
their&lt;br/&gt;results for presentation at conferences and publication
in&lt;br/&gt;journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research subject is software
safety with a focus on the&lt;br/&gt;analysis and integration of failure
conditions with functional&lt;br/&gt;specifications, the use of assertions in
formal specifications,&lt;br/&gt;and validation not only for testing software
under normal&lt;br/&gt;conditions but also for showing that unsafe states cannot
be&lt;br/&gt;generated by the software as the result of single or
multiple&lt;br/&gt;erroneous inputs. This project allows students
from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups or universities with limited
research&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to experience cutting-edge research in
software&lt;br/&gt;engineering and to gain proficiency in a broadly
applicable&lt;br/&gt;skill set, including critical thinking, research
methods,&lt;br/&gt;problem solving, and oral and written communication -- all
of&lt;br/&gt;which are very important for success in graduate programs
and&lt;br/&gt;careers in science and technology research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;