* 0851764
* Modeling the Underlying Dynamic Processes in Motivation and Decision Making: A Parsimonious Self-Regulatory Approach
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jianchao Zhu, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 07/31/2012
* USD 408,060.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most formal
models of decision-making treat it as a static process (i.e., how the current
state of some set of variables affects the probability of a particular choice).
This approach ignored the fact that each day individuals are faced with numerous
decisions regarding the allocation of resources (e.g., time, attention, and
effort) across competing tasks in order to meet or maintain many goals. It also
ignores that fact that, over time, circumstances (both internal and external)
change and learning occurs both of which may result in changes in the choices
one makes to attain or maintain one?s goals. Finally, contemporary models of
decision making are largely silent with regards to the underlying psychological
and information processes that are responsible for observed decision patterns
over time. &lt;br/&gt;Under this grant, a group of researchers composed of an
engineer and three psychologists use a simple information processing structure ?
the weighted difference model common in engineering control theories ? to
explain numerous decision-making, motivational, and economic phenomena. For
example, this structure is used to construct models that explain why 1)
individuals work longer on days when they are paid a relatively lower wage; 2)
beliefs in one?s capacities to perform are sometimes negatively and sometimes
positively related to the resources one allocates to the task; 3) individuals
tend to switch back and forth between two tasks with the same deadline, but then
focus on only one as the deadline draws near; 4) individuals change their risk
attitudes when making choices as they approach their goal, and 5) individuals?
change their choices over time despite no change in the options or their
attributes. Several empirical studies are designed to test the proposed models.
If found valid, the research will demonstrate that models based on this
structure not only allow predictions over time (i.e., are dynamic), but also are
consistent with empirically confirmed elements of well-accepted static models of
decision making and motivation. Moreover, they integrate aspects of economic,
psychomotor, and learning models, providing a general, comprehensive, yet
parsimonious approach to understanding human behavior in naturalistic contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;