* 0852138
* Collaborative Research: Midwater animal models: Optical measurement of metabolic transitions in pelagic biota
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sonke Johnsen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2013
* USD 281,181.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite encompassing more than 99% of
the livable space on the planet, the midwater environment and its inhabitants
are among the least studied on the planet, primarily due to their remoteness and
the technological limitations that have precluded direct study. The use of
optical techniques, including spectroscopy and video image analysis, for direct,
non-invasive imaging of physiological function transforms midwater animals
(zooplankton and micronekton) into ideal physiological models. In this case,
transparency, a ubiquitous camouflage strategy in the pelagic environment,
allows, literally speaking, insights into animal physiology (i.e. it facilitates
physiological imaging). Thus, it is now possible to conduct physiological
experiments on midwater animals that are of equal complexity, but greater
temporal resolution, to those routinely performed on more robust fishes and
mammals. The present project is a novel combination of less invasive sampling
and optical physiological methods that will elucidate the metabolic strategies
employed by midwater organisms for survival in the extreme hypoxia
characterizing much of the midwater environment. The investigators will further
use the changing CO2 concentrations through these oxygen minimum zones as a
natural laboratory to test physiological responses to ocean acidification. They
will quantify metabolic transitions relating to oxygen concentration for
ecologically important, but understudied, midwater organisms. They will test
hypotheses relating transparency (i.e. visibility by predators) and metabolic
rates as an indication of the capacity for predator avoidance. Specifically, the
investigators will measure blood oxygen binding, heart rate, stroke volume,
ventilation rate and volume, oxidation state of the tissues (NAD+:NADH) and
whole-animal oxygen consumption rates. Not all of the above parameters are
relevant to all species to be studied. They will study transparent
representatives from a broad spectrum of zooplankton and micronektonic groups,
including fishes, larvaceans, chaetognaths, polychaetes, jellies, salps,
amphipods, and gastropods but will focus on cephalopods because of 1) their
closed circulatory systems and blood oxygen binding proteins allow the full
development and utilization of optical physiological techniques and 2) because
unique aspects of their physiology are of special interest for hypoxia tolerance
and render them vulnerable to ocean acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides a model for an integrated approach to studying the ecological
physiology of pelagic organisms. The approach has potential to reveal the
tolerance of oceanic organisms to global warming and ocean acidification.
Furthermore, oxygen minimum zones are expanding with potentially severe
consequences for oceanic biota. The project includes training at both URI and
Duke University for three graduate students in a unique suite of techniques
relevant to optical physiology. The investigators will also provide
opportunities to go to sea for several graduate and undergraduate students. The
project will foster collaboration with German scientists and their students. The
ship and submersible time requested will be shared to the extent possible with
scientists and students from diverse institutions. Further, the public appeal of
deep-sea and oceanic biology is great. The investigators will make the images
and video obtained (some of the most close-up and detailed ever taken) available
to the public via the Bloom Association (www.bloomassociation.org). Bloom is a
non-profit association whose mission is to protect the oceans and, more
particularly, the deep sea, through education of the greater public about
environmental problems. The creator of Bloom, Claire Nouvian, has participated
in cruises in the past and has agreed to take part in the proposed expeditions.