* 0852037
* REU Site:   Cellular and Developmental Biology Research Apprenticeship Program at Washington University in St. Louis (CD-BioRAP)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kathryn Miller, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2013
* USD 280,350.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Washington University REU Site will provide a research
program for undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Ten students will be
selected each year to participate in an intensive 10-week research program in
Cell and Developmental Biology (CD-BioRAP). The goals of CD-BioRAP are: 1)
prepare students for the rigor of top quality graduate training programs, 2)
foster student-faculty and student-student relationships and interactions to
provide participants with peer and faculty support, 3) provide professional
development to increase confidence and success in application to graduate
training programs, and 4) provide a cohort experience for participants. Research
mentors are carefully selected to ensure that students have a supportive
environment and a research project that will allow participants to develop the
skills necessary to become an independent investigator. In addition, trainees
will attend lectures given by a number of distinguished faculty and accomplished
graduate students. They will also participate in group team-building exercises
and community service projects to encourage group trust and emphasize the
importance of peer support in pursuit of a science career. Applications from
individuals who come from rural or inner-city areas, those from institutions
where research opportunities are limited, and those from groups traditionally
underrepresented in biological research are encouraged. Students will receive a
stipend, housing, meals, and travel to and from the program. The CD-BioRap
director and coordinator will utilize several means of evaluating student
success while in the program and post-summer. Communication, advising, coaching
and support will continue during subsequent years following participation in the
program. Additional information can be found at http://dbbs.wustl.edu/, or by
contacting the Program Director, Dr. Kathryn G. Miller at 314-935-7305,
miller@wustl.edu or the program coordinator, Ms. Rochelle D. Smith at
rsmith@wustl.edu.