* 0852891
* IDBR:   Development of a time-gated Raman/fluorescence micro-spectroscopy instrument for biological applications
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Thomas Huser, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2012
* USD 507,811.00

Raman spectroscopy is the inelastic scattering of photons by molecular bonds,
and therefore enables chemically-specific measurements within a sample without
the use of external labels. This unique characteristic gives Raman-based
techniques the potential to be used in a variety of biological research
applications. However, many of the chemical components within the biological
material are fluorescent, acting as a background and thus severely limiting the
use of Raman spectroscopy for these applications. Although there have been
attempts to reduce this background, only an optical time-gated approach can be
sufficiently effective. Since the Raman signal occurs almost instantaneously
with the excitation light while the fluorescence is delayed by several
nanoseconds, lasers with pulses in the range of several picoseconds can be used
for his purpose. A time gate that opens only for the duration of the Raman
signal and closes before the background fluorescence is produced can be built by
using a nonlinear medium and highpower laser pulses. This combination allows for
the measurement of Raman spectra in the presence of a strong fluorescence
background and opens up new potential applications of Raman spectroscopy for
biological research such as (i) non-invasive characterization of the chemical
composition of the endogenous fluorophores in bacteria, cells and tissues, (ii)
understanding cellular processes and diseases such as cancer, vascular or
neurodegenerative diseases by using natural markers, (iii) developing new probes
that can be used both as fluorescence and Raman labels, (iv) noninvasive medical
sensors for blood analytes such as glucose sensors for diabetes treatment. This
technique will have a significant impact on related fields such as analytical
chemistry, biomedicine, pharmacology, forensics, food safety, agriculture,
biofuel research, environmental monitoring, and bio-defense.Outreach will
involve students and educators at all levels, from middle school to
postdoctoral, as well as representatives and participants from the biotechnology
industry.Further information can be requested from the PI.