* 0852057
* REU Site: Back to the Future
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Jon Kellar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 03/31/2012
* USD 344,000.00

This award will establish a REU Site in the Department of Materials and
Metallurgical Engineering at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology.
The program is called 'Back to the Future' and will offer a unique 10-week
summer research program that integrates Metallurgical Engineering projects with
historical, cultural and artistic significance. Ten undergraduate students will
be recruited each year for three years from regional tribal colleges and
universities nation-wide. Planned REU activities make use of the research
facilities of the Advanced Materials Processing Center on campus and involve
faculty members from different departments. In addition to the research
projects, the REU students will participate in a number of professional skills
development activities, such as technical communication training, seminars and
hands-on workshops on Archaeometallurgy, Art and History of Metallurgy.
Participating students will have opportunities to present their research results
at South Dakota State Capital, Pierre, and in national meetings of professional
societies.

This program is responsive to the National Research Council report
'Globalization of Materials R&D' that details a need for increased research and
development of metals in the U.S.A. The proposed new approach of this program
i.e., an emphasis on understanding the historical and artistic context of
Metallurgical Engineering research projects is expected to provide a richer
learning environment for undergraduate students. This site is co-funded by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. Within NSF, this
award is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Division of Engineering
Education Centers in the Engineering Directorate.