* 0852292
* New Stratigraphic and Archaeological Investigations on the Origin of the Acheulean at Olduvai Gorge
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Ignacio de la Torre, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 223,510.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lindsay McHenry and an
international team of colleagues will conduct two field seasons of geological
and archaeological research at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. The team brings together
U.S., U.K., Spanish, and Tanzanian geologists and archaeologists to revisit
classic fossil and stone tool sites in Olduvai Middle and Upper Bed II. This
interval of time (~1.79 - 1.15 million years) at Olduvai preserves evidence for
critical changes in early hominid and animal fossils, stone tools, and climate,
including the disappearance of Homo habilis, the emergence of Homo erectus, the
end of primitive Oldowan stone tools, and the first appearance of more advanced
Acheulean tools. Unlike at many other African archaeological sites, many Olduvai
artifacts are found in primary or near-primary context, providing additional
information on hominid behavior. Little field research has been conducted on
Middle and Upper Bed II since M.D. Leakey's original studies over 40 years
ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of Olduvai Bed II, the age and
stratigraphic position of the excavated sites is poorly constrained. Estimates
for the age of the top of Bed II range from 1.4 to 1.0 million years. This
400,000-year range makes it impossible to compare the Olduvai record
chronologically with other potentially contemporaneous sites in Eastern Africa,
and makes it difficult to incorporate the vast amount of archaeological data
from Olduvai into regional studies of hominin evolution. To address this, this
study will date volcanic ashes from Bed II using innovative 40Ar/39Ar
radiometric methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing better dates
for regional correlation this project will improve site-to-site correlation
within Olduvai. This project will study volcanic ashes within the Olduvai
sediments, determining unique compositional "fingerprints" for each ash and
using these to identify individual ashes at different sites. By analyzing ashes
above and below archaeological sites, this project will construct a new
stratigraphic framework for Bed II. Using this high-resolution framework this
project will test whether the "Developed Oldowan" archaeological sites clustered
around the margins of ancient Olduvai lake coexisted with the more inland Early
Acheulean. A renewed investigation of the artifacts using modern assemblage
interpretations will help test whether these two assemblages actually represent
unique industries, or whether they are adaptive responses to different
ecological settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is the establishment of a new, geochemically tested stratigraphic framework for
Olduvai Bed II that can test and refine the relative ages of its archaeological
sites. New dates will provide age control for this notoriously poorly dated
interval, and relate the Olduvai record to regional records of climate and
technological change. The re-examination of Bed II Developed Oldowan and
Acheulean assemblages will combine field and laboratory work to provide a modern
reappraisal of the sites where the Oldowan - early Acheulean sequence was
originally defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this study is
that it will improve understanding of Olduvai's chronological and archaeological
place in the records of human evolution, technological development, and climate
change. This project will provide training for U.S., U.K., and Tanzanian
students and will help improve the paleoanthropological facilities at the
Tanzanian National History Museum.