* 0852303
* Expert Workshop on Knowledge Markets in the Life Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Benedicte Callan, Organization For Economic Cooperation & Development
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 30,000.00

This workshop is the first policy meeting to consider what new exchange
mechanisms -- and especially markets -- are being experimented with in the life
sciences in order to improve access to and use of the vast amounts of data,
knowledge and information created in the biomedical sciences. What is new here
is the attempt to understand how financial pressures in the biomedical
industries are dove-tailing with public policy priorities and not-for-
profit/not-for-loss business models which deliver greater access to intellectual
assets. The workshop will bring together expertise from academia and public
research organizations, health and IT industries, the venture capital and
institutional investor community, non-governmental organizations, as well as
policymakers. They will debate whether not only knowledge markets improve
innovation efficiency but also whether they are creating new business
opportunities and business models. The OECD has broad expertise in a number of
areas related to knowledge markets including: collaborative mechanisms for
access to intellectual property, OECD Guidelines on licensing practices, new
models for organizing research in health innovation, knowledge flows and
intellectual asset valuation. The workshop will include international speakers
and participants from the policymaking, business and research communities from
the 30 OECD countries and beyond. It will increase awareness among policymakers
about new trends in organizing access to data, knowledge, and information in the
life sciences and provide a typology of knowledge markets. It will show how the
research infrastructure is evolving and help governments understand how their
policies can influence the emergence of knowledge markets, as well as an
explanation of why they may want to do so. The meeting will be summarized in a
Policy Report to be discussed and agreed by OECD countries through the Working
Party on Biotechnology.

