* 0852233
* Understanding Late to Terminal Classic Political and Economic Transformations: Archaeological Investigations at Xuenkal, Yucatán, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Traci Ardren, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 199,910.00

Supported by the National Science Foundation, Drs. Kam Manahan and Traci Ardren
will lead an international team of specialists and students in the
archaeological investigation of how household economic strategies adapted to
increasing regional political pressures during the Late Classic (A.D. 600 - 900)
to Terminal Classic (A.D. 900 - 1000) transition, a time marked by great
sociopolitical transformations, at the ancient Maya center of Xuenkal, Yucatan,
Mexico and environs. While the Late-Terminal Classic transition represents a
period of decline in many areas, in the Northern Lowlands this time period
coincides with the greatest regional influence of the large urban center of
Chichén Itzá. The site of Xuenkal is significant because it contains both
substantial occupations that predate the emergence of Chichén Itzá and
subsequent settlement associated with the latter's greatest regional influence.
By investigating the shift in household economic strategies between the Late
Classic and Terminal Classic, the project seeks to elucidate how diverse
household strategies articulated within broader political economies on the
levels of the household, the community, and the polity. The project will
accomplish this by pursuing a program of both mapping and broad horizontal
excavations of a sample of households drawn from three distinct communities in
the project area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the research poses the
following questions: (1) Did household economic strategies shift between the
Late Classic and Terminal Classic? (2) Were there concomitant changes seen in
the regional settlement hierarchy? (3) Did the political economy of Chichén Itzá
as expressed at Xuenkal and environs differ significantly in terms of
organization and intensity from Late Classic norms? This research will
contribute more broadly to ongoing theoretical debates about the nature of pre-
industrial state economic organization from Mesoamerica and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Chichén Itzá is widely considered to have possessed a much more
hierarchical and mercantile political economy in contrast to Late Classic Maya
modes, but the role of the political economy in shaping household economic
strategies on the regional level remains poorly understood. Moreover, the
strategies employed by household members to adapt to political and economic
landscapes beyond their immediate control are unknown. This research will
provide the data to examine the strength of Chichén Itzá's political economy
over the broader region, the degree to which it penetrated into individual
household economic decision making, and how household economic autonomy was
negotiated in a rapidly evolving sociopolitical landscape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research will solidify
long-term collaborations between US and Mexican institutions and foster lasting
intellectual bonds with our Mexican colleagues at the Universidad Autónoma de
Campeche and the Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán. This project will also involve
American and Mexican undergraduate and graduate students from leading US,
Mexican, and Canadian institutions, providing them with training and research
opportunities. Finally, the project will provide a significant amount of
training and wage labor to members of the traditional Yucatec Maya community of
Espita, Yucatan, which currently is experiencing strong migration pressures.