* 0852788
* Monitoring maize and Ustilago maydis RNA and protein expression during tassel infections
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Virginia Walbot, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2010
* USD 191,011.00

The fungal pathogen Ustilago maydis infects many plants, however, only in corn
(Zea mays L.) does infection cause cancer. The fungus proliferates outside plant
cells and elicits tumors through predicted secreted proteins that interact with
maize cells. To date the plant-fungal interaction has been studied using fungal
mutants and little is known about maize contributions that confer the tumor
outcome. In this project changes in maize and Ustilago gene expression will be
monitored during the early stages of infection/cancer induction by cataloguing
the genes expressed and production of new proteins by each partner. Data will be
collected from infected, immature maize tassels (the organ responsible for
producing pollen), because they are readily infected and maize mutants with
defective anthers in an otherwise normal tassel block tumor formation
specifically in the anther tissues. RNA and protein responses will be analyzed
comparing susceptible wild-type anthers to a male-sterile mutant for additional
insight into the maize anther proteins required for tumor growth. The potential
impacts are a novel approach to understanding steps in anther development in
maize and by extension other cereal crops and better understanding of how
pathogens exploit host properties that are specific to one organ type. The long-
term aim is define the individual steps in tumor elicitation, using as a working
model production of fungal molecules that bind to maize receptors to alter
development. As cereal crops are the most important contributor to agricultural
productivity in the US and worldwide, this new knowledge is important for crop
improvement and protection. In the course of the project, a postdoctoral fellow
will receive training in high throughput mass spectrometric protein
identification, an emerging technology applicable to many complex biological
problems.