* 0852016
* An NSF REU Site at Berkeley:   Cell, Developmental and Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* David Weisblat, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 530,506.00

The University of California Berkeley REU Site will provide a research program
for undergraduates during summers of 2009-2012. Ten students will be selected
each year to participate in an intensive 10-week research program in Cell,
Developmental, and Evolutionary Biology. The goals of this intensive program are
(1) To foster an appreciation of how interwoven concepts unite the field of
biology across many layers of organizational complexity. Students will
participate in a series of faculty seminars including cell, developmental,
evolutionary biology and bioinformatics. (2) To foster independent research
capabilities. Students will participate in individual research projects based on
their interests and the availability of participating faculty. The research
experience will be shaped by faculty and doctoral students from the 3
participating units of Molecular & Cell Biology, Integrative Biology and Plant &
Microbial Biology. (3) To enhance student success and guide them toward graduate
studies. Students will participate in professional development workshops
including scientific ethics, writing an effective research
statement/application, making effective oral presentations, understanding the
funding structure of biology, and more. (4) To become familiar with life at a
large research university. Students will interact with undergraduate peers from
the Biology Scholars Program (http://bsp.berkeley.edu). Applications from ethnic
minority students underrepresented in the sciences and from those who have
little opportunity for research experience at their home institution are
especially encouraged. Participants will receive a stipend, plus housing, meals
and travel costs. Participating faculty are committed to facilitating student
success and a diverse bioscience community. More information and application
materials are available at http://mcb.berkeley.edu/nsfreu/, or by contacting the
Program Director, Professor David Weisblat (reuapplic@lists.berkeley.edu, 510
642 8309).