* 0852892
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Integrated MultipTrophic Aquaculture in Norway
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Alyssa Joyce, Joyce                   Alyssa
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 08/31/2011
* USD 141,100.00

0852892 Joyce

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Alyssa
Joyce to work with Dr. Bernt Aarset at the Norwegian University of Life Sciences
in Norway.

This study examines economic costs and benefits of Integrated Multi-Trophic
Aquaculture (IMTA) production in salmon, mussel and kelp culturing systems. IMTA
is an innovative approach to sustainable aquaculture that involves the co-
culturing of filter feeders, finfish, and macro- and microalgae in ways that
exploit the benefits of interspecies interactions and internal nutrient
recycling within fed aquaculture system. In conventional salmon farm
monocultures, feed constitutes approximately half the cost of production, and
IMTA offers a means by which waste by-products from feed may be recycled as
nutrient inputs at lower trophic levels for the production of bivalves and
seaweed. From an economic perspective, IMTA may be able to diversify production
and increase overall production value of existing finfish farms without
significant capital investment, while reducing waste production of conventional
finfish farming. Preliminary research indicates that IMTA can provide a
profitable and environmentally friendly alternative to conventional finfish
farming, with the potential to transform aquaculture in much the same way that
organic farming has transformed the agriculture sector.

This study use economic and environmental data to develop quantitative economic
evaluations of an experimental IMTA prototype, in order to assess the potential
for IMTA to serve economic goals for industry profitability and resilience
through horizontal integration. Using data from economic analyses, the study
examines the market feasibility of incorporating IMTA into the existing salmon
and shellfish aquaculture industries in Norway. The study also characterizes a
range of stakeholder attitudes, regulatory policies, and environmental risks and
benefits of IMTA, thereby providing quantitative and qualitative data for
scientists, policymakers, industry, and the public to assess the feasibility and
desirability of developing IMTA in Norway, and, by extension, IMTA in other
countries.