* 0852093
* REU Site: Collaborative Research in the Chemical Sciences at the University of Arizona
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Dominic McGrath, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 09/30/2012
* USD 231,000.00

The Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Arizona for the summers of 2009-2011. The site
is focused on exposing undergraduates from predominantly non-PhD granting
institutions to collaborative research environments in order to initiate or
develop aspirations to pursue scientific careers. The site is coordinated by
program director Katrina Miranda and assisted by co-PI Dominic McGrath, both of
the Chemistry Department. The chemical sciences thrive on the sharing of ideas
among researchers from various disciplines and sub-disciplines. The
collaborative environment is an exciting atmosphere that will instill in
students the enjoyment of research and an enthusiasm for chemistry. The site
will recruit primarily women and underrepresented minority physical science
students from institutions that offer limited research opportunities. These
students will benefit from the variety of research and research-related
activities and will be encouraged to pursue careers in chemistry. The core of
the program will be independent research with a faculty mentor supplemented by a
series of workshops that will help prepare the REU students to perform research,
to initiate thought and discussion about ethical issues in science and the
research environment, and to consider career opportunities in chemistry. A
poster symposium for the REU students as well as other on-campus summer research
programs will be held at the conclusion of the program. After the program, the
REU students will be encouraged to present their research at regional or
national conferences.