* 0852893
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Changing Ligands, Changing Lone Pair Stereochemical Activity:  A Theoretical Study of a Divalent Lead Coordination Polymer
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Anne Poduska, Poduska                 Anne           M
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 01/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

0852893 Poduska

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Anne M.
Poduska to work with Dr. Eluvathingal D. Jemmis at the Indian Institute of
Science in Bangalore, India.

For decades, researchers have sought to understand the appearance?and
disappearance?of lone pair stereochemical activity in divalent lead and other
heavy, post-transition elements. Due to its sensitivity to a variety of factors
such as ligand sterics and basicity, the lead?s lone pair activity is difficult
to predict, thus inhibiting efforts to solve issues of lead toxicity, whether it
involves designing specific biological chelating agents or removing lead from
contaminated soil and water. A comprehensive chemical understanding of lone pair
activity can evolve from studies of lead-containing compounds in which ligand
characteristics are systematically varied and the resulting changes in lone pair
activity carefully monitored. A two-dimensional Pb(II) polymer, synthesized by
Nordell et al., Cui et al., and Shi et al., presents an opportunity for a
systematic study: the lone pair is stereochemically active when Cl is bound to
lead, but not when Br or I are. The PI and host are employing a theoretical
approach, combining high-level density functional theory calculations with
qualitative, semi-empirical extended HÃ¼ckel molecular orbital calculations, to
identify lone pair location and composition, and to connect the lone pair
(in)activity in these two-dimensional polymers with that seen in the lead
hexahalides.

During this post-doctoral fellowship, the PI will also teach chemistry and a
science communication course at an undergraduate institution, the newly
established Indian Institute of Science Education and Research in Kerala.
Moreover, she will participate in science outreach activities with the Karnataka
Rajya Vijnana Parishat NGO, publish articles in Resonance, an educational
journal produced by the Indian Academy of Sciences, and establish long-term
science and outreach collaborations with Indian researchers and educators.