* 0852030
* REU Site: Computation and Modeling in Pure and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Dennis Garity, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2014
* USD 308,140.00

Project Elements:&lt;br/&gt; Renewal of previously funded REU site: DMS
0453304&lt;br/&gt; Project Title: REU Site: Computation and Modeling in Pure and
Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt; Principal Investigator: Dennis J.
Garity&lt;br/&gt; Submitting Organization: Oregon State University&lt;br/&gt;
Location: Oregon State University&lt;br/&gt; Main Field: Mathematics, Pure and
Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt; Number of Undergraduate Participants per year:
10&lt;br/&gt; Summer REU Site, 8 weeks per year&lt;br/&gt; International
Component: Consultation on projects and guest lectures by Professor Dusan Repovs
of the University of Ljubljana in Slovenia.&lt;br/&gt; Point of Contact for
Student Applicants: &lt;br/&gt;Dennis J. Garity, 541 737 5138,
math_reu@math.oregonstate.edu&lt;br/&gt; Web Address for information:
http://www.math.oregonstate.edu/~math_reu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ten undergraduate students from across the country will be
chosen each year to work in a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program in
Mathematics at Oregon State University. The program will be offered for eight
weeks each summer for four years beginning in 2009. Students will be recruited
from a broad range of colleges and universities and from diverse backgrounds.
The intended impact is to encourage students to become familiar with the
mathematical research process with a goal of increasing the number of U.S.
citizens available to provide expertise in this area. The students will work on
projects in pure and applied mathematics and mathematical computer science. The
program will emphasize the theme of the close connection between pure and
applied mathematics, geometric reasoning and modeling, and computer simulation
and modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will work on a research project
with a faculty mentor and attend a seminar. They will be given information about
the various areas and techniques needed in the mathematical sciences and they
will receive information about graduate school and employment opportunities. The
research projects will be designed to make the students familiar with and
proficient in the process of mathematical research. This will enable them to use
better research methods in their careers and in service to the broader
community. The mathematical content that students are exposed to will enable the
students to make more informed choices about areas of research they will
encounter in the future. The exposure to various teaching styles by the
presenters of material will enable the students to enter their future careers
with information about what teaching and communication styles work best. The
training in mathematical and presentation software will enable the students to
communicate their results effectively to the broader community.