* 0852747
* Characterization of Secondary Organic Aerosol Exposed to Acidic Sulfates:  Chamber and Field Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Myoseon Jang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 527,690.00

This project addresses the hypothesis that acidic sulfates have a significant
impact on secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation in the atmosphere via
heterogeneous reactions that form nonvolatile products including organic
sulfates (OS). The major goals are (1) to develop new analytical techniques to
measure aerosol acidity and bulk phase products; (2) to elucidate the mechanism
of SOA formation in multicomponent organic and inorganic mixtures; and (3) to
evaluate the impact of acidic sulfates on SOA formation in ambient air. Organic
compounds found in the atmosphere will be exposed to acidic sulfate solutions to
imitate heterogeneous chemistry in acidic aerosols. Teflon chambers will be used
to expose organic compounds to submicron acidic sulfate aerosols and to perform
a wide range of SOA experiments. Various spectroscopic methods will be used to
analyze the aerosol bulk phase products. A new technique will be developed to
dynamically measure aerosol acidity using colorimetry coupled with reflectance
UV-Visible spectrometry (C-RUV). The results obtained from the laboratory
studies will then be applied to field data to evaluate the impact of acidic
sulfate on organic carbon. A new predictive model will be developed to quantify
the role of heterogeneous chemistry in SOA formation and growth.

This study will help to explain how heterogeneous reactions change the chemical
properties of atmospheric aqueous droplets, such as those in clouds, and how
they affect aerosol optical properties. It also has implications for visibility
and public health. Broader impacts also include support for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).