* 0852464
* Special Meeting: Southwest Center for Arithmetic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rachel Pries, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 447,939.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Savitt, David L.
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0852464 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Arizona &lt;br/&gt;Title: Special Meeting: Southwest Center for Arithmetic
Geometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southwest Center for Arithmetic Geometry was
founded in 1997 with grant support from the National Science Foundation, and
renewed in 2002, 2006, and 2009. The main activity of the Southwest Center is
the Arizona Winter School (AWS), an annual meeting which has become a prominent
national event, and which provides high-level training and research experience
for graduate students in arithmetic geometry. The AWS is an intensive five-day
meeting, organized around a different central topic each year, which features a
set of courses by leading and emerging experts. The AWS is not a traditional
conference: the speakers organize courses of four lectures, with lecture notes
provided in advance, and propose projects for graduate students to work on
during the meeting. Each speaker hosts working sessions nightly during the
meeting, and on the last day the students present their findings to the entire
group. The result is a particularly intense and focused five days of
mathematical activity for both students and speakers. Recent Winter School
topics have included non-archimedean geometry, transcendence theory, and
quadratic forms. Upcoming AWS topics will be guided by future mathematical
developments and the availability of key speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
Winter School, connections among peers are formed, and mentoring relationships
between students and senior researchers are developed. As has been the case at
previous Winter Schools, subsequent collaborations between participants at all
levels are the norm. Experienced researchers develop new interests and see new
connections that lead to important published results; students make concrete
strides toward becoming research mathematicians; and post-doctoral assistants
gain valuable mentoring experience, which helps to develop their academic
careers. The Southwest Center website shares reusable content from the Winter
Schools, including lecture notes, project descriptions, and audio and video of
lectures. Since our site will contain a thorough record of each Winter School,
the dialogues begun at the Winter School will be extended to the greater
mathematical community, and the efforts of the Winter School participants will
be available to all mathematicians indefinitely.&lt;br/&gt;