* 0852497
* From Dark Matter to the Early Universe: a Cosmic Roadmap
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Daniel Boyanovsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 225,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last decade has
witnessed a revolution in our understanding of the early and present Universe
with the confirmation that seeds of quantum mechanical origin are ultimately
responsible for the formation of galaxies, and that 95% of the energy density in
the Universe is in the form of Dark Matter and Dark Energy. Forthcoming
cosmological observations and accelerator experiments will reveal more awe
inspiring phenomena that will challenge our understanding but present us with
the opportunity of an unprecedented convergence of nuclear, particle physics,
astrophysics and cosmology. The discovery that neutrinos have masses and mix
ushered in a new era in which early Universe cosmology, large scale structure
formation and stellar evolution combine with cosmological observations and
accelerator experiments to offer a glimpse beyond the standard model of particle
physics which may open the window towards deeper understanding of Dark Matter
and Dark Energy. This project describes a continuation of interdisciplinary
research efforts in early Universe Cosmology and Particle Physics. We present a
program to assess neutrinos in extensions beyond the standard model as possible
Dark Matter candidates by providing a comprehensive framework to study their
production, evolution and gravitational clustering properties. We also seek to
understand quantum processes and correlations during the inflationary stage in
the early Universe and their potential observability with forthcoming
measurements. This program is driven by and complements strong experimental and
observational programs in particle physics, astrophysics and cosmology, and
implements a wide range of interdisciplinary methods borrowed from quantum
optics and condensed matter out of equilibrium to provide a fundamental
framework for the assessment of novel phenomena and explore their observable
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;This is an interdisciplinary program at the forefront of
nuclear and particle physics and astrophysics and cosmology. Neutrinos not only
open a window to physics beyond the standard model, but are the common link
between nuclear and particle physics, astrophysics and cosmology. The notion
that the Universe that we see today was born out of small quantum fluctuations
during an early phase of rapid expansion is awe inspiring, intellectually
challenging and stimulating. Understanding the past and present of our Universe
and the origin of the largest structures beginning from the smallest
constituents, and opening a window to the early Universe with satellites,
telescopes, detectors and accelerators are clearly some of the most fascinating
intellectual questions, and undoubtedly one of the most challenging and
rewarding endeavors. The broader impacts are as follows: Many of the aspects
explored in this program, such as quantum kinetics and coherence are of broad
interest across fields. Furthermore neutrino oscillations provide an arena to
study macroscopic quantum coherence and the interplay between environmental
decoherence and relaxation. The concepts and methods involved in this study are
also relevant in condensed matter and quantum optics motivated by quantum
computing. The appeal of studying the early Universe and some of the most exotic
objects in the present Universe goes beyond the scientists working in these
areas, and reaches out to the broad audience.