* 0852803
* A Novel Integrated Scheme for Treating Hydrophobic Air Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* George Sorial, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2013
* USD 326,500.00

0852803 Sorial

Non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHC), usually called volatile organic compounds
(VOCs), have been a major health concern due to their adverse effects on both
human and the environment. Biofiltration systems have recently emerged as an
attractive option for controlling volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emissions
from industrial processes due to its cost effectiveness. However, a number of
challenges face biofiltration technology. Typically, most off-gas or treatment
streams for volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that originate in industrial
processes have variable flowrates and contaminant compositions that limit the
handling efficiency of the biofiltration system. Furthermore, hydrophobic
contaminants are not readily bio-available. Nevertheless, the regulatory
community generally expects emission controls to be capable of maintaining
adequate treatment.

As a solution to this limitation in biofiltration systems, a novel integrated
technology will be investigated to achieve stable contaminant removal efficiency
by combining the buffering capacity of a two bed cyclic adsorption/desorption
unit with a Trickle Bed Air Biofilter (TBAB). The bioavailability of hydrophobic
compounds will be enhanced by the introduction of non-toxic surfactants that
will serve dual purposes, increasing solubility and limiting excess biomass
growth. The primary objective of this project will be to establish the
effectiveness of coupling adsorption with biofiltration to yield an efficient
treatment train that can comply with emissions regulation during adverse
conditions of industrial operation especially for recalcitrant low solubility
contaminants. The results of the study are expected to form the scientific and
engineering bases for an innovative integrated treatment scheme for effective
control of hydrophobic VOCs under varying loading conditions. It is expected
that the utilization of the 2- bed cyclic adsorption/desorption unit to minimize
fluctuations in the TBAB operation will improve the overall efficiency of the
biofiltration treatment process; provide cost savings and more consistent
emission compliance.

As a general class of additional benefits, the proposed scheme for removal of
hydrophobic VOCs is expected to promote significantly improved air emission
control technologies. Furthermore, the research activities will emphasize
learning through discovery and can be used to establish a culture of curiosity,
critical thinking, and an authentic scientific method of inquiry for both
undergraduate and graduate students. The 7th to 12th grade teachers involved in
the RET site project (in which the PI of this project is a CO-PI) will have the
opportunity to gain knowledge in the proposed research through scheduled
Engineering Seminars and poster forums and convey the knowledge gained in their
teachings of math and science. Furthermore, the results obtained in this study
will be disseminated by presentations at national and international conferences
and by publication in peer refereed journals for enhancing scientific and
technological understanding of the proposed integrated technology.