* 0852961
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Ecological Consequences of Large-Herbivore Declines under Different Rainfall Regimes
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Robert Pringle, Pringle                 Robert         M
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2011
* USD 59,927.00

0852961 Pringle

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Robert M.
Pringle to work with Dr. Fabian Haas at the International Centre for Insect
Pathology and Ecology (CIPE), with Dr. Charles Warui at the National Museums of
Kenya, and with Dr. M. Kinnaird at the Mpala Research in Kenya.

Recent studies suggest that large mammalian herbivores may be ?strong
interactors? whose removal will precipitate major changes in biological
communities. This project aims to document and explain the short-term (2-3 year)
responses of plant and invertebrate communities to the exclusion of ungulate
herbivores in a Kenyan savanna, and also to examine how these responses are
contingent upon variability in rainfall. This is being done using a unique
experiment with four 1-ha treatments: total exclusion (removal of all herbivores
larger than 4-kg hares), exclusion of all herbivores larger than 6-kg dik-diks,
exclusion only of megaherbivores (elephants and giraffes), and unfenced control
(all animals present). These treatments are each replicated three times at three
levels of a natural rainfall gradient. Project personnel are testing four
specific hypotheses. I: Herbivore exclusion alters the palatability of
individual plants, enhances recruitment, reduces species evenness, and increases
structural complexity at the habitat level. II: Via these effects on plants,
herbivore exclusion leads to increased total biomass of both herbivorous and
carnivorous arthropods. III: Indirect responses of individual arthropod species
vary, but depend on (a) diet breadth and host-plant preference, (b) foraging
strategy, and (c) predation vulnerability. IV: The strength of both direct and
indirect effects is negatively correlated with rainfall. Humans are reducing
large-herbivore populations worldwide, and climate change promises dramatic
changes in precipitation patterns. Yet nobody knows how these changes will
affect biodiversity and ecological function in iconic landscapes such as African
savannas and the Yellowstone ecosystem. Generating this knowledge will reveal
fundamental truths about how large mammals influence ecological dynamics and how
these influences are modulated by environmental context. It will also provide a
basis for predicting the consequences of large-mammal declines and extinctions
in a rapidly changing world. To date, measurements of responses to large-mammal
removal have been idiosyncratic and opportunistic, and the mechanisms offered to
explain underlying the responses are often speculative. Moreover, the few
exclusion experiments conducted in species-rich ungulate guilds have mostly been
?all or none,? meaning that the effects of particular species or subgroups
cannot be identified, whereas our sequential size-based exclusion approach will
isolate these effects. Finally, this experiment is the first to combine large-
herbivore exclusion with replication across multiple levels of an environmental
gradient, which is consistent with recent calls for ecologists to address the
context-dependence of species interactions. In terms of developing human capital
and international collaboration, this project supports five full-time research
assistants from local communities in rural Kenya. Their employment provides them
with valuable, transferable skills (identification of native Kenyan
biodiversity, data entry and computer training, management and teamwork
experience). These men are also from different ethnic groups and religions in a
region torn (as recently as January, 2008) by ethnic strife; working together
cements bonds that overcome ethnic differences. Local people and their children
will be taken on guided tours of the experimental facilities, allowing them to
interact with biodiversity in an educational setting, which will promote
environmental stewardship in the region. This project also involves
collaboration among three research institutions in Kenya (as well as three
universities in the US and Canada) that have long operated separately; this
collaboration will build intra- and international partnerships and capacity that
will facilitate future joint endeavors. The project also lays a foundation for
future work on the poorly known invertebrates of this region. Lastly, the
conservation and management implications of the work will be disseminated in
short essays for non-scientific audiences to be published both in local Kenyan
media and on the worldwide web.