* 0852999
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Using Computational Chemistry to Assess Reactivity of Contaminants in Surface Waters
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Jennifer Guerard, Guerard                 Jennifer
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 137,500.00

0852999 Guerard

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jennifer
J. Guerard to work with Dr. Silvio Canonica at the Swiss Federal Institute of
Aquatic Science and Technology and with Dr. J. Samuel Arey at Ecole Polytech
Federale in Switzerland.

Organic contaminants in natural waters have the potential to be degraded by a
variety of reaction pathways. Assessment of the fate and impact of these
contaminants often hinges heavily on quantification of the principal degradation
processes responsible for their removal or transformation into other compounds.
It is increasingly understood that light-induced processes play a significant
and complicated role in the degradation of many aquatic contaminants. This
project will use state of the art computational methods to predict the single
electron oxidation potentials and reaction kinetics of compounds that can
undergo electron transfer upon photo excitation to the triplet excited state
(sulfonamides and phenylurea herbicides) and analogues for dissolved organic
matter (electron-rich phenols and substituted anilines), a heterogeneous
substance ubiquitous in all natural surface waters. A novel computational
approach will calculate free energy of ionization in water solutions to provide
reliable computation of aqueous one-electron oxidation free energies of organic
contaminants to within 1-2 kcal/mol error. The Rehm-Weller model will be applied
to describe the kinetics of oxidation by triplet-excited DOM. These model
developments will allow us to better assess the significance of 3DOM* for the
environmental degradation of a wider range of target pollutants in aquatic
systems.

