* 0852787
* IDBR - An Auto-sampler for Aquatic Microbial Sampling and Archiving
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Katherine McMahon, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Cort L. Anderson
* 05/31/2012
* USD 222,265.00

&lt;br/&gt;The future of aquatic sciences will be grounded in the use of
autonomous platforms and sensor networks to accumulate observations in real-time
or near real-time. Although platforms capable of making rapid physical and
chemical measurements are robust and commercially available, the design,
fabrication, and deployment of autonomous sensors capable of making even modest
biological measurements are in their infancy. While a number of biological
sensors based on molecular analysis have been field deployed, these systems are
inherently complex and have high production and running costs, and are limited
in the number of assays they can perform. Additionally, these systems have
complex operational procedures for system set up, deployment, and retrieval, and
as such there is a low likelihood that in their current stage of development
they will be broadly adopted. To address these existing limitations, a small
autonomous in situ sampling and archival device is being developed. The Sample
Filtration and Archiving (SaFA) system can be deployed in the aquatic
environment where it will automatically collect and filter between 20-30 user
defined time-stamped water samples of between 200-500 ml. Preservation of the
genetic material in the captured biological material is performed by the
subsequent addition of a stabilization buffer, making it available for
downstream &lt;br/&gt;interrogation in the laboratory using a range of molecular
biological techniques upon retrieval. The SaFA instrument will therefore enable
autonomous sample collection and archiving at high temporal resolution, for
subsequent laboratory analysis. The SaFA will also allow increased sampling
regimes to be performed in situ without the need for personnel to be deployed in
the field, particularly during dangerous or inconvenient sampling periods,
thereby increasing the resolution and scope of current microbial ecology
studies. This multidisciplinary project will assist in the training and support
of a &lt;br/&gt;masters student at UPRM. The project will also support 2 summer
engineering undergraduate students who will develop the electrical subsystems
and package the instrument. We will also develop K-12 external outreach programs
in both Puerto Rico and Wisconsin that address molecular biology and in situ
instrumentation applications. Following utility studies by the PIs, microbial
ecologists affiliated of the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON)
initiative, will have access to the prototype versions of the SaFA for
evaluation purposes. To enable broad integration into the aquatic sciences the
instrument will be ?open source? as all information relating to the construction
and operation of the SaFA system will be download-able via a web site.
&lt;br/&gt;