* 0852729
* Synthesis of Crystalline Carbon Nitride by Simultaneous Vibrational and Electronic Excitations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 09/30/2013
* USD 255,771.00

The primary goal of this research is to develop a new approach to realize
simultaneous resonant excitations of vibrational states of precursor molecules
and electronic states of reactive radicals to control and promote the deposition
of crystalline carbon nitride (C3N4) thin films. The project objectives are to:
1) establish the basic science governing dual-resonance-excitation chemical
vapor deposition (DRE-CVD) processes through coordinated experimental and
theoretical investigations; 2) control the coating processes for optimization of
stoichiometry in deposited films; 3) improve crystallization in deposited films;
and 4) characterize coating materials to support process
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful implementation will have
significant impact on scientific research of laser-controlled chemical processes
by resonance excitation of precursor molecules and reactive radicals, as well as
in the field of functional thin film deposition. This proposed approach provides
the potential to realize surface coatings with controlled compositions, high
energy-coupling efficiency, and low thermal impact on substrates. For
applications, the proposed method is expected to provide a novel approach to
material deposition on various substrates as functional coatings to enhance,
improve, and optimize the substrate properties. The research activities will be
integrated with educational purposes, including integrating new knowledge gained
in the research in a nanotechnology course, training and mentoring of graduate
and undergraduates including those from underrepresented groups, and seminars
for K-12 students and teachers. Results will be disseminated to scientific,
industrial, public and educational communities in ways including online
publications, journal papers, annual K-12 seminars, an animation kit, and
conference presentations. This project will ultimately benefit society through
new and advanced electronic, biomedical, and mechanical applications and
products. &lt;br/&gt;