* 0852035
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Minority Group Demography
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Arthur Sakamoto, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2010
* USD 105,000.00

"Minority Group Demography" has been, and will continue to be, the organizing
theme for this program. Notably, this program continues to be comprised of
roughly 60% under-represented minority group students and about 70% female
students; a majority of the REU participants go on to graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this REU Site is the academic and
ethical development of junior social science scholars around a topic of immense
importance to the future of the United States. The PIs seek to provide the REU
students with (1) exposure, (2) experience, and (3) expertise. Specifically,
they want to expose undergraduates to both the technical tools and professional
culture of social science, and to do that through the scientific course of
inquiry in social demography. The PIs want the REU students to experience the
rigorous course of study and intensity of the scientific research process
firsthand. Additionally, they want these students to demonstrate their expertise
as junior members of the academy. To accomplish these goals, the Pis have
developed precise program objectives.&lt;br/&gt;To begin with, they expose the
REU students to social demography via formal course work and seminars. An
undergraduate sociology course, Analytic Demography, comprises the heart of the
first one-half of the summer at our REU site. In addition, they conduct a series
of professionalization workshops, or ?proseminars,? which the REU Site Director
and Co-Director hold during the summer. In these proseminars, REU students
discuss issues ranging from getting into and paying for graduate school to the
myriad ethical issues that demographers and other social scientists confront in
conducting their work.&lt;br/&gt;Our students will gain concrete experience in
three ways. First, the formal course focuses on the methods and materials of
demographic research, with an emphasis on the demography of minority groups.
Second, the related Stata programming lab provides students with an introduction
to statistical analysis and computer literacy to gain competence in the analysis
of population-based data sets. Third, the students will experience an intense
mentored research relationship with Population Research Center (PRC) graduate
students and faculty affiliates. The REU students will be expected to produce,
at the end of the summer, a stand-alone ?deliverable? in the form of a scholarly
paper, and have much support in doing so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the REU
students will demonstrate their expertise at the end of this program in two
ways. First, the students will present their research work at the end of the
summer to a group of PRC faculty affiliates and graduate students. Second, each
of our students will be funded to present his or her REU research paper at the
annual meeting of the Southern Demographic Association (SDA) in the fall
following the close of the summer program. The SDA has dedicated two sessions
each year to the REU alumni in the past, has been very welcoming of these
students, and will be asked to do so again.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this program is to influence the future of higher education in the
social sciences, with special attention to the racial/ethnic and gender
diversity of the future academic workforce. This REU site program aims to
influence the continued development of both sociology and demography as fields
by helping to train the next generation of population scholars in a rigorous,
ethical, and multi-racial/ethnic context.