* 0852518
* U.S.-Japan Planning Visit:  Hormonal control of body fluid homeostasis in fish; Interactions between fast-acting and slow-acting hormones
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* E. Gordon Grau, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2011
* USD 19,844.00

OISE-0852518 (Grau, University of Hawaii) ?Hormonal control of body fluid
homeostasis in fish: Interactions between fast-acting hormones and slow-acting
hormones?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports planning and early-stage collaborative research activities between PI
Grau and Professor Yoshio Takei of the University of Tokyo to further develop
comparative studies on two euryhaline teleosts, eel and tilapia, to elucidate
shared mechanisms that are employed in osmotic and ionic regulation in the face
of large changes in environmental salinity. These fishes are ideal models for
comparative studies, since they share many features in common with higher
vertebrates including humans that are involved in homeostasis of body fluids.
Hormones involved in osmoregulatory adaptation in fish can be classified into
two categories; fast-acting hormones and slow- but long-acting hormones.
Interactions between the two categories of the hormones are not well understood.
The goals of the proposal are to 1) integrate areas of scientific inquiry that
are typically distinct and separate from one another, i.e., fast-acting hormones
vs. long-lasting hormones, and eel vs. tilapia; 2) initiate collaborative
research to identify key genes and proteins that regulate activities of relevant
endocrine systems in both eel and tilapia in response to environmental changes
in salinity; 3) develop new methods, concepts and approaches by exposing young
scientists to a unique mixture of knowledge and training not available in a
single laboratory, and 4) foster personal and professional relationships that
will extend beyond the proposed work. Young scientists, postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students, and faculty on both sides will participate in minisymposia
and workshops as well as have short-term training experiences in Dr. Takei?s
lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;