* 0852533
* Saint Mary's University of Minnesota Women in Mathematics Colloquium Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Kevin Dennis, Saint Mary's University of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 10,890.00

The support from this grant provides the funds for the Mathematics and
Statistics Department at Saint Mary's University of Minnesota to continue an
annual colloquium highlighting successful women mathematicians and to support
undergraduate travel to national conferences. Both activities support the
department's goal to produce students who can effectively communicate
mathematics to laypeople and to experts in the field. Both the colloquium
speakers and undergraduate presenters at national conferences provide role
models for Saint Mary's students by giving them the chance to observe and
interact with successful mathematics professionals and peers. The colloquium
speakers especially will provide examples to our students of successful female
mathematicians. This series encourages the recent upward trend of women in
mathematics at Saint Mary's University and introduces undergraduate and high
school women to role models who are not only successful in their mathematical
profession, but also in their lives. This project intends to keep inspiring
women to pursue terminal degrees in mathematics and also to enhance the Saint
Mary's mathematics community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major objective of this
project is to continue a successful annual colloquium for the advancement and
encouragement of women in mathematics. By bringing well-known and outstanding
women scientists specializing in mathematics to lecture and talk about their
areas of expertise, students are engaged and inspired by the opportunities and
challenges presented for women in the ever-progressing field of mathematics.
This series provides undergraduate women with the opportunity to spend time
listening and conversing with successful women in the field in hopes that they
will be encouraged to go on to graduate studies and consider careers in
mathematics. Additionally, since the symposium encourages participation from
local high schools, it leaves high school women with a positive and hopeful
outlook on the field and fosters their inclination to pursue math majors in
college.