* 0852948
* Multiscale Modeling of Flow over Functionalized Surfaces: Algorithms and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Bruce Caswell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 356,671.00

CBET - 0852948 Karniadakis



Many microfluidic, synthetic-materials, and biomedical applications often need
to model multiscale flow phenomena across several orders of magnitude in spatio-
temporal scales from near-wall subdomains but also the outer flow over long
simulation times. The goal of this project is to develop a validated methodology
for simulating multiscale flow phenomena over functionalized surfaces with a
biomedical focus. To this end, the PIs propose a "triple-decker" flow model
based on interfacing seamlessly a mesoscopic method (dissipative particle
dynamics or DPD) to molecular dynamics (MD) on one side and incompressible
Navier-Stokes (NS) equations on the other side. The novelty of the PIs' approach
is the use of a mesoscopic layer between NS and MD--unlike previous approaches--
to facilitate a smooth transition from the atomistic to the continuum regime.
Their preliminary results for simple fluids show the great potential of this
method. Here the PIs propose fundamental new developments to make the method
applicable to complex fluids and to flows over functionalized surfaces including
polymer brushes, where an assembly of polymer chains tethered by one end to a
surface creates a surface with specialized properties. The large theoretical and
experimental works on this topic, starting with the work of de Gennes, will act
as a testbed to validate the proposed methodology and evaluate its efficiency
and then model cytoadhesion over protein-coated surfaces using the polymer
brushes as model of cell surface. The objective here is to develop a molecularly
based adhesive dynamics model to complement existing mechanistic macromodels for
multiparticle adhesive dynamics. Specifically, the PIs will simulate the binding
of malaria-infected red blood cells (RBCs) to functionalized walls, as was done
in recent microfluidic experiments, in essence mimicking cytoadhesion in
arterioles and capillaries. The triple-decker (MD-DPD-NS) approach is general
and can be applied to simple and complex fluids in microfluidic or biomedical
applications but also in more classical applications, e.g., control of wall
shear stress using surfactants or hydrophobic surfaces. DPD, first popularized
in Europe, is a very effective method for modelng both complex fluids and soft
matter but has not yet been adapted widely in USA, and the proposed work will
contribute to its further use and development. More broadly, this work on
polymer brushes can be used in a wide range of industrial applications in oil
recovery, automotive lubrication, colloid stabilization, and in tailoring
surface properties. The PIs will disseminate their models and the triple-decker
codes as open source codes via existing external open source websites. They will
organize seminar-courses open to all students at Brown University focused on
multiscale modeling and applications. In addition, undergraduate students,
through Brown's UTRA (Undergraduate Teaching and Research Assistantships)
program, will be involved in the research projects, either during the academic
year or the summer. The PIs also plan outreach activities for inner-city high
school students in a partnership with the MET school, where Brown students will
be tutoring MET high school students in physics and mathematics in close
collaboration with MET school teachers.

This study is cofunded by the CBET, CMMI, and DMS divisions.