* 0852301
* Food Chain Magnification of Marine Toxins
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Thomas Hemscheidt, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2013
* USD 929,362.00

In this study, researchers at the University of Hawaii at Manoa will examine the
biological magnification of two neurotoxins in the flora and fauna of Hawaiian
coral reefs. The toxins, beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), a low molecular
weight (ca. 120amu) amino acid, and ciguatoxin (CTX), a large molecular weight
(ca. 1,200 amu) polyether, were selected for study because of their different
chemical natures and hence potentially very different biological magnification
patterns. The work will take advantage of recent advances in the study and
interpretation of nitrogen fractionation within specific amino acids to identify
an organism's position in the food web relative to the first trophic level.
Source amino acids (glycine, lysine, phenylalanine, serine, threonine and
tyrosine) record the d15N value of the source of nitrogen at the base of the
food web, and trophic amino acids (alanine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid,
isoleucine, leucine, proline and valine) reflect the trophic level of the
consumer. The relationship between the difference between the d15N values of
trophic and source amino acids and toxin concentrations in the tissues of fish
and shellfish will be analyzed within the framework of (1) a simple linear food
chain and (2) an unstructured food web to determine which theoretical construct
is most consistent with experimental results. Additional studies will focus on
the degree of environmental control of CTX and BMAA production and the extent to
which differences in the concentrations of these toxins in fish and shellfish
reflect differences in the feeding/physiology of consumer organisms or
variability between species at the producer level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work reflects the integration of experimental observations and
theoretical understanding to gain insight into the processes that regulate the
movement of toxins through marine food webs. Experimentally the use of compound-
specific 15N analyses of source and trophic amino acids to determine an
organism?s position in a food web is an important recent advancement, and
application of unstructured food web theory or variations thereof will likely
prove necessary to explain the patterns of biological magnification in the
complex food webs that characterize coral reef biological communities. Since the
complexity of these food webs is by no means anomalous, insights gained from
this study may have broad applicability to marine systems where food webs depart
from strict linearity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed
work include (1) funding for the participation of University of Hawaii (UH)
Global Environmental Science majors working on their senior research projects,
(2) the inclusion of NSF REU students (C-MORE Research Experiences in Microbial
Oceanography - proposal pending), (3) a $200,000 commitment by the UH vice
chancellor for research to purchase a quadrupole mass spectrometer with the
appropriate APCI/ESI probe hardware to facilitate the determination of the
structures of ciguatoxins and related toxins in extracts from coral reef flora
and fauna, and (4) the publication of educational materials that target both
undergraduate and graduate students, and the inclusion of these material into
courses offered by the Department of Oceanography at the University of Hawaii.