* 0852985
* SGER PROPOSAL: Testing the Role of Morality Judgments on the Impact of Procedural and Outcome Fairness Perceptions in the Context of Public Hearings About Nuclear Energy
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* John Besley, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2010
* USD 30,597.00

Expanding nuclear energy production in the United States has the potential to
become a topic of substantial public discussion in upcoming years. Few
technologies evoke as much passion, on both sides, as nuclear power. Faced with
opposition and cheaper alternatives, U.S. energy producers have not ordered
construction of a nuclear power plant since the 1970s. Concerns about climate
change, energy prices, and energy independence, however, have engendered renewed
interest in nuclear energy technology. As of late 2008, energy producers across
the United States were proposing to build new plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project takes advantage of one such proposal in South Carolina to
investigate public opinion about nuclear power in the context of a week-long
permitting hearing by the state?s Public Service Commission. Surveys will be
conducted both before and after the hearing process. Drawing on research into
the concept of ?procedural justice,? the study is specifically interested in the
degree to which perceptions of the fairness of the state decision-making process
may mitigate potential concerns about the proposed expansion. The hypothesis is
that fair process is a primary mechanism through which public entities can
secure legitimacy for their decision-making processes. In contrast, an
alternative hypothesis suggests that the value-laden nature of nuclear power
makes fair process irrelevant to how people will judge the decision-making
process. According to this view, the only factor underlying how they perceive
the process is whether the decision makers make the right decision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the survey research, the research will
involve a systematic study of the media environment (both television and print
journalism) surrounding the hearing process and consider the impact of media
coverage in any changes in public opinion that may occur.