* 0852147
* Recursive Estimation of Time-Varying Parameters in Dynamic Factor Models for Nonstationary Psychological TIme Series
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Peter Molenaar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Many psychological and biological processes have statistical characteristics
which vary in time. Prime examples are adaptive, learning and developmental
processes. Recently it has been shown mathematically that statistical analysis
of processes with time-varying statistical characteristics has to be based on
intensive repeated measurements of single subjects in order to obtain valid
results. However, at present statistical techniques which would enable valid
analyses of such processes are lacking. In this project innovative statistical
modeling and estimation techniques will be developed which yield valid and
reliable analyses of processes with a priori unknown time-varying
characteristics. The new techniques can and will be applied to intensive
repeated measurements of single subjects in real time, thus enabling high-
fidelity tracking of the time-dependent fluctuations of key characteristics of
psychological and biological processes as functions of momentary changes in
environmental and subject-specific conditions. The new modeling and estimation
techniques developed in this project will be validated in large scale computer
simulation studies and implemented in generally accessible scientific software.
They will be applied to a range of psychological and biological processes with
time-varying statistical characteristics, including brain responses to transient
stimuli measured by means of electroencephalographic and magnetic resonance
imaging tools, and individual maturational, learning and developmental
processes. A potential special field of application of the new modeling and
estimation techniques developed in this project involves patient-specific
continuous assessment and optimal treatment of disease processes such as
diabetes type 1 and asthma. In sum, the outcomes of this project will for the
first time enable valid and reliable statistical assessments and optimal
guidance of psychological and biological processes with time-varying statistical
characteristics.