* 0852438
* Particle Physics and Lattice Gauge Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* E. Tomboulis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

Over the last several years the structure of the QCD vacuum over different
length scales and the mechanisms of confinement have been the focus of intense
activity among workers in lattice gauge theory. Lattice gauge theory provides
the only available framework for the quantitative investigation of such entirely
nonperturbative phenomena. Research in this project is in the areas of QCD
improved actions; confinement and QCD vacuum physics; deconfinement transition
dynamics; and the quark-gluon plasma in heavy ion collisions. A goal of the
proposed research is to further develop systematic procedures that connect the
short distance (perturbative) to the long distance (non-perturbative) confining
regime in the QCD vacuum. It thus contributes towards directly extracting
confinement from QCD, a long-standing goal of theoretical particle physics. It
also leads to the construction of improved actions on coarser lattices for
accurate determination of string tensions and other observables with reduced
discretization errors and computational effort. The second area of the project
is that of deconfinement dynamics and heavy ion collisions. The recent
experimental discoveries at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) have
generated wide interest. In particular, the mechanism responsible for the
apparent very rapid thermalization in the resulting strongly-coupled quarkgluon
plasma above deconfinement remains an unresolved question and the focus of
intense activity. Simulation methods for non-equilibrium field theory must be
developed to properly address such questions. In this project such novel methods
are to be investigated by detailed lattice studies that are a natural
continuation of simulations on deconfinement dynamics under previous NSF
support.

Broader Impacts of this project are that the proposed research in Lattice Gauge
Theory involves state-of-the-art methods in Computational Physics that are of
wide applicability in the Natural and Biological Sciences and Engineering. As
such it provides excellent training in such techniques to graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows. For example, graduate students engaged in previously
funded projects by this investigator are currently active in engineering and
biological research projects. The project can also serve, as it has in the
recent past, as a source for mini projects in computation and statistical
physics at the upper division undergraduate level. The interplay between
experimental discoveries (RHIC) and theoretical/computational physics present in
this project has also provided illustrative material for the principal
investigator's outreach activities to high school science teachers and students.