* 0852581
* Single Molecule Detection of Binding Kinetics
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Andrea Armani, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,222,472.00

The ability to understand and to manipulate protein-protein interactions will
contribute to improvements in biological imaging and methods for drug discovery
and delivery. One crucial component of protein interactions is the binding site.
The strength of the interaction determines the utility of the two proteins,
which could be an antibody-antigen or an enzyme-substrate pair. Different
methods have been developed to characterize this interaction, yet these
techniques require either high protein pair concentrations or imaging of the
interaction. High concentrations often cause blurring in the final data.
Therefore, to accurately determine the interaction between two proteins, it is
important to perform both types of measurements.&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of
this project is to develop and to demonstrate an optical sensor capable of
characterizing antibody-antigen binding at the single molecule level without
relying on images. This instrument is based on an optical sensor that relies on
resonance, somewhat like an acoustic tuning fork. The optical sensor is capable
of single molecule detection, because as molecules bind to the sensor, the
sensor?s resonant frequency changes, resulting in a fast response time (100ns)
and improved sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;This technique will enable new types of
measurements that will have immediate impact on the fields of cell biology and
biochemistry, with longer-term benefits to systems biology. Training future
scientists and engineers at all age levels is an integral component of this
project. In addition to the involvement of a graduate student and a post-
doctorate scholar, several undergraduate researchers whose stipends are provided
through USC?s Undergraduate Research Fund will be involved in different aspects
of this project. They will have the opportunity to learn state-of-the-art
instrumentation and fabrication methods in USC?s Class 10 cleanroom and electron
microscopy center. Results will be presented at professional conferences and the
equipment will be demonstrated to middle school and high school visitors to the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;