* 0852429
* Representations, modular forms and Galois groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Gordan Savin, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 348,148.00

A quadratic equation is a polynomial equation of degree two.&lt;br/&gt;A formula
for solving quadratic equations was already known to Babylonians in 1800BC, and
is familiar to just about everybody who has taken some mathematics
classes.&lt;br/&gt; On the other hand, a formula for solving cubic (degree three
equations) was developed much later, in the 16th century, during contests
between Italian mathematicians. Higher degree equations remained a mystery. A
breakthrough came in 19th century when Galois, a French mathematician,
introduced a new tool, a group of permutations of the set of roots of a
polynomial equation. This object, now called Galois group, expresses the nature
of the polynomial equation in subtle ways. In particular, it gives a criterion
whether the equation can be solved in terms of radicals. Fast forward to 20th
century. Due to efforts of hundreds of mathematicians, a classification of
finite simple groups has been obtained. A natural question is which of these
groups appear as Galois groups. In a couple of recent works, C. Khare, M. Larsen
and G. &lt;br/&gt;Savin have developed a method of constructing Galois groups
using Langlands functoriality principles. Gordan Savin is continuing his work on
this subject, as the main theme of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities supported by this grant will include participation of post-docs,
graduate students, domestic and international collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of proposed activities are expected to be similar to those
resulting from the grant DMS-0551846.&lt;br/&gt;They include, but are not
limited to,&lt;br/&gt;research opportunities for undergraduate students. One
such activity, supported by the previous grant, is the work of G. Savin and R.
Denomme (undergraduate from the Ohio State University) on primality testing
using elliptic curves with complex multiplication. The problem of factoring of
large numbers and related problem of verifying that a large number is a prime
number (primality testing) has attracted considerable attention in recent years
due to applications in cryptography. Indeed, internet security is based on an
observation that it is very easy to multiply numbers, but very hard to factor
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;