* 0852673
* Collaborative Research:  WN: Proper Location Identification in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Nan Zhang, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2011
* USD 201,570.00

Wireless networks bring mobility to users by allowing them to change location
without disrupting connectivity. On one hand, this opens space for a wide
variety of location-aware services. On the other hand, it also poses a concern
to users as to what extent their location can, or should, be identified in
different scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of the research is to
address the proper identification of mobile device locations in wireless
networks. There are two sides of the problem: the accurate determination of a
mobile device's location in applications such as E911 services, and the
effective protection of location information against adversaries which intend to
intrude mobile device users' privacy. This project takes a systematic view of
both sides of the problem, explores a solution space that spans both ends of
wireless communication, and delivers solutions for various application
scenarios. The sticking point is to determine the minimum location information
necessary for the intended network service by understanding, analyzing,
structuring, and controlling the complex interactions among different entities
in the system including end-devices, base stations, and (potential) adversaries
across application, network, and physical layers. Both control plane and data
plane are considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is to form a scientific foundation for proper location
identification.&lt;br/&gt;