* 0852396
* Arctic-CHAMP Project Office: The Arctic Community-Wide Hydrological Analysis and Monitoring Program
* GEO,OPP
* 06/30/2008,11/30/2010
* Charles Vorosmarty, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 11/30/2010
* USD 460,043.00

The Arctic constitutes a unique and important environment, central to the
dynamics and evolution of the Earth system. The region is currently experiencing
rapid environmental change. The sources and ultimate consequences of such change
are, however, still poorly understood. Research conducted as part of the NSF-
ARCSS Arctic Freshwater Integration Study (FWI) program has documented not only
the ongoing changes in the arctic hydrological cycle, but also the important
role these changes play in global climate dynamics. Recently developed documents
on research needs have emphasized the critical function of arctic freshwater
processes in ecosystem, social and global systems. The recently released SEARCH
Implementation Plan (SEARCH, 2005) describes changes in the freshwater system as
one of the most consequential links between the arctic and the earth systems.
Two of eleven working groups in the November 2005 International Conference on
Arctic Research Planning II (ICARP II) focused almost exclusively on freshwater
dynamics as the highest priority for the next decade of arctic research. The
work in this proposal will support the goals of SEARCH and contribute to IPY
through enhancing our understanding of the changing arctic system on circumpolar
scales. The primary function of the efforts described in this proposal is to
maintain the Arctic- CHAMP Science Management Office (SMO), expand the SMO
portfolio of support activities to include those recently identified by the FWI
rank-and-file to realize the FWI Synthesis, and to assist ARCSS in coordinating
emerging Arctic-CHAMP science and outreach efforts.

Intellectual Merit: The Arctic-CHAMP synthesis and integration issues are
complex and multi-faceted and a dedicated, well-managed, Science Management
Office is necessary to provide an efficient mechanism for facilitating maximum
collaboration and coordination among project participants and other related
research activities. The research and integration activities of the FWI
participants is now well established and progressing towards ultimately
achieving a valuable synthesis of broad-scale understanding of
atmospheric/terrestrial/oceanic connections through the freshwater cycle of the
pan- Arctic; however, and as we have found, coordination of synthesis activities
is essential to achieve maximum productivity and full-system scale integration.
The SMO will specifically:

Support the ongoing activities of the Arctic-CHAMP Scientific Steering Committee

Catalyze synthesis across FWI projects and make FWI synthesis relevant to ARCSS
community wide synthesis Organize Arctic-CHAMP and FWI scientific meetings and
symposia

Support the timely delivery of CHAMP-related science data products and develop a
coordinated pre-ADCC archive of FWI synthesis data products

Organize and conduct two major FWI synthesis Workshops in 2007 (for FWI
investigators) and 2008 (as an IPY-affiliated meeting), including the exercise
of the FWI synthesis compendium

Conduct liaison activities with other US and international agency partners, with
a special focus on IPY and ICARP-II.

Disseminate findings of Arctic-CHAMP effort, to scientists and broader user
communities.

