* 0852205
* Collaborative Research:  Accounting for Status
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Shelley Correll, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2011
* USD 135,369.00

SES-0751993&lt;br/&gt;Cecilia Ridgeway&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0751471&lt;br/&gt;Shelley Correll&lt;br/&gt;Cornell
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0751474&lt;br/&gt;Ezra
Zukerman&lt;br/&gt;MIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of accountability in
biasing decisions in favor of high-status options is captured by the saying, ?No
one ever got fired for buying IBM.? This expression reflects the recognition
that decision-makers who must justify their decisions to others have an easier
time defending that decision if they can say that they did what ?most people?
would have done?i.e., favored the high-status option. Yet while research in
economic sociology has documented such an effect, research on status in social
psychology has shown what appears to be the opposite pattern, whereby
accountability dampens biases in favor of status characteristics such as gender
or race. With this background in mind, the intellectual merits of the proposed
project are that it: 1) develops and tests a new theoretical analysis of the
role of accountability in status processes that advances our understanding of
important social inequality processes; 2) integrates two previously separate and
seemingly contradictory strands of research on accountability and status biases.
The key to this reconciliation involves recognizing that accountability is
constitutive of status because status not only signals ?quality? but also acts
as a social coordination device by which people align their behavior in relation
to others. Insofar as a decision-maker feels dependent on audience approval but
knows only that the audience is aware of the status structure, it is rational
for a decision-maker to favor high-status options even when the decision-maker
personally does not endorse them. But insofar as the decision-maker: believes or
suspects that the audience holds unconventional beliefs (e.g., that gender and
race biases are illegitimate), the bias towards high status options will be
reduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two experiments will test hypotheses about the
conditions under which accountability produces biases in favor of high status
options and those in which it suppresses such biases. The first experiment
employs a consumer product choice decision following economic sociology. The
second involves the assessment of applicant files for hiring similar to social
psychological research. Conditions within each experiment manipulate the
decision maker?s sense of the audience for his of her decision so that, for both
consumer choice and hiring recommendations, we predict high status favoritism in
one condition while we expect such favoritism to be suppressed in other
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several broader impacts. First
it has the potential to inform policies aimed at reducing workplace
discrimination against women and minorities by increasing accountability. This
project suggests that the positive effects of accountability will only be
realized in an environment that can effectively override conventional beliefs
and replace them with specific beliefs in the local environment that decouple
the association of status and quality. Second, the project will contribute to
the infrastructure of science by providing graduate students and several
undergraduates at two universities with first hand training and experience in
the conduct of social research. Third, from past experience, the PIs expect that
up to half of the graduates and undergraduates will be women and racial/ethnic
minorities. Such experiences increase the likelihood that these students will
pursue scientific careers. &lt;br/&gt;