* 0852270
* Developing Heavy Stable Isotopes for Provenance of Turquoise, Metals and Glass
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Joaquin Ruiz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2011
* USD 269,754.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the National
Science Foundation, an interdisiplinary team at the University of Arizona will
greatly expand work in progress on characterizing (1) sources of turquoise in
the southwestern USA and northern Mexico; (2) sources of native copper in north
America; (3) sources of copper in North and West Africa; and (4) glass trade
beads of the Muslim era in Africa. The team consists of an archaeologist (David
Killick), two geochemists (Joaquin Ruiz and John Chesley) and three graduate
students (Thomas Fenn, Lisa Molofsky and Alyson
Thibodeau).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the inorganic materials that were
highly valued by past societies are both geologically scarce and unevenly
distributed across the earth's surface. For example, Mesopotamia and the West
African Sahel both have few copper ore deposits, and thus the populations of
these regions had to obtain almost all of the copper that they consumed through
long-distance trade. Turquoise only forms around copper ore deposits in semi-
arid areas, but is often recovered from archaeological sites in regions where
there are no local sources, such as Mesopotamia and central Mexico. These
materials (and others, like obsidian, tin and jade) are therefore potentially
valuable indicators of the extent, duration and scale of prehistoric contacts
between distant regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actual proof of long-distance
exchange can only be obtained by matching the chemical or mineralogical
composition of archaeological artefacts to the composition of specific
geological sources of these materials (the field of provenance analysis). A
necessary first step is to demonstrate that all potential sources of these
materials can in fact be distinguished from each other on chemical or
mineralogical evidence. The methods most commonly employed for provenance
analysis (trace element ratios, optical petrography and x-ray diffraction) are
not likely to be fully successful in distinguishing copper and turquoise
deposits, which are highly variable aggregates of copper minerals and host
rocks. This study will rely instead upon the measurement of isotopic ratios of
lead and strontium. Ratios of these isotopes are less variable within particular
deposits than are trace element ratios, are not altered by weathering or
smelting, and can often be related to regional geological processes (e.g. the
assembly of subcontinents from terranes). Copper isotope ratios will also be
used as a third line of evidence in some cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of these studies will depend upon the empirical findings. If turquoise
sources can be successfully discriminated from each other, archaeologists will
have a powerful new way of investigating prehistoric interaction between Mexico
and the southwestern USA. Similarly, if the geological sources of copper alloys
and glass beads in archaeological sites in West Africa can be reliably inferred
from isotopic and chemical composition, archaeologists will be able to study in
some detail the early history of contacts between the Muslim world and sub-
Saharan Africa - a topic of very wide popular interest, given that one-third of
the population of Africa today are Muslims.