* 0852074
* REU Site: Physics Research at Brigham Young University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2012
* R. Steven Turley, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 09/30/2012
* USD 387,081.00

This award supports an REU / RET site in physics at Brigham Young University.
Participating students will engage in a ten-week summer physics research program
in computational plasma physics, ultrafast nonlinear optics, experimental and
computational condensed matter physics, x-ray and XUV sources and optics,
microfabrication technology, metrology, astronomy, or materials science.
Participating students will have the opportunity to experience the joy of
research by being involved in all aspects of a research project from proposal
presentation through performing the research and reporting their results. The
program will focus on developing students' abilities and interest in physics
research by hands-on experiences. There will also be some direct mentoring and
group training to help the students acquire the skills they will need to get
started in their research projects. Group training will include instruction in
experimental and computational techniques, sensitivity to experiences of
underrepresented groups in the disciplines, preparation for graduate school, and
scientific writing and presentations. Students will also benefit from close and
direct mentoring by faculty members involved in their research projects. This
contact will give them role models for professional ethics and standards and
opportunities to discuss many aspects of graduate school opportunities and
careers in physics and related fields. Special efforts will be made to recruit
and accommodate women and minority students in physics and those from two-year
and four-year colleges in our geographical region. The site will also include an
RET program involving three secondary school teachers. The teachers will work
alongside the REU students in similar research projects under the supervision of
faculty mentors.