* 0852141
* Improving GEOLocate to Better Serve Biodiversity Informatics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,134,058.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of researchers at Tulane
University has been granted an award to develop GEOLocate, a software tool for
assigning latitude and longitude coordinates to text descriptions of locations
where scientific collections were made (Georeferencing). There are hundreds of
millions of historical records of museum specimens and observations world-wide
with natural language descriptions of location but not latitude or longitude.
Georeferencing is a critical step in the processing of collection event data, a
process that starts with digitizing collection records, continues with
databasing and networking the data, and ultimately gives researchers access to
the vast specimen and data resources of natural history museums. Georeferencing
allows data from previous collection events to be displayed on digital maps,
permitting researchers to visualize the spatial and temporal intensity of
scientific collecting activity, examine species distributions, and developing
predictive models of species habitat use. It allows researchers to use natural
history data to address important scientific and societal needs such as
biodiversity causes and effects, conservation, environmental restoration, and
preparing for global climate change. The GEOLocate tool kit has gained wide
acceptance in the natural history collection community because of its geospatial
accuracy, automation and correction features. In this project, the team is
making critical advancements of the GEOLocate toolkit, including 1) enhancing
its web services for natural language processing and georeferencing of locality
descriptions; 2) improving GEOLocate?s core algorithm for more efficient and
accurate georeferencing; 3) integrating uncertainty calculations into the tool;
4) deploying default web mapping services for use in GEOLocate; 5) completely
rewriting the desktop software in Java, utilizing web services for
georeferencing and web mapping services for visualization; 6) integrating new
GEOLocate user interface components into the Specify biological collections data
management system; 7) enhancing user support &amp; training; and 8) gradually
phasing out the desktop version of GEOLocate following migration to the new
Internet-based client. The proposed advancements to GEOLocate will not only
enhance the capture of geo-coordinate data from existing electronic collection
records and newly digitized records; it will support the next generation of
research use of natural history collection data, performing all of its services
via remote distributed services. The project will include student participation
to give practical experience to the next generation of scientists. Additional
information about the project can be found at
http://www.museum.tulane.edu/geolocate/.&lt;br/&gt;