* 0852949
* CT-ISG: Collaborative Research: Detection and Isolation of Malicious Inclusions in Secure Hardware (DIMINISH)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2011
* James Plusquellic, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 07/31/2011
* USD 99,987.00

Due to global economy pressures, fabrication of advanced integrated circuits
(ICs) is migrating to foreign foundries. It has become a common trend for many
fab-less companies and government agencies to ship their designs offshore for
low-cost fabrication. These trends have raised serious concerns regarding
possible threats or attacks on US military systems, critical sites and even
household appliances that rely on high performance chips. There are various
potential vulnerabilities to such systems caused by malicious alterations of
hardware processes that might make these vital systems inoperable at some future
time. Such malicious manipulation of ICs slated for installation in US weapon
systems cannot be tolerated.

The focus of this research is on the development of automatic test pattern
generation (ATPG) and signal analysis techniques for detecting and locating
malicious alterations, e.g. the insertion of Trojan circuits, during wafer probe
aor package test as a means of improving the level of trustworthiness of the
chip. In particular, techniques that significantly improve the resolution of
quiescent current and transient current techniques for detecting and locating
Trojan circuits are investigated. A second focus of the project is on the
development of ATPG methods designed to detect hidden alterations of the chip,
e.g., inserted or weakened wires or transistors which cause the chip to fail
later in the field.