* 0852249
* SHINE:  How New Active Regions Trigger Erupting Filaments and Associated Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Sara Martin, Helio Research
* Standard Grant
* Ilia I. Roussev
* 09/30/2013
* USD 294,969.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans to investigate how erupting solar
filaments and Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) are triggered. The research will
focus on why and how quiescent filaments frequently erupt when a new solar
active region (AR) occurs within a broad area up to 35 heliographic degrees from
middle of the quiescent filament. This relationship was first noted by Bruzek in
1952, and past statistical studies have verified its validity. The PI's team
will examine new spacecraft data for evidence of interactions among solar
coronal magnetic fields that could explain the Bruzek relationship.

Specifically, the PI's team will use wavelet processed images from the Solar
Heliospheric Observatory Extreme-ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (SOHO EIT)
instrument to investigate how an AR can serve as a catalyst for a quiescent
filament to erupt, even when such a filament is relatively distant from the
newly forming AR. The PI will analyze a sample of at least 50 specific events
while focusing on observed evidence of magnetic interactions. The PI expects
this research to stimulate the development of new approaches to modeling
erupting solar filaments and CMEs, which will not only be very useful for the
solar physics research community, but also provide practical benefits to
society. Such results will improve forecasts of erupting filaments and CMEs,
which are important for space weather operations. One undergraduate student will
assist in the planned data analysis during the summer months in each year of the
project.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).