* 0852730
* CAREER:    Synthetic Design and Biological Study of Novel Polymeric DNA Delivery Vehicles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/30/2008,03/31/2011
* Theresa Reineke, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2011
* USD 266,477.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division and the Biomolecular Systems Program in the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division, Professor Theresa Reineke of the University of
Cincinnati will identify how the presence of hydroxyl groups, the number of
amine centers, the density of the cationic charge centers, the charge center
type, and the geometry of polymeric materials promote effective nucleic acid
binding, and she will determine how the chemical and structural properties
detailed above affect cytotoxicity, intracellular delivery, and gene expression
within living cells. The development of efficient and nontoxic nucleic acid
delivery vehicles has become one of the most significant and fundamental
problems facing research fields involving gene function, cellular signaling,
gene therapy, genetic vaccines, and plant biotechnology. Due to the dangers
associated with virus-based delivery systems, polymeric vectors now show great
promise. However, problems with toxicity, low delivery efficiency, and a lack of
insight into the polymer structure-biological property relationships have
hampered their use. The goals of the proposal will be accomplished by
synthesizing five novel polymer families that vary in the functionalities
mentioned above and by studying the polymer-DNA interactions via isothermal
titration calorimetry, dynamic light scattering, and zeta potential
measurements. Lowry protein, beta-galactosidase, and luciferase gene expression
assays will be performed with a variety of cell lines transfected with the new
polymers.&lt;br/&gt; The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the
Biomolecular Systems Program in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
supports Professor Theresa Reineke of the University of Cincinnati who will
establish and promote interactive mentoring, cooperative learning, and research
programs that successfully unite teaching and scholarship. This will be
completed through developing a structured mentoring program called Emerging
Ethnic Scientists (EES) that incorporates interactive and cooperative learning
techniques into a Freshman Chemistry course and mentoring high school and
undergraduate students in the process of scientific research. The long-range
goals and broader impacts of this work are to formulate a design model that can
be utilized by researchers in the field of polymeric gene delivery to develop
efficient and nontoxic vectors for specific cell types and applications and
impart to students the excitement of performing interdisciplinary research with
the goal of increasing the retention of underrepresented groups in the sciences.
Students involved in this interdisciplinary program will gain a uniquely broad
and in-depth experience in several areas ranging from synthetic chemistry and
polymer science to molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;