* 0852105
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Coevolutionary Models and the Evolution of the Anthropoid Honing Complex
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* William Kimbel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2010
* USD 1,760.00

Two features, bipedality and reduced canine size, distinguish humans and our
fossil ancestors from other apes. In monkeys and apes the canines are typically
relatively large and participate in a functional complex that sharpens the
canines during occlusion; the reduced hominin canine is not sharpened.
Characters within functional complexes are expected to coevolve as a result of
natural selection and, among nonhuman anthropoid primates, two characters of
this complex have been shown to be correlated among species, suggesting that
characters of the complex do coevolve. A similar pattern is not observed in
early hominins of the genus Australopithecus. Thus, the canine honing complex
provides a rare opportunity to investigate the coevolution and dissolution of a
functional complex.&lt;br/&gt; Character coevolution occurs as the result of
different processes; for example, characters may coevolve because of genetic
correlations, created by pleiotropy or genetic linkage, which exist among
characters. Coevolution, observed among species, is in this case an extension of
the genetic relationship that exists within species. Coevolution occurs in the
absence of genetic correlations as well if characters respond independently to
selection, which is termed selective covariation. This project will determine if
characters of the honing complex coevolve and, if so, by which process. Genetic
correlations in nonhuman primates would require a genetic decoupling of the
complex during hominin evolution; however, the absence of genetic correlations
would only require a change in the source or strength of selective pressures to
break up the complex. By examining patterns of covariation, both within and
among species, the process(es) that holds the complex together in extant
nonhuman anthropoids will be elucidated as will be the process that decoupled
the complex in hominins. This project will investigate the origin of canine
reduction, one of the hallmark features of hominin evolution. To address this
topic, the morphology of the primate dentition will be quantified using caliper-
and photographic-based measurements. Measurements will be taken on a broad
sample of primate dentitions to ensure that the sample is broad
phylogenetically, in body size, and in social structure.&lt;br/&gt;