* 0852791
* CAREER: Self-Assembly of Polyunsaturated Lipids and Cholesterol In The Cell Membrane
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Linda Hirst, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 01/31/2013
* USD 529,090.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to Florida State University investigates the self-assembly of
cholesterol and polyunsaturated lipids in the lipid bilayer and their structural
effects on the cell membrane. This proposal is to develop understanding of the
fundamental physics behind the cell membrane, and will undoubtedly lead to new
medical technologies in the future. In addition, self-assembled biological
structures can be tailored to a variety of applications for templating and the
formation of nanostructures. This proposal focuses on the study of membrane
systems using grazing incidence x-ray diffraction (GIXD) and resonant x-ray
diffraction. Using in-vitro lipid mixtures, the PI will investigate the effects
of biologically active molecules on the structure and physical properties of the
lipid bilayer. Cholesterol is one of the most important components of the cell
membrane, and through interactions with other lipids, it may influence membrane
protein function significantly by affecting membrane properties or by inducing
phase separation into lipid 'rafts'; areas of the cell membrane with a differing
composition to the surrounding regions. In this project, polyunsaturated fatty
acids will be incorporated into biologically relevant lipid bilayers and their
interactions with cholesterol. This interplay is highly relevant to membrane
properties in the retinal rod cell outer segment, where high concentrations of
highly unsaturated lipids occur, but their functions are not well understood. To
carry out this work, the investigators will use synchrotron x-ray techniques to
study bilayer structure in different lipid mixtures, particularly in plane
ordering. Fluorescence microscopy and atomic force microscopy will complement
this work, giving information on macroscopic membrane structure and phase
separation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of biological physics
and the relevance of cellular structure to the living organism, undergraduate
life-science students remain largely unaware of the physics of bio-molecules and
their interactions on the nano-scale, where fundamental forces control the
assembly of all supra-molecular structures found in the cell. This proposal aims
to introduce students in life-science majors with an aversion to physics, to the
world of bio-molecular interactions and their importance. By developing a major
new course, "Biomedical Physics", the PI is working to introduce physical
science topics to the undergraduate student population in novel, biologically
related ways. A key focus is to attract female undergraduate students in life
science majors to experience research in physics and to encourage them to pursue
a career in biophysics. The PI will also teach an undergraduate course in
condensed matter physics that includes more advanced topics in biomolecular
assembly and soft matter to the traditional condensed matter topics. These
courses will be complemented by the development of a major new web-site
"softmatterworld.org" focusing on soft-matter physics, a significant proportion
of which will involve biophysics and bio-molecular self-assembly.