* 0852843
* Collaborative Research:   IDBR:   New Technology to Measure Oganismal Color Phenotypes: 3D, Hyperspectral, UV-Vis, Virtual Reality Models of Organismal Coloration
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Brady, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 110,821.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is a collaboration
between investigators at Yale University and at Duke University.
&lt;br/&gt;Color is a crucial feature of many multicellular organisms.
Scientific description of organism color requires detailed documentation of both
the spectral and spatial variation in reflectance of the surface of the
organism. Because many organisms use colors in communication and camouflage,
organism color should be described over the entire visible spectrum of the
organisms themselves, their predators, and ecological partners. Currently, there
are no accepted technological methods for capturing detailed spectral data and
spatial geometry at the same time. &lt;br/&gt; This project will develop a new
technology to capture simultaneously an accurate, three-dimensional (3D) virtual
model of organism surface geometry, and detailed data on the spatial variation
in the spectral reflectance over the surface of the organism. The project will
combine 3D laser scanning, hyperspectral imaging, and 3D surface modeling to
record the color of diverse organisms. Beyond red, green and blue (RGB)
components and brightness information for each pixel, each hyperspectral image
captures an entire reflectance spectrum. The research will also implement and
further develop a new imaging technology that uses computational methods to
capture the entire hyperspectral data cube in a single exposure. The research
will focus specifically on birds, which have great color diversity and complex
four color cone visual systems. &lt;br/&gt; Using these unique data sets, new
mathematical tools will be developed for the spatial and comparative analysis of
variation in color over the surface of the organism as it appears to the visual
systems of organisms themselves. These new tools will be applied in pilot
studies of avian plumage color variation, mechanism, and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;
The proposed technology has the potential to transform the way biologists
quantify, analyze, and study the color of organisms. The color data sets will be
permanently curated at Yale University, and available for other researchers and
the public. The results will be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals,
and will be made available to larger audiences through popular science journals
like Scientific American and Natural History. Results will also be communicated
locally to ethnically diverse, urban, and economically disadvantaged communities
in New Haven, CT through a new Yale Peabody Museum exhibit.