* 0852414
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Local Impacts of Medical Tourism
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Stephen Koester, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Steven Koester, University of Colorado at Denver
doctoral student Courtney A. Lee will conduct research on how international
medical tourism affects local populations. Health care, once the most localized
of activities, is expanding into a global arena. The practice of patients
traveling to foreign countries for medical procedures is now a rapidly
expanding, multibillion dollar global industry. However, little is known about
local social effects in the countries to which these "tourists"
travel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in Costa Rica,
long lauded for its successes in public health and a popular destination for
elective medical procedures. Despite pressures to privatize, the Costa Rican
health system remains almost exclusively public, while medical tourism is a
private industry. This context provides a unique opportunity to examine the ways
in which the line between public and private line is navigated, the impacts of
integrating this powerful global industry into a state-oriented system, and the
potential implications that medical tourism has for health care of local,
underprivileged populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes a multi-
level, multi-sited, comparative ethnographic design to examine the relationships
among international entities, national government, and on the ground practices
that surround medical tourism. Lee will interview brokerages in the United
States to understand how companies operate and their relationship with hospitals
in Costa Rica. In Costa Rica, she will conduct semi-structured interviews with
health officials and carry out ethnographic field research in one public and one
private hospital. She will observe and interview physicians, patients, and
administrators; document hospital procedures and protocols; and collect
information on attitudes and opinions about medical tourism, motivations to
practice in the public or private sphere, comparative salaries and benefits, and
job satisfaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remarkable growth of medical tourism
coupled with the lack of research in this arena makes this project timely and
significant. This project addresses important social policy issues, particularly
for underrepresented populations, as well as issues of social responsibility for
industries. It also contributes to the education of a social scientist.