* 0852946
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Clovis Settlement Behavior in the American Southeast:  Using Lithic Artifact Analysis to Evaluate the Staging-Area Model
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Frank Goebel, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,199.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Ted Goebel, Ms. Ashley Smallwood's doctoral
research will apply site-level data about stone tool technologies to understand
Clovis settlement behavior in the American Southeast. Clovis hunter-gatherers
are the best-documented early inhabitants of the Americas. One of the most
remarkable aspects of the Clovis cultural complex is its extensive geographic
distribution covering all of North America south of the Wisconsin ice sheets. In
this vast area, Clovis bifacial fluted projectile points are found at
archaeological sites dating to approximately 11,000 radiocarbon years before
present. Smallwood's research will address key questions to help understand the
Clovis population's settlement process. How were Clovis technologies organized
during the late Pleistocene? What can studies of technology tell us about Clovis
mobility? How did Clovis groups disperse across North
America?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A "staging area" model developed by David Anderson
predicts that Clovis groups entered the continent and slowed migration to
concentrate territorial ranges around resource-rich river valleys. These valleys
became staging areas where groups settled-in and habitually used local tool-
stone and biotic resources. Under this settlement model, residence in staging
areas facilitated population growth and led to the fissioning of groups into new
secondary staging areas, inciting early cultural regionalization in the
Americas. Smallwood's study will evaluate the effectiveness of the staging-area
model through analysis of stone tool assemblages from three key sites in the
American Southeast: Topper (SC), Williamson (VA), and Carson-Conn-Short (TN).
Carson-Conn-Short occurs within an area designated as a primary staging area.
Topper and Williamson fall within areas Anderson designates as later
concentrations, or secondary staging areas occupied by foragers expanding from a
primary staging area. According to Anderson, these population concentrations are
where early regional cultural traditions
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the nature of Clovis settlement in
the Southeast is essential to fully explain the peopling of the Americas. Once
the staging-area model is tested, the Clovis record in the Southeast can be
confidently contributed to the broader study of Paleoindian adaptations across
the New World. Ultimately, this research will address how humans dispersed
across North America and how regional environmental variation impacted human
settlement strategies during the late Pleistocene. This intensive investigation
will help place the Southeast, as a region, into an even broader context to
answer theoretical problems of Clovis origins and adaptations. &lt;br/&gt;The
research will pertain to a larger body of literature exploring how modern humans
dispersed across the globe and how small-scale societies colonized empty
landscapes in the past. In conducting her research, Smallwood will interface
with the public by synthesizing valuable information from private and museum-
owned collections, educating the public on the importance of their collections,
and disseminating her research on the peopling of the Americas to the public
arena. Further, Smallwood will continue as a Clovis site-supervisor at the
Topper site in 2009, and in this capacity, she will instruct students and
volunteers of all ages about archaeological techniques and artifact analysis.
The field program at Topper has educated the public in the excavation experience
since 1996, and in the summer of 2008 alone it attracted more than 150
volunteers and visitors from around the world. The proposed research will report
the findings of the Topper excavation back to the volunteer community and
interested public. Finally, Smallwood's research will provide her with the
professional training and qualifications necessary to earn a Ph.D. in
Anthropology.