* 0852686
* Savannah Valley Frontier Project
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2012
* John Gillam, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,263.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles Cobb will conduct
archaeological research on colonial-era Native American towns along the Savannah
River in South Carolina and Georgia, USA. His team will focus on indigenous
migration to the Savannah drainage (which became part of the southern frontier
of the Carolina colony in the late 1600s) and resulting patterns of material
hybridity as Native groups began to incorporate and modify European practices
and material culture. The establishment of Charleston in AD 1670 spawned a
massive wave of Native American population movement, as groups attempted to
physically situate themselves to take advantage of highly lucrative trade
partnerships with the English. This movement led to a string of settlements
along the Savannah River south of Charleston, where large numbers of deerskins
were bartered to English traders in exchange for a wide range of European goods.
An important dimension of the migration was the variety of Native American
homelands involved. Towns along the Savannah River were founded by the Chickasaw
from Mississippi, Creek groups from Alabama and Georgia, and the Yuchi from
Tennessee, to name just a few. In addition, English trading outposts grew
alongside these towns. As a result, the Savannah River region evolved into a
frontier characterized by considerable ethnic diversity, and in many respects
was a staging ground for the melting-pot metaphor we associate with the United
States today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve two seasons of
archaeological fieldwork at a town occupied by Apalachicola Native Americans who
migrated from southern Georgia; field survey to identify additional towns along
the Savannah River; and re-analyses of collections made from earlier excavations
at two towns. Ethnohistorical research will complement the archaeological
investigations as Cobb and his collaborators will use colonial documents and
maps to identify town locations and reconstruct European descriptions of Native
American lifeways in those towns. The research questions are directed at
evaluating (1) the ecological and subsistence adjustments involved in the
uprooting from one location to another as groups migrated to the Carolina
frontier, and (2) how Native Americans selectively incorporated elements of
European material culture and practices into their cultures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit is based on its
examination of how migration into frontiers led to the formation of hybridized
patterns of material culture as groups learned to accommodate to very distinct
worldviews from their own. Traditional views of the North American frontier have
construed it as a wave of advance, where indigenous migration consisted of a
retreat from European colonial settlements. The Savannah Valley Frontier Project
promotes a more nuanced view of these processes that is in line with current
anthropological theory, where indigenous groups contributed to the formation of
borderlands through migrations and activities strongly shaped by their own
volition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study build on the
considerable history of the archaeology of colonialism that has been conducted
at the University of South Carolina. The research will actively integrate
undergraduate participation and outreach to Native American communities through
an archaeological field school operated through the USC Lancaster Native
American Studies Program. Graduate students will be directly involved as
graduate research assistants, and they and other graduate and undergraduate
students will be encouraged to adopt aspects of the project for thesis and
dissertation research.