* 0852111
* REU Site in Marine and Coastal Ecology in Alaska
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Carolyn Bergstrom, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 08/31/2013
* USD 308,763.00

This award to the University of Alaska Southeast (UAS) is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). UAS will
conduct an REU Site research program for undergraduates during the summers of
2009-2011. Ten students will be selected each year to participate in an
intensive 10-week research program in marine biology and coastal ecology. The
REU Site program offers research experience to undergraduate students interested
in the physiology, ecology, population genetics, and behavior of organisms in
Alaska's marine and coastal environments. The UAS Juneau campus, located on Auke
Bay, provides opportunities for hands-on research experiences with
invertebrates, birds, and mammals, as well as in glacial hydrology and
biogeochemistry. In addition to the Juneau area, field research projects take
place in Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve, the Tongass National Forest,
the Gulf of Alaska, Juneau glacial icefields, and the Arctic Ocean. The program
is supported with funds from the National Science Foundation Directorate of
Biological Sciences, in partnership with the Division of Ocean Sciences in the
Directorate for Geosciences. Each student participant will receive a stipend,
housing and subsistence allowance, and travel support to and from Juneau. The
program begins in early June with a retreat and an introductory workshop at a
wilderness lodge near the UAS campus. The retreat includes presentations by
mentors on their research, training in the conduct of science, selected field
methods, and field safety, as well as team-building activities. Student
participants conduct research under the guidance of UAS Natural Sciences faculty
and collaborating scientists. During the program, students work intensively with
their mentors on individual projects and present their results in a seminar at
an end-of-program symposium. Opportunities also exist for students to present
their work at national meetings. When not in the field, students and mentors
also participate in weekly discussions and seminars, including discussions of
scientific ethics. Additional information can be found at
http://www.uas.alaska.edu/biology/undergraduate-research/REU/index.html, or by
contacting the Project Director, Dr. Elizabeth Mathews at
eamathews@uas.alaska.edu.