* 0852811
* Logic and Computability
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Anil Nerode, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research proposed centers on investigations of the structures of sets and
functions ordered by relative complexity of computation. Particular emphasis
will be placed on issues of definability and automorphisms. Also included in
this area is the analysis of the relations between the difficulty of computing
functions and other issues such as rates of growth, complexity of their
definitions in arithmetic and the strength of axiom systems needed to prove
their existence (reverse mathematics). The emphasis in reverse mathematics will
be on analyzing basic combinatorial, model theoretic and set-theoretic
principles that seem to lie outside the scope of the standard theories studied.
In addition, a new approach to the issue of classifying the complexity of
mathematical constructions based on computability theoretic notions will be
developed. This approach should allow applications to uncountable and higher
order structures that are either out of reach of current approaches or (as in
the case of analysis on the real numbers) only handled through coding into
countable structures.

The proposed project includes research into a broad range of topics in
computability theory and logic both theoretical and applied to other areas of
mathematics and computer science. At the foundational level, this work will
illuminate the nature of relative complexity of computation, the strength of
axioms needed to prove standard mathematical theorems and the relations between
these areas. In practical terms, results in this area (computable mathematics
and model theory as well as reverse mathematics) at times indicate that there
are no algorithms for certain important tasks or that more information than
might have been expected is needed to write programs calculating the desired
results. The work related to automata theory and automatic structures is based
on a very resource-limited model of computation that is often relevant to
practical computing problems. The theoretical and foundational analysis of
structures whose basic relations and functions are computable by such automata
should also eventually be of practical significance. The primary focus in the
most applied areas to be investigated will be the logical and mathematical
foundations of hybrid (continuous and discrete) control theory as well as the
practical implementation of algorithms for these subjects based on the
theoretical work being done. Here the issue is to understand how to
mathematically model systems that include both digital (discrete) input and
logical constraints as well as analog (continuous) information and constraints.