* 0852643
* MRI: Acquisition of a Physical Properties Measurement System
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Gregory Kenning, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2012
* USD 327,030.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to obtain funding
to purchase a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) to be
operated as a user facility at the Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP).
This device offers a myriad of experiments allowing for characterization of
physical properties of materials including thermodynamic properties and
transport properties. This type of basic information is vital for characterizing
materials being produced and or studied, in a number of different fields, at
IUP. At IUP, users from the Physics, Chemistry and Geology Departments have
shown strong interest in using this device in their research projects. Specific
research projects include investigations of the following types of effects and
materials:&lt;br/&gt;1) Thermodynamic properties of complex nonequilibrium
magnetic materials&lt;br/&gt;2) Finite size effects in thin and multilayer
films&lt;br/&gt;3) Magnetic properties of nanoparticles and nanoparticles
arrays&lt;br/&gt;4) Spin related phenomena in dilute magnetic
semiconductors&lt;br/&gt;5) Polymorphism in organic crystals and its potential
impact on pharmaceuticals&lt;br/&gt;6) Properties of new optical
materials&lt;br/&gt;7) Geophysical magnetic correlation methods&lt;br/&gt;As a
primarily undergraduate institution the faculty and staff at IUP are focused on
undergraduate and M.S. training. All of envisioned research projects, within
this proposal, are structured to provide student training. We are also intending
to use this device to develop a dual level experimental materials science course
for seniors and M.S. students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to obtain funding to purchase
a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) to be operated as
a user facility at the Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP). This device
would allow users to measure many of the properties of materials necessary for
understanding both the type of material and internal workings of the material.
At IUP, users from the Physics, Chemistry and Geology Departments have shown
strong interest in using this device in their research projects. Projects
include work on magnetic materials, man-made materials, semiconductors,
characterization of geological materials, optical materials and organic
materials. As a primarily undergraduate institution the faculty and staff at IUP
are focused on undergraduate and M.S. training. All of envisioned research
projects, within this proposal, are structured to provide student training. We
are also intending to use this device to develop a dual level experimental
materials science course for senior and M.S. students. &lt;br/&gt;