* 0852701
* Collaborative Research:   Integrated Microfludic Platform for High Throughput Single Cell Gene Profiling
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Pei-Yu Chiou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Gene expression in human cells is the process that translates the information
embedded in agene into the synthesis of a cellular product. It is a critical
aspect of both normal and pathological development of cells and tissues. Current
bulk gene expression assays rely on molecules extracted from multiple cells or
tissue samples, therefore containing various degrees of cellular heterogeneity.
As a result, it is difficult to determine the regulatory relationship of genes
in different phases of development from these 'cell population averaging'
measurements. The investigators have previously demonstrated that a microfluidic
technology can be used for extracting total messenger Ribonucleic acid (mRNA)
from single-cells and synthesizing complementary Deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) on
the same chip for high efficiency single-cell gene expression profiling and
reduces the minimum detectable number of mRNA molecules. However, one of the
current challenges of them microfluidic device is the difficulty of using
pneumatic pumping and valving mechanism for single cell addressing, which is a
time-consuming and labor intensive task. In this project a microfluidic platform
will be developed for massively parallel single cell mRNA analysis for gene
profiling applications. The proposed device integrates three functional regions
on a single Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microfluidic chip: a high speed
microscale fluorescence activated cell sorter (ÂµFACS), optoelectronic tweezers
(OET) for massively parallel single cell manipulation, and 1000 microfluidic
wells for single cell mRNA extractions and cDNA conversion. This device will
solve the technical issues in integrating OET with microfluidic devices to
enable massively parallel single cell manipulation. One thousand cells will be
individually trapped and transported into microfluidic wells where cells are
split, or lysed, for gene profiling analysis. Integrating OET allows eliminating
the multiplexed microfluidic control network that has been proven extremely
inefficient in single cell manipulation and replacing it with dynamic optical
images that can be reconfigured in real-time. Success in this proposal will
realize a low-cost, fully integrated microfluidic chip capable of conducting
massively parallel gene profiling on 1000 single cells. Knowledge developed
during the course of this project will be incorporated into the investigators?
teaching activities at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Results of
this proposal will be published in international conferences and peer-reviewed
journals and information will also be available on the investigator website.
Minority graduate and undergraduate students will participate in these projects
through independent research courses. Students involved in this project will be
exposed to an excellent multidisciplinary training environment between the USC
Medical School and UCLA Engineering School. The PI will also be involved with
the outstanding outreach program (CEED) in UCLA to recruit underrepresented
college students for constructing a 'Virtual Chemical Lab' allowing everyone in
the world to control cells in investigators' lab through Internet.