* 0852345
* Financial Frictions and Monetary Policy:  Accounting for the Behavior of Small and Large Firms over the Business Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Varadarajan Chari, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 471,720.00

Intellectual Merit: A central question in monetary economics is how monetary
policy affects real activity over the business cycle. One widely held view is
that it does so through the credit channel, by affecting the rates at which
banks borrow and lend, and by affecting the balance sheets of firms,
particularly for firms with limited access to financial markets. This proposal
describes three projects aimed at investigating the quantitative importance of
the credit channel and the implications of theoretical models of the credit
channel for the conduct of monetary policy. The first proposed project is
empirical and analyzes the business cycle characteristics of the size
distribution of firms, price-cost margins, labor productivity, borrowing costs
and other measures of financial constraints, all by firm size. The focus on firm
size is motivated by the idea that larger firms have better access to financial
markets. This analysis covers widely-used and new data for the postwar period
and the Great Depression for the United States as well as postwar data for a
number of other countries. The PI's have obtained approval from the Census
Bureau for access to an extensive detailed collection of data at the plant and
firm level since the 1970s. A panel tracking the behavior of plants and the
characteristics of their associated firms will be constructed using this data
and data from publicly available sources. Preliminary findings suggest that,
over the business cycle, small and large firms (with very different access to
capital markets) behave very similarly, but following monetary contractions
small firms contract disproportionately relative to large forms.&lt;br/&gt;The
second project builds a model consistent with the findings of the first project.
In the model, financial frictions affect the use of working capital,
particularly for small firms. Larger firms are less affected by these frictions
because they have greater access to public financial markets. A monetary
contraction disproportionately affects small firms and distorts their use of
working capital relative to other inputs. Over the business cycle, productivity
shocks affect both types of firms similarly as long as monetary policy is
appropriately accommodative. Preliminary versions of the model suggest that
while it is promising other mechanisms may be needed to amplify the eÂ¤ects of
shocks.&lt;br/&gt;The third project is intended to develop an amplification
mechanism. We describe a model in which small firms discipline the monopoly
power of large firms. Financial frictions disproportionately affect small firms.
In recessions, financial frictions worsen and small firms marginal costs rise
relative to those of large firms. The economy becomes less competitive and the
resulting distortions provide a possible amplification mechanism. Furthermore,
in the model, the labor wedge rises in recessions much as it does in the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts are that the
projects will help improve the conduct of monetary policy over the business
cycle. The projects will also help in the design of regulatory policy aimed at
the banking and financial services industry and in the design of policies aimed
at new and small firms. The research described here will be disseminated
broadly. It will be published in academic journals as well as in publications by
the Federal Reserve System and publications which are intended for fiscal and
regulatory policymakers.