* 0852082
* REU Site: University of Hawai'i (UH) High Performance Computing (HPC) Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Applications in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Susan Brown, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 08/31/2012
* USD 295,222.00

Proposal No. 0852082&lt;br/&gt;P. I. ? Susan T.
Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year REU site program at the University
of Hawaii will provide research experiences for ten undergraduate students each
year in the area of Engineering Applications of Computational Fluid Dynamics
(CFD) using High Performance Computing (HPC). The primary objectives of the
program are to: (1) introduce engineering undergraduates to HPC applications in
engineering; (2 provide research experiences for students that are unlikely to
have such experiences (3) advance the research in Mechanical and Civil
Engineering through the students' projects, and (4) encourage more students,
especially from underrepresented groups to pursue graduate studies and careers
in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the students will participate in
overview and introductory lectures to lay the theoretical foundations, coupled
with hands-on tutorials using commercial CFD software. Working in teams with
their mentors, the students will carry out advanced applications of CFD in the
area of tsunami impact on structures, thermal-fluid modeling of heat sinks, and
tsunami modeling. They will also have the opportunity to work with top-of-the-
line supercomputers at the Arctic Region Supercomputer Center (ARSC) as well as
on local computers, working on some of the most advanced engineering problems in
today's research environment. The program will culminate with students' making
presentations of their work, in a conference format, to their mentors and peers
and other invited guests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this REU
Site arise from the participation of undergraduate students who are
underrepresented minorities in engineering and science. The involvement of these
students in exciting research in Computational Fluid Dynamics using High
Performance Computing enhances the likelihood that they will consider post-
graduate study and broaden the base of the Nation's technical manpower. Results
of the research will be disseminated at conferences, (i.e. ASME Ocean, Offshore
and Arctic Engineering Conference, ASCE/SEI Structures Congress, International
Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering (IABSE Symposia) and ASME
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE) and in
several journals (i.e. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, ASME
Journal of Heat Transfer, ASCE Structures Journal, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;