* 0852869
* Lightning: Electromagnetic Environment and Source Parameters
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Vladimir Rakov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,279,792.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Lightning significantly impacts public safety and economic security both through
its role in producing numerous injuries and loss of life as well as by frequent
and extensive damage to forests, housing and businesses, and vulnerable
technological systems upon which society increasingly depends. Scientific
investigations supported by this project will serve to better detect and
quantify a wide range of physical processes that accompany and ultimately
control lightning initiation, propagation and environmental impacts. Efforts
will combine observational and modeling approaches to address both naturally-
occurring and "triggered" lightning strikes. These latter events hinge on a
unique system utilizing small rockets (which trail a conductive wire) launched
into active thunderstorms from an internationally-recognized research facility
at Camp Blanding, Florida. Studies will also take advantage of expanded
capabilities to measure high frequency electric field derivatives of lightning
at a nearby facility in Gainesville. Both of these facilities are managed and
operated by the Principal Investigator and partly supported via funds provided
under this project.

The intellectual merit of this research rests on the improved understanding of
physics occurring within and immediately surrounding lightning channels,
beginning with processes key to the initial triggering and step-wise propagation
of lightning through the atmosphere, but ultimately encompassing electromagnetic
emissions reaching into the nearby and distant environments. This research will
utilize traditional advanced high-speed optical systems, but also involve
detection and quantification of highly energetic x-ray and gamma-ray bursts, and
will explore mechanisms involved in the generation of these recently identified
emissions. Observations will address electromagnetic influences capable of
disrupting power transmission and sensitive electronic systems and extend to
evaluation of performance characteristics of the operational National Lightning
Detection Network (NLDN). Analysis of unique data previously acquired at the
aforementioned field observational sites in north-central Florida will continue.

Broader impacts will be derived through improved methods for lightning detection
and mitigation of associated damage, but will extend to student training,
including direct involvement both graduate- and undergraduate-level students
employed at the field research facilities and enhanced course offerings both on
the campus of the Univ. of Florida and via a Distance Learning Program. Outreach
through public seminars and high-school presentations will continue. Impacts
will involve continuation of collaborations with international scientists and
presentations at both domestic and international science and engineering
conferences. Dissemination of results will occur both through media interviews,
formal publications within established scientific journals, and through the
Principal Investigator's established interface with energy generation and
distribution companies and associated applied research groups.