* 0852048
* REU Site: Summer Engineering Research Experiences in Diabetes for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Vincent Turitto, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 03/31/2012
* USD 329,998.00

Proposal: 0852048 PI Name: Eric Brey

This renewal REU award for a site focused on diabetes will support ten
undergraduates for three years in a ten-week summer research experience at the
Illinois Institute of Technology (ITT).

The primary goals of this program are to: 1) have students complete challenging
diabetes-related engineering projects with research mentors; 2) demonstrate the
ability to design experiments, analyze data, and present results that address a
hypothesis; 3) expose students to the broader health implications of their
research with lectures, outreach, and tours of clinical facilities; and 4)
integrate ethics discussion and training into all aspects of the student
experience. In order to build positive relationships between students and
mentors in this program several social activities have been planned. These
include weekly lunches, a student/faculty cookout, trips to sporting events, and
performing volunteer work for the American Diabetes Association Day Camp. These
experiences will stimulate the interests of undergraduates in engineering
research, in general, and specifically emphasize the needs for top-notch
researchers in the field of diabetes.

More than 18 million people in the United States have diabetes. While a cure
does not currently exist, biomedical engineering is providing important inroads
to understanding and treating the disease and its many complications.

In 2005, ITT established a unique multi-disciplinary center, the Engineering
Center for Diabetes Research and Education?s (ECDRE) under the umbrella of the
Pritzker Institute for Biomedical Science and Engineering. The objective of the
ECDRE is to use engineering techniques to increase understanding and treatment
of diabetes and its complications. Also, the ECDRE is the first engineering
center in the U.S. to focus on diabetes. The Biomedical Engineering Department
at ITT in collaboration with the ECDRE will provide the foundation for this
summer REU program

The PIs will target undergraduates from institutions were Biomedical Engineering
research opportunities are limited, with a focus on women and underrepresented
minorities for participation in this REU summer program. By conducting research
projects related to a disease that affects more than 18 million people in the
United States, the PIs have the potential to advance understanding while
influencing engineers in their career.