* 0852066
* REU Site: UTEP Summer REU Program in Applied Intelligent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Olac Fuentes, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 03/31/2012
* USD 315,000.00

This project will be performed by the Computer Science Department at the
University of Texas at ElPaso (UTEP), in collaboration with the departments of
Psychology, Biological Sciences, Industrial Engineering, and Civil Engineering.
The topical focus will be Applied Intelligent Systems. The main goals of the
project are to increase participation in science and engineering fields by
traditionally underrepresented groups, to introduce science and engineering
students to cutting edge interdisciplinary research, and toprovide students with
an opportunity to familiarize themselves with graduate programs in science and
engineering at a regional university. The program will host students for a
period of ten weeks during the summer. It will emphasize interdisciplinary
research, where techniques developed in the area of artificial intelligence will
be appliedto real-world problemsinscience and engineering. This will allowthe
students togain a broader overviewof science and engineering as a potential
career than would be possible in more narrowly-defined research areas. An
emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from minority-serving
institutions and institutions that do not offer graduate programs in computer
science. The proposed program will provide undergraduate students an opportunity
to conduct full-time collaborative interdisciplinary research under the co-
supervision of a faculty member fromthe computer science departmentand a faculty
member from one of the collaborating departments hold a seminar series in which
academic and non-academic careers in science will be discussed, promote
extensive student-faculty and student-student interaction through weekly
gatherings (research meetings and social/cultural activities) and undertake
activities to mprove students' confidence and communication skills through oral
and written presentations of project results and through Career Development
Workshops.

Intellectual Merit The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the unique
combination of: a)well-planned interdisciplinary research projects, which can
realistically be expected to be completed by an undergraduate student during one
summer; b) mentorship by at least two faculty members from two different
research departments,which enables students to gain a richer perspective about
careers in science; c) emphasis on development of research skills over knowledge
about a particular discipline; d) emphasis on recruitment by individualized
invitation over self-selection of applicants, which is expected to attract
larger numbers of minority applicants, and, f) participate in a proven mentor
training program.

Broader Impacts The broader impact of this project will ultimately be increased
numbers of students, in particular members of underrepresented groups, pursuing
graduate studies in science and engineering and engagingin successful careers.It
is expected that most of the students who participate in the project will enroll
and successfully complete graduate studies and that a significant fraction of
them will become faculty members at colleges and universities.