* 0852470
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant. Inalienable Property and Market Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Nada Moumtaz, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2010
* USD 11,361.00

City University of New York graduate student, Nada Moumtaz, with the guidance of
Dr. David Harvey, will undertake anthropological research on pre-capitalist
Islamic forms of property that co-exist with capitalist, market economies. The
focus of her research will be the waqf, a charitable endowment dedicated to a
pious purpose forever. As such, the waqf is inalienable property, that is,
property that cannot be transferred from one person to another through sale or
other means. The waqf was once common in the Muslim World, but discarded in the
20th century because it was considered pre-modern. Recently, however, the waqf
has been undergoing a revival. The researcher will be investigating this
phenomenon, through a case study of the past and present of the waqf in
Lebannon, asking how religious regimes of value intersect with the market
economy, and what purpose is served by having both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
the waqf is grounded in a long tradition in Islamic Law surrounding charitable
property donations, the researcher must contextualize contemporary meanings and
practices in relation to that tradition. For this purpose, data are being
gathered through archival collections of foundation documents, leases,
exchanges, and accountings of waqf in nineteenth century Ottoman Beirut, now
located in Ottoman archives, shari'a (Islamic) court records, family archives,
private libraries of religious scholars, and newspapers. Research on
contemporary waqf practices will be carried out using ethnographic methods,
interviewing donors, architects, and government representatives concerned with
waqfs, and following the trajectory of new waqfs currently being constructed.
The historical and contemporary materials will then be analzyed both
quantitatively and qualitatively, to document changes in waqf practices and in
the how people understand such key concepts as market, value, and
property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it contributes
to the theoretical understanding of the varieties of contemporary capitalism and
the different regimes of value that can exist within capitalism. As capitalism
spreads in the world and generates new challenges, micro-level understandings of
its development in particular local contexts have increasing relevance. The
research also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.