* 0852113
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site - Arecibo Observatory Summer Student Program
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Donald Campbell, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniel Evans
* 05/31/2012
* USD 271,881.00

Through participation in the active research environment of a professional
scientist rather than through student exercises, students experience the full
breadth of scientific research from defining the question to be answered or
explored, through data-taking and data interpretation steps, to the preparation
of a published paper or public presentation of their work. For more than
35-years, the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center has sponsored a summer
student research program at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. Under this
award, this work will continue as students work as professional research
collaborators with members of the Observatory scientific and technical staff on
the on-going research programs of the mentoring staff members for ten-week
during the summer. The intellectual goals are, (1) To enable students to explore
a career as a research scientist through participation in frontier scientific
research projects at a national research facility; (2) To educate students in
the multi-disciplinary scientific fields that are actively carried out at the
Arecibo Observatory, including radio astronomy, radar astronomy and the
atmospheric and space sciences; (3) To expose students to hands-on experience
with state-of-the-art technology; and (4) To give students a real-world
experience that helps them to evaluate career options and in preparing them for
graduate studies. Much of the research in which the students participate leads
to publications in scholarly journals or to presentations that the student will
make to professional organizations such as a meeting of the American
Astronomical Society.

In addition, this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site has a goal
to achieve a multi-cultural, gender-balanced, summer student body selected from
both Puerto Rican colleges and universities, and from mainland U.S. schools.
During the course of the summer, an introduction to the people and culture of
Puerto Rico is presented through a program of invited speakers, and by planned
group excursions to the many natural and historical attractions on the island.

This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the NSF Division of Atmospheric Sciences
under the NSF REU program.