* 0852139
* Collab. Proposal: Partial and Point Identification of Causal Net and Mechanism Effects Under Different Treatment Assignments with Heterogeneous Effects: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Alfonso Flores-Lagunes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 01/31/2010
* USD 72,195.00

Within the literature on causal statistical inference, an important goal is to
examine the causal mechanisms or channels through which the treatment or
intervention affects the outcome of interest. Net (or direct) causal effects
measure the effect of the treatment on the outcome while blocking the effect of
the treatment on the variable that represents the mechanism. Hence, net effects
are useful in learning about the ways in which the treatment causally affects
the outcome and, as a result, can be used for policy purposes in the design,
development, and evaluation of interventions. Despite their evident importance,
the latest theoretical developments on the definition, identification, and
estimation of this type of effects have taken place in fields outside economics.
The research objectives of this proposal are to: (i) introduce developments on
net and mechanism effects in other fields to economics, employing familiar
econometric language; (ii) contribute to the literature on these causal effects
by providing new conditions for their partial and point identification
(nonparametric as well as parametric) under different treatment assignments,
allowing for heterogeneous effects; and, (iii) provide relevant applications and
simulations of the methods that can guide future applied research.

More specifically, this project first employs the potential outcomes framework
(Neyman, 1923; Rubin, 1974) and related concept of principal stratification
(Frangakis and Rubin, 2002) to introduce into economics the concepts of net
average treatment effect (NATE) and mechanism average treatment effect (MATE).
These two effects decompose the total average treatment effect (ATE). Related
concepts have been previously introduced in other fields by Robins and Greenland
(1992) and Pearl (2001). Second, this project provides new results for the
nonparametric partial identification of net treatment effects under minimal
assumptions. Subsequently, the project presents different sets of assumptions
that allow parametric as well as nonparametric point identification of NATE. The
nonparametric results follow from an application of the insights in the seminal
work of Imbens and Angrist (1994) and Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996) on local
average treatment effects. The analysis is done for the cases in which the
treatment is randomly assigned, when selection is based on observables, and when
selection is based on unobservables. This last case has not been considered in
the recent literature on net effects in other fields, and it is important in
economics. Finally, applications of the methodologies are provided based on
substantive and well known empirical problems employing data sets available to
the investigators. They will be complemented by Monte Carlo simulations. These
simulations offer further insights on the application of the methods and the
robustness of alternative identification assumptions.

This project makes a clear and significant contribution to the econometrics
literature on causal inference. It also provides linkages among econometrics,
statistics, epidemiology, artificial intelligence, and other areas that
emphasize estimation of causal effects. The proposed research is also likely to
impact many areas of economics and other sciences by adding new tools to the kit
of applied researchers. This is particularly the case in those fields in which
the estimation of treatment effects is important for analysis and policymaking,
such as labor, public, agricultural and health economics, among others. To this
effect, the project stresses the inclusion of empirical applications and
simulations that will provide guidance for applied researchers as they implement
the methods introduced in this proposal.

Broader Impacts: The results and methods developed in this project will be used
as a teaching tool in graduate courses in economics and agricultural economics
at the University of Florida and the University of Miami. The research
assistants selected for the project ¯who will help with coding the statistical
programs for the empirical applications and simulations¯will be well-trained in
this regard, and every effort will be made to ensure that they come from
underrepresented groups (which is anticipated to be no problem given the
existing diversity at the principal investigators? institutions). The project
also broadens the participation of underrepresented groups because both PIs, in
addition to being junior faculty, are members of such a group. Finally, the
project will promote synergies between the University of Miami and the
University of Florida, and particularly between economics and agricultural
economics, as the PIs are members of each department.