* 0852549
* SGER:  Primary Meteorological Variables Influencing Hurricane Evacuation Decisions: A Case Study of Hurricane Gustav
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2008,09/30/2009
* Michael Brown, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 09/30/2009
* USD 5,780.00

The primary focus of this SGER project is to determine if people are evacuating
in response to the meteorological variables of a hurricane, such as forecasted
winds and storm surge. The PIs will ascertain which meteorological variable(s)
motivate residents to evacuate and the sources used to assess those factors.
Results will yield a better understanding of residents' priorities, and this
will allow forecasters, emergency managers, and government officials to better
communicate with the residents in advance of hurricanes by focusing on variables
of interest to the people. A secondary objective is to analyze the spatial
variation of threat perceptions across the evacuation region. It is important to
determine if people are evacuating in anticipation of the worst damage swath
immediately to the right of the eye, or if they are evacuating due to a
perceived threat of hurricane force conditions across the entire region. Prior
research has addressed these questions, but they were mostly conducted well
after the storm or with respect to hypothetical situations. In 2008, Hurricane
Gustav had the potential to be a powerful hurricane and to influence a highly-
populated and recently impacted coastline in Louisiana and Mississippi. Gustav
was anticipated to prompt a mass evacuation of the Gulf Coast region, thus
providing an ideal and narrow window to survey evacuees during the evacuation
process. Given the frustrating evacuation of Hurricane Rita, it is a concern
that many residents may not evacuate as readily for future storms of comparable
intensity. Improved understanding will ultimately aid in the planning of
evacuations as researchers can predict where residents will evacuate (or not)
according to the expected threat(s) in their area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
data to be collected during this project cannot be considered the same as data
collected after the storm has impacted the area and affected the subjects'
perspectives and priorities. It is likely that vital information will be lost
regarding the exact reason(s) for evacuation during a post-storm assessment.
Furthermore, individuals may not clearly remember the meteorological variables
that influenced their decision to evacuate. These data may provide a better
understanding as to what drives personal evacuation decisions. A voluntary post-
storm survey will be used to determine whether evacuees' perceptions and
motivations change after the storm. This will help relate these results to those
of other post-storm studies. In addition to scientific publications, results
will also be disseminated to emergency managers and government officials.