* 0852741
* Collaborative Research:  IDBR:  Development of a Biofluid Transport, Separation and Molecular Analysis System using Microfluidics and a Miniature Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Paul Bohn, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2013
* USD 725,000.00

Biological systems respond to environmental stresses and chemical agents by
producing unique biochemical signatures, i.e. biomarkers, that - when detected
and interpreted correctly - yield enormous insight into the state of the
organism. Thus, the central objective of this work is to develop an integrated
instrument that detects and identifies biomarkers by acquiring small- volume
fluid samples, separating and pre-concentrating the biologically important
components in a nanofluidic-microfluidic chip, and then characterizing them
using on-line mass spectrometry in a miniature mass spectrometer. In the
process, the applicability of molecular identification tools in biological
research will be enhanced by significantly decreasing the concentration levels
at which specific organic molecules can be detected in complex mixtures. Novel
protocols for transferring and ionizing compounds of interest based on high-
frequency ac electrospray ionization and desorption electrospray ionization
methods will be developed and compared with respect to figures of merit, such as
mass transfer efficiency, sensitivity and background interferences. One specific
aim is to improve the efficiency of the ionization step, by far the least
efficient process in mass spectrometry. Critical performance tests of the
analysis system will target biomarkers for oxidative stress using biofluids
which mimic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). &lt;br/&gt;The coupling of micro/nano
fluidic sample preparation to miniature atmospheric pressure mass spectrometers
offers much value to the biological sciences, for example making it possible to
realize real-time functional assays of changes in fundamental metabolic,
regulatory and signaling processes in response to environmental factors.
Fundamental improvements in the performance of mass spectrometers and in
microfluidic devices will result from the synergy of this project, making
possible future generations of biological instruments of great power and
utility. In addition to the direct relevance to biological research, successful
instrumentation development will impact medical diagnostics: The same markers
relevant to biological oxidation processes are germane to the early detection
and prognosis in a host of diseases, including multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's
disease, Niemann-Pick C, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, heart disease,
Parkinson's disease and ischemic stroke, making the results readily translatable
to human health studies. Furthermore, the training of highly skilled
instrumentation scientists is an emerging national need, and this need will be
addressed by formalizing collaboration through (1) research student exchange
between Notre Dame and Purdue and (2) larger scale exchanges between Purdue's
Center for Analytical Instrumentation Development (CAID) and Notre Dame's
Advanced Diagnostics and Therapeutics Initiative. Both institutions aim to (i)
train graduate students in instrumentation science (ii) engage in
instrumentation development, (iii) facilitate its commercialization, (iv)
benefit the regional economy through instrument commercialization. The public
can follow these activities at the relevant websites:
http://sri.nd.edu/advanced-diagnostics- and-therapeutics/ and
www.purdue.edu/dp/caid/.