* 0852965
* GOALI:  Gated Tunneling Devices from Nano-wire Core Shell Structures for Low-poer Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Supratik Guha, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to address one of the most pressing questions in the area of electronics ?how to
reduce power consumption in new generations of field-effect
transistors.&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to employ for the first time a
silicon/germanium nanowire heterostructure in a core-shell arrangement to enable
a novel type of gated tunneling device structure. This device makes explicit use
of the one-dimensionality of the system by employing the quantum capacitance
limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;While transistors have
been scaled substantially over the course of the last few decades, power
consumption kept increasing due to the use of "conventional" devices. The
proposed tunneling transistor development from a coaxial nanowire
heterostructure utilizing germanium and silicon is capable of overcoming this
major obstacle by employing a band pass filter type arrangement. A one-
dimensional wire structure can truly exploit this tunneling approach to create a
device with substantially reduced power consumption specs while the use of
industry compatible materials allows technology transfer at a later
stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will add
to the current understanding of the impact of the quantum capacitance in low-
dimensional systems with respect to future low-power devices
applications.&lt;br/&gt;At the same time the proposed effort includes an
integrated education and outreach program that addresses challenges in current
nano- materials and devices related education. The proposed program includes 1)
the development of a course on "One-Dimensional Nanoelectronics", and 2) an
effort on mentoring through Women in Science and Women in Engineering.