* 0852532
* Conference on Hopf Algebras and related topics
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Robert Guralnick, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 10/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Guralnick,
Robert M.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0802098 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Southern California &lt;br/&gt;Title: Conference on Hopf Algebras
and related topics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support a
three day conference on Hopf Algebras and Related Topics be held on the campus
of the Univeristy of Southern California during the period February 14 - 16,
2009. Hopf algebras are a common generalization of group algebras and Lie
algebras. Many ideas from group theory and Lie theory are used to study Hopf
algebras, but also Hopf algebras have been shown to be the right framework to
study important problems in many areas. There have been recent advances in the
subject with regard to classification problems, actions of Hopf algebras on
rings, connections with noncommutative algebra, quantum groups, extensions to
more general categories, invariant theory and representation theory of algebras.
They have become an important tool in geometry and topology, especially knot
theory, and provide a good framework for understanding invariants. They are used
prominently in physics and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will
focus especially on certain aspects that have become increasingly important in
recent years. There has been progress in classifying Hopf algebras and their
representations, both in the pointed case (using some analogs of Lie methods)
and in the semisimple case (with using more group-theoretic analogs). In
particular the notion of Frobenius-Schur indicators, studied classically for
finite groups and extended to Hopf algebras with a suitable definition, has
become a major topic of investigation in Hopf algebras. Indicators have been
used as a new invariant to classify Hopf algebras and to study the
representations of Hopf algebras. In a different direction, there have been
major advances about the stability of various radicals under actions of Hopf
algebra, a classical problem. This conference will bring together experts in
Hopf algebras, representation theory, ring theory and group theory with common
interests in Hopf algebras but different viewpoints. It is expected that this
will lead to even further advances and more connections among the different
fields. A further goal of the conference is to expose outstanding postdoctoral
and graduate students, especially women and other under represented groups, to
the plethora of techniques and important problems in the area and to have them
interact with some of the top people in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;