* 0852099
* REU Site: SURF-IT: Exploring Integrative System Design at UCSC
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Richard Hughey, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/28/2013
* USD 458,457.00

The Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship in Information Technology (SURF-IT)
at the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) provides an intensive and
personalized summer research program for students with an emphasis on
undergraduates from underrepresented groups and disadvantaged
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary part of SURF-IT is a 9-week summer
program that includes research directly supervised by a UCSC faculty member.
Students also have weekly meetings on graduate school preparation, ethics, and
research presentation, as well as field trips to local neighboring Silicon
Valley research laboratories, and a number of social activities. The summer
program concludes with a research poster presentation by the SURF-IT students.
The goal is to promote diversity in computer science and engineering by
assisting motivated students in obtaining graduate degrees, who then become
positive role models for future generations of college students throughout the
nation. To better achieve this goal, the site maintains continuing contact with
SURF-IT alumni to assist them in applying to and succeeding in graduate school,
as well as in their eventual careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
The students join a variety of funded research projects in integrative system
design within UCSC's department of computer engineering. The special
intellectual merit of each project varies, however all students will learn to
apply their traditional academic training to open-ended research problems at the
forefront of information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
impact is that greater numbers of individuals from groups underrepresented in
information technology, such as women and racial/ethnic minorities. These
individuals are moving toward leadership positions in academia and industry,
thus providing positive role models for a next generation. The combination of
this program and other REU sites ensures broadened participation in computer
science and computer engineering, as well as an increased domestic pool of
highly trained information technologists.