* 0852775
* A Chemical History of Anthropogenic Input to the Atmosphere throughout the Industrial Era
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Tami Bond, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 774,455.00

This project will develop a history of anthropogenic emissions of short-lived
pollutants to the atmosphere during the period from 1850 to 2010. It will
produce estimate of all major aerosol species, aerosol precursors, short-lived
trace gases, ozone precursors, and major trace elements emitted from
anthropogenic, energy-related combustion and industrial processes for that
period. This work represents the first attempt at constraining histories of
these species by integrating all available records, from engineering histories
to ice cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trends in technology change and emission
were previously developed on the basis of engineering records and used to
estimate black and organic carbon histories. Process-specific emissions of other
tracers will be added to develop a time history of multiple tracers. Emissions
will be translated to atmospheric concentrations and deposition using the
Community Atmosphere Model (CAM) developed at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research. Measured histories of deposition will be tabulated as
recorded in lake sediments and ice cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will update the CAM deposition parameterization, particularly for snow and ice,
based on recent polar campaigns. It will also conduct an analysis of transport
to and deposition in remote regions by climate mode, using a 40-year run with
prescribed meteorology, to assess transport and deposition prior to 1960.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scheme will be developed to obtain an optimal
representation of emitting technology by comparison with predicted and observed
deposition records. Trends, rather than absolute magnitudes, will be the primary
basis for comparison. Markers used for optimization will include elemental
ratios in source profiles and differences in observations near and far from
sources. The optimized technology base will then provide emissions of the
important atmospheric species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project include: (i) spatially and temporally resolved inputs to global chemical
and transport models that evaluate changes in climate forcing, transient climate
response, and climate sensitivities from short-lived chemical species and (ii)
critical inputs to models of time-dependent anthropogenic perturbations to
biogeochemical cycles. A graduate student and two undergraduate students will
participate in this project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;