* 0852593
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Morality and Personhood in the Hmong Diaspora: A Person-Centered Ethnographic Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Richard Shweder, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Chicago doctoral student, Jacob Hickman, with the guidance of Dr.
Richard A. Shweder, will investigate how immigrants' cultural models interact
with both individual subjective experience and the competing models of the
majority groups in resettlement contexts. The focus of the research will be
beliefs of morality and personhood held by Laotian Hmong who have immigrated to
Thailand and to the United States. The researcher will compare these different
resettlement communities in order to understand how daily living, cultural
practices, and interactions with institutions in Thailand and the United States
shape immigrants' beliefs about morality and personhood. Morality and personhood
were chosen as domains for this ethnographic comparison because of their
fundamental importance for understanding oneself and one's relationships with
others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taking advantage of the natural experiment
afforded by having immigrants from one place settle in two different countries,
the researcher will undertake nine months of fieldwork in Thailand and nine
months in the United States. Using a person-centered research methodology, he
will conduct person-centered interviews, undertake continuous ethnographic
observation, and carry out a systematic survey of one community in each research
site. Interviews and observations will focus on intra-familial intergenerational
comparisons, in order to gauge how changes in personhood and morality differ
across two generations that have entered the different resettlement contexts at
different points in the life course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
significant because it will illuminate the processes of change that migrants
experience from resettling in different social contexts, including interactions
with both formal and informal institutions. The analysis of a group that
originated in one location and migrated to two distinct locations for more or
less random reasons constitutes a unique comparative framework for investigating
how people both react to and are shaped by their social and cultural milieu.
This knowledge will offer a better understanding of the nature of
"assimilation," a social, economic, and political concern for receiving
countries. The research also supports the education of a social scientist.