* 0852044
* REU Site:   Agricultural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Education and Development Program (ASSURED)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Wendy Hamilton, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2012
* USD 270,000.00

The New Mexico State University's Chile Pepper Institute will provide a research
program for undergraduates during summers of 2009-2011. Ten students will be
selected to participate in a 10-week research program, called Agricultural
Science Summer &amp; Research Education and Development (ASSURED). Students will
conduct research in genomics, plant science and agriculture. The goal of the
program is to have underrepresented first generation college students from
immigrant farm labor families expand their appreciation of agricultural science
in a university, research-rich context. Students engage in research that
explores questions relevant to agricultural science and learn about various
careers available in agriculture from research in genetics and microbiology to
crop production. In the ASSURED research environment, students take real life
situations and apply the scientific method to the discovery process. Students
learn from mentors and contribute to the research program of the mentors.
Student projects include genetics, breeding, plant physiology, insect control,
economics, weed control, agricultural engineering, and many others. Weekly group
meetings, workshops and lectures cover ethical conduct in research, career
choices, and others. The students are required to prepare an oral presentation,
a poster presentation and a written report on their research findings. Students
with disabilities are also eligible for the program. More information is
available by visiting http://www.chilepepperinstitute.org/agricultural-science-
sum.html, or by contacting the Program Director, Dr. Paul Bosland, at
575-646-3028 or hotchile@nmsu.edu.