* 0852962
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Telomere Dynamics:  An Important Link Between Growth and Longevity?
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Britt Heidinger, Heidinger               Britt
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 12/31/2010
* USD 91,984.00

0852962 Heidinger

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Britt
Heidinger to work with Dr. Pat Monaghan at the University of Glasgow in the UK.

There is an increasing appreciation that understanding the mechanisms that
underlie life-history traits is essential for predicting the evolution of life-
history trade-offs. Life-history theory predicts that life-history traits such
as the rate of growth are optimized rather than maximized. In support of this
idea, rapid growth is associated with accelerated aging and a reduced lifespan
in diverse taxa. However, we currently have little information about the
physiological mechanisms that underlie this link. One process that is likely to
be particularly important in this regard is cell telomere loss. Telomeres
shorten during cell division and limit the replicative potential of cells and
might thereby influence organismal lifespan. Exposure to oxidative stress in
vitro accelerates telomere loss. Therefore, metabolically costly processes such
as growth acceleration might hasten telomere loss in vivo and form a mechanistic
link between the rate of growth and longevity. This study will take advantage of
a unique opportunity to test this hypothesis in a known-age, free-living
population of a long-lived seabird, the European shag (Phalacrocorax
aristotelis). Specifically, we will examine whether 1) telomere length and loss
rates are predictive of longevity, and whether 2) growth acceleration during
development increases levels of oxidative stress and hastens telomere loss. The
results of this study will enhance our understanding of the long-term
consequences of the conditions experienced during early life and the mechanisms
that underlie life-history trade-offs.



