* 0852090
* REU Site: Collaborative Research and Education in Agricultural Technology and Engineering (CREATE)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Pamela Ronald, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 09/30/2012
* USD 360,000.00

EEC-0852090 P.I. Jean VanderGheynst

The REU Site award, entitled "Collaborative Research and Education in
Agricultural Technology and Engineering (CREATE)" will provide undergraduate
students with integrated research and educational training in plant sciences,
molecular biology and engineering. In this REU program the participants will be
involved in cutting edge research areas that address the following major
problems facing our nation and the world: 1) Lack of rapid production
technologies for vaccine manufacturing; 2) Rising health care costs; 3)
Dependence on fossil fuels for energy and chemical feedstocks; and 4)
Contaminated soil and groundwater. In order to address these major societal
problems, the CREATE program will focus on the development and use of transgenic
plants and/or in vitro plant based systems for the production of industrial non-
food products, biopharmaceuticals and for bioremediation.

This REU program is well structured with a high level of interaction between
peers and mentors. The undergraduate students will be part of highly diverse
interdisciplinary research teams, made up of faculty and graduate student
research mentors, from a variety of disciplines, including Biological Systems
Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Plant Biology, Plant Pathology, Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, and Genetics. In addition to the research activities, REU
students will be required take at least one short course offered in plant
biotechnology or plant bioprocessing to learn critical experimental methods used
in plant biotechnology and to strengthen their research skills. They will also
participate in alternating weekly research seminars on the topical themes and on
ethics, individual and team presentation challenges, speech and poster
development training, seminars and practice modules in pre-graduate preparation
and submitting graduate applications, and a faculty-protégé retreat. The program
will culminate with a CREATE REU Research Symposium to enable participants to
showcase their individual research findings and accomplishments and prepare them
for scientific and professional society conference attendance and presentations.

The Principal Investigator is committed to recruiting undergraduate participants
from underrepresented groups. This REU program will prepare undergraduate
students for graduate-level research related to agricultural biotechnology and
prepare them to be the research and educational leaders of the future who will
help solve society's most pressing problems related to affordable vaccines and
therapeutics, energy sustainability and environmental stewardship.

Co-funding for this project is provided by the NSF Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI).