* 0852886
* IDBR:   RUI:  Development of a Cantilever Based Optical Interfacial Force Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Byung Kim, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2013
* USD 240,181.00

The cantilever based optical interfacial force microscope (COIFM) is a new tool
to be developed, through this project, for the study bio-molecular metastable
energy states. A bio-molecular system passes through several metastable states
before it reaches a stable state with the lowest energy. Probing the metastable
states and their shape, or conformation, is crucial for understanding bio-
molecular function. However, metastable states are difficult to observe because
of their relatively short lifetime and their non-equilibrium nature in a
solution phase. The COIFM?s sensitive distance and force control capability will
allow for investigating the metastable states along the reaction coordinates. By
combining a conventional interfacial force microscope (IFM) and an atomic force
microscope (AFM) type cantilever and its optical detection scheme, the COIFM
will substantive improve measurement accuracy .. A force feedback technique for
the IFM will be adopted to remove the rapid snap-off process, an intrinsic
mechanical instability associated with conventional devices, which prevents
probing metastable states during bio-molecular activations. The smaller probe
size of the cantilever will enable inproving the force resolution, over
conventional techniques, by at least an order of magnitude. The improved COIFM
capability will be demonstrated by probing metastable states during bio-
molecular activations of a biological system at the single molecule level. These
COIFM modifications have the potential to quantitatively measure biological
interactions at various molecular levels, not only for single molecules, but
also for viral, bacterial, and cellular systems. To make this development as
widely available to other laboratories as possible, all details, including
electronic circuits and specifications of the COIFM mechanical head, will be
well-documented and openly accessible. For wide applications to biological
systems, manufacturers will be encouraged to incorporate COIFM capability into
their existing systems. Results of the research activities will be disseminated
through, and evaluated by, (i) presentations at national/international
scientific conferences; (ii) publications in peer-reviewed journals; (iii)
creation of an interactive physics lab website; and (iv) demonstrations to lab
visitors. This project will engage one undergraduate student and one graduate
student in research and training activities each year, thus providing
unprecedented research opportunities for as many as six physics, chemistry,
biology, and engineering students over a three-year period. This research will
be an important addition to the strong and growing multi-disciplinary
undergraduate research program at Boise State University, and to its planned
Biomolecular Sciences PhD program.

