* 0852025
* Collaborative Research:  REU Site Project--Evolution of  Precambrian Rocks in Yellowstone National Park
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2012
* David Mogk, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2012
* USD 268,429.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in Yellowstone National Park
(YNP) will characterize the geology, geochemistry and geochronology of the
Precambrian rocks that underlie the northern part of the Park. REU students will
participate in three major activities that will constitute a complete research
experience: 1) Field studies, conducted in YNP will include geologic mapping and
sampling of the Precambrian basement of YNP; formulation of testable research
questions by smaller working groups; and mapping and sampling projects to
address these research questions; 2) Analytical studies, starting with sample
preparation immediately following field work at Montana State University;
petrographic analysis at the students' home institutions; a week-long visit to
analytical laboratories to conduct follow-up studies by small research groups
during the academic year (University of Florida for geochemistry and
geochronology; Louisiana State University for electron microprobe analysis); 3)
Communicating results, each working group will submit an abstract to the
following Geological Society of America Rocky Mountain sectional meeting as a
first step towards formalizing the research results, including a writing
workshop to encourage collaborative writing towards a peer-reviewed journal
article. This REU site project will be conducted over two years with a focus on
the anomalously low-grade metasedimentary rocks in the first year and
(meta)igneous rocks in the second year. In aggregate, the research results will
provide important insights into the petrogenesis, architecture, and evolution of
the Precambrian rocks of YNP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will
contribute to a more complete understanding of the natural history of YNP. The
geologic maps and sampling locations will be GIS-based and will be transmitted
to the YNP Research Office for inclusion in their database to help inform
further research and management in YNP. Students who participate in this project
will gain valuable research experience through participating in the full range
of activities including hypothesis formulation and testing, field mapping and
sampling, sample preparation, analytical studies on modern instrumentation,
communicating results at a professional meeting and engaging collaborative
writing towards a peer-reviewed journal article. A research on learning
component will document the cognitive and affective impacts of the field
experience on the participating students to help document best instructional
practices in field instruction for use by the larger geoscience education
community.