* 0852862
* SGER: Realization of Half-Metallicity in Magnetite
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Jinke Tang, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 10/31/2010
* USD 170,639.00

TECHNICAL: While attractive to many, true half-metals have not been observed
experimentally. The room temperature value of the spin polarization falls far
short of 100% for all theoretically predicted half-metals. The experimentally
reported room temperature spin polarization of Fe3O4 varies between 20 and 80%.
Several factors may contribute to the lack of metallicity, including surface
oxidation and reconstruction, presence of magnons, surface magnetic state being
different from the bulk, and the properties of the barrier materials when the
experiments involve magnetic tunneling junctions. In this project, an innovative
and exploratory approach to unveil the spin polarization of Fe3O4 is to be
investigated. Ultra thin oxygen-free organic overlayers will be applied to the
surfaces of Fe3O4 to prevent its oxidation and to lift the reconstruction with
the ultimate goal of restoring the true spin polarized nature on its surfaces.
Understanding that achieving 100% spin polarization may be difficult, this
investigation also aims at the realization the highest possible half-metallicity
in Fe3O4. Both high quality epitaxial films and cleaved surfaces of single
crystal Fe3O4 will be prepared. A group of organic overlayers that show promise
for the stated purposes, including styrene, thiols, graphene and carbon
?dusting?, will be deposited on the surfaces. The chemical and structural
properties and spin polarization of the surfaces with/without overlayers will be
investigated with state-of-the-art characterization tools and magnetic tunnel
junctions will be made for additional spin polarization measurements. Due to the
unavoidable presence of the surface states that are different from the bulk, it
has been an extremely difficult task to probe the true spin polarization of
Fe3O4. The project points to a novel and promising way to overcome such obstacle
by applying overlayers on various surfaces of Fe3O4. Such efforts to protect the
surfaces from oxidation and, in particular, to lift the reconstruction have not
been tested before, and the risk is high in terms of the outcome of the project.
However, the potential impact will be tremendous as it leads to a completely new
and transformative approach to reveal the bulk spin-resolved electronic
properties. NON-TECHNICAL: If successful, realizing half-metallicity in Fe3O4
will be groundbreaking to the spintronic materials research and will have a huge
impact on the science and technology of spintronics. This high risk high payoff
project should have a direct economic impact on the future information
technology. Both graduate and undergraduate students, especially
underrepresented minorities and females, will be provided with training
opportunities in condensed matter physics and materials science that are
strongly linked to advanced technology.