* 0852649
* CAREER:Towards Effective Identification of Application Behaviors in Encrypted Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 08/19/2008,08/31/2012
* Fabian Monrose, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2012
* USD 257,182.00

Fabian Monrose&lt;br/&gt;John Hopkins
Unversity&lt;br/&gt;0546350&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Several fundamental
security mechanisms for restricting access to&lt;br/&gt;network resources rely
on the ability of a reference monitor to&lt;br/&gt;inspect the contents of
traffic as it traverses the network. However,&lt;br/&gt;with the increasing
popularity of cryptographic protocols the&lt;br/&gt;traditional means of
inspecting packet contents to enforce security&lt;br/&gt;policies is no longer a
viable approach as message contents are&lt;br/&gt;concealed by encryption. This
project encompasses the first major&lt;br/&gt;component of a principled
investigation into the feasibility of&lt;br/&gt;protocol identification based
solely on those features that remain&lt;br/&gt;intact after encryption---namely,
the packet size, inter-arrival and&lt;br/&gt;direction. More specifically, this
work attempts to provide a better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the limits of
protocol recognition based on a&lt;br/&gt;thorough statistical analysis and
information theoretic assessment of&lt;br/&gt;the available features in protocol
behaviors observed in the&lt;br/&gt;wild. Specifically, this project advances
the current state of the art&lt;br/&gt;and contributes to the scientific
community by building efficient&lt;br/&gt;mixture models for detecting protocols
with multi-modal behaviors,&lt;br/&gt;designing practical tools for visualizing
behavioral motifs in TCP&lt;br/&gt;sequences, providing new information-
theoretic decision policies for&lt;br/&gt;assigning protocol class labels to
these sequences, and imparting new&lt;br/&gt;notions for assessing realistic
masquerading attacks and the&lt;br/&gt;appropriate defenses.&lt;br/&gt;