* 0852610
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Sociocultural Factors Affecting Medical Constructs of the Consumptive in Nineteenth-Century Scotland
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Jane Buikstra, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2010
* USD 14,871.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Jane E. Buikstra, anthropology graduate student Amy
W. Farnbach will investigate how the understanding and treatment of disease is
shaped by social and cultural factors. She will conduct her research in
Scotland, a critical setting for the development of modern western medical
ideas. Ms. Farnbach will use nineteenth-century archival records to investigate
medical understanding of tuberculosis (TB), then known as consumption, and the
variable treatment of TB patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will include
patient medical records and other documents from twenty-nine medical
institutions operating during the nineteenth century in Glasgow, Edinburgh,
Dundee, and their surrounding areas. Using this rich corpus of materials, the
researcher will address two major research questions. First, how did patient
social categories and changing medical knowledge of TB affect doctors' ideas
about the disease? Second, what indicators did doctors use to diagnose
consumption in nineteenth-century Scotland, and how consistent were those
indicators? To address the first question, she will analyze patient records and
recorded discussions among medical personnel to determine whether doctors
attributed men's and women's TB to different causes, or approached working-class
and higher-status TB patients differently. For the second question, the
researcher will undertake chi-square analysis of the clinical indicators
recorded in cases diagnosed as TB, consumption, and other diseases in patient
records, to test whether "consumption" had a strict clinical definition or was
more loosely diagnosed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the nineteenth century, TB
affected a staggering number of lives. Even today and despite antibiotic
treatments available since the mid-twentieth century, the disease remains common
worldwide in large part because many with the disease go untreated. While it is
known doctors' attitudes toward TB patients are likely to affect whether
patients seek and comply with medical treatment, how this works is poorly
understood. This research will contribute to social science understanding of the
non-scientific factors that affect medical practice. It also will help to
clarify contemporary western medical assumptions about TB and TB patients by
examining their historical roots.