* 0852653
* New Theortical Approaches in Nuclear Reactions and Application for Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Akram Zhanov, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2013
* USD 196,127.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest physicists Vladimir
Gamow compared our universe with a giant reactor or cauldron, in which all
elements are cooked up via nuclear reactions. The process itself is called
"nucleosynthesis." We are all made of the products of this nucleosynthesis.
Studying how the nuclear reactions proceed inside stars is one of the main
objects of contemporary nuclear physics and of this project. The question is how
we scientists can get a look inside a star. Physicists use different
observational methods to get information about nuclear reactions in the stellar
interior, but mostly the sources of the information are located on the star's
surface. Often physicists are trying to mimic nuclear reactions inside stars in
the laboratory using accelerators. However, nuclei have electrical charges of
the same sign and they repeal each other making it very difficult or often
impossible to measure nuclear reactions in the laboratory at stellar (very low)
energies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to develop
reliable indirect probes of nuclear reactions occurring inside stars, which
allow us to study astrophysical nuclear reactions in laboratories. One such
technique is a very neat implementation in physics of Homer's Odyssey, namely,
the siege of Troy, and Ulysses' scheme to hide his warriors inside a giant
wooden horse presented to the Trojans as a peace offering. Once inside the
gates, the warriors waited until nightfall, then emerged, and conquered the
unsuspecting city. This idea has been implemented in Trojan Horse-like nuclear
reactions. To overcome the barrier of electric repulsion in the nuclear reaction
one of the interacting nuclei is hiding inside the so-called Trojan Horse
nucleus, which is accelerated to energies sufficient to overcome the electrical
repulsive forces. After the Trojan Horse nucleus penetrates through the
electrical repulsive barrier, it breaks down leaving the hiding nucleus inside
the target nucleus while the second constituent nucleus of the Trojan Horse
leaves as a spectator carrying away all the excessive energy. Theoretical
background for analysis of such reactions will be developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be directly integrated into the
education of students at the graduate and undergraduate levels.