* 0852636
* Modulation of Microsaccades and Correlated Neural Responses as a Function of Viewing Task
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Susana Martinez-Conde, St Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 626,505.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People are often surprised to learn
that their eyes never stop moving, even when they fixate their gaze. Even more
surprising: if our eyes did stop moving, we would become blind to stationary
objects due to a brain process called "neural adaptation". Since we fixate our
gaze about 80% of the time, fixational eye movements are responsible for driving
most of our visual experience of stationary objects. The physiology and
perception of fixational eye movements are therefore critical to understanding
the neural mechanisms that overcome neural adaptation and maintain visual
awareness. A type of fixational eye movement, called microsaccades, produces
bursts of neural activity in visual system neurons and counteracts adaptation
and visual fading. However, no study to date has determined the role of
microsaccadic dynamics (rate, velocity, and magnitude) on high-level visual
processes, from either a perceptual or a physiological viewpoint. With support
from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Susana Martinez-Conde and colleagues
at the Barrow Neurological Institute will address this gap in knowledge by
determining the relationship between microsaccadic dynamics and a variety of
high-level viewing tasks. The project will measure microsaccade dynamics during
viewing tasks with varying attentional/cognitive demands and will also examine
the neural activity that occurs in correlation to microsaccades during such
viewing conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because much, if not most, of our
visual experience occurs during fixation, understanding the role of fixational
eye movements in perception and cognition is of utmost importance. This research
will determine how viewing conditions differentially modify the dynamics of
microsaccades, as well as their impact on neural activity and successful task
completion. The funding from this application will be used to support a new
research group at the Barrow Neurological Institute which can provide research
training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral trainees in
neuroscience. It will broadly disseminate results through publications to
scientific as well as lay audiences, thus enhancing scientific understanding by
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;