* 0852216
* SHINE: Electron Pitch-Angle Scattering during Solar Electron Bursts
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Curt de Koning, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/28/2014
* USD 235,333.00

The PI plans a comprehensive analysis of solar electron bursts observed during
solar cycle 23 by the WIND, ACE, and Genesis spacecraft. In this investigation,
the PI and his collaborators will compare in situ measurements with published
simulation results. The PI will calculate the widths of electron pitch angle
distributions (PADs) before, during, and after bursts for a wide variety of
electron energies. The PI will also characterize the solar wind plasma and
interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) before, during, and after the electron
bursts. He will then determine if these PAD, solar wind plasma, and IMF
signatures are consistent with pitch-angle scattering by the electron/electron
instability. In non-broadened bursts, the PI will determine if the PAD, solar
wind plasma, and IMF characteristics are consistent with pitch-angle scattering
by broadband whistler turbulence. Since the electron/electron instability can
generate Type III radio bursts, the PI and his collaborators will determine the
correlation between broadened solar electron bursts and Type III radio
bursts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI notes that an improved understanding of
electron propagation during solar bursts addresses the ongoing controversy
concerning the acceleration of electrons in the solar corona and their injection
into the interplanetary medium. Electron pitch-angle scattering during bursts
can also serve as a proxy for electron scattering during other forms of solar
activity, including CMEs, and it may be important in resolving the solar
magnetic flux budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this research project, the PI
plans to mentor summer students and involve them in the analysis of the WIND,
ACE, and Genesis spacecraft observations. The students will be participants in
the Boulder Research Experience for Undergraduates program, which is jointly
managed by the University of Colorado and NOAA's Hollings Undergraduate
Scholarship program.