* 0852865
* SGER: Fluvial Dynamics of a Large-River Meander Cutoff
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2011
* James Best, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2011
* USD 64,992.00

Meandering is a fundamental characteristic of many natural rivers that has yet
to be adequately explained. The dynamics of meanders involves the continuous
evolutionary development of sequences of meander bends through time as the
channel migrates laterally and downstream. Individual bends can evolve into
complex forms characterized by multiple arcs of curvature, with these loops
evolving to curve back upon themselves at their entrance and exit to form a
narrow neck. Flow across the neck during floods eventually leads to the
development of a new channel at this location, a process known as a meander
cutoff. The old meander loop is then abandoned by the flowing river as sediment
plugs the entrance and exit of the loop to form an oxbow lake. Recent research
has emphasized the importance of meander cutoffs in the dynamics of meander
trains, or sequences of bends. Cutoffs can have a substantial influence on bend
interactions, because these events often trigger new patterns of evolutionary
development of bends adjacent to the cutoff, which in turn affect other bends
throughout a meander sequence. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will
examine the development of a new meander cutoff along the lower reach of the
Wabash River on the Illinois-Indiana border. The investigators have been
monitoring the new cutoff since the days after it formed in June 2008, and they
will use funds from this award to continue to monitor its development and to
examine the influence of the cutoff on the dynamics of a large-river confluence
immediately downstream where the Wabash flows into the Ohio River. The
investigators will focus on how the cutoff affects the three-dimensional flow
structure of the river at the upstream and downstream ends of the cutoff
channel, the developing flow structure within the cutoff channel and within the
meander loop that is being cutoff, and the dynamics at the confluence
immediately downstream. They will relate documented patterns of flow structure
to patterns of channel erosion and deposition to establish linkages between
fluvial processes and fluvial forms within the evolving cutoff. This will be
done by (1) mapping the extant morphology of the cutoff channel, the bed
morphology of the meander loop, and analyzing ancillary information on the
occurrence of the cutoff and its influence on the Wabash River-Ohio River
confluence; (2) measuring patterns of three-dimensional flow structure at the
upstream and downstream ends of the cutoff, within the cutoff channel and within
the meander loop during events of different flow stages; (3) mapping patterns of
erosion and deposition at the upstream and downstream ends of the cutoff, within
the cutoff channel, and within the meander loop; and (4) measuring the flow
structure and mapping patterns of sedimentation at the Wabash-Ohio confluence.

This research project will make a substantial field-based contribution to the
understanding of the dynamics of meander cutoffs, which can later inform
development of general process-based numerical models of meandering. The project
also will enhance basic understanding of the ways that the formation of the
cutoff affects the changing dynamics of the large Wabash-Ohio river confluence
immediately downstream. The project will have positive broader impacts by
providing research and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students and for providing valuable data to enable local government agencies and
other stakeholders to determine how to deal with the land-management
implications of the new cutoff and related changes.