* 0852482
* Product Imaging of Photodissociations and Reactions of Atmospherically Important Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/10/2008,03/31/2011
* Paul Houston, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 03/31/2011
* USD 250,301.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry program, Paul
Houston of Cornell University and his students will use product imaging
techniques to study the ultraviolet photolysis of small molecules and
bimolecular reactions involving atomic oxygen. The Cornell group investigate the
one- and two-photon dissociation of NO2 and compare the speed and angular
distributions of the atomic products with theoretical predictions. NO2 plays an
important role in the catalytic destruction of ozone, and a better understanding
of the mechanism of its photodissociation will improve our ability to model the
chemistry of the upper atmosphere. A major new thrust of the work is to apply
product imaging techniques to the study of bimolecular reactions, in particular
reactions between high energy oxygen atoms and a variety of atmospheric species,
including molecular nitrogen and oxygen. Houston and his students also will
study the reaction of excited oxygen atoms with N2O to produce N2 and O2 or 2NO.
In these studies, Houston will measure the vibrational and rotational
distributions of the molecular collision partners following deactivation of
excited oxygen atoms and relate these results to theoretical predictions of
reaction efficiencies.

This work addresses fundamental experimental issues in chemical physics and
promises to provide detailed results on the chemistry of the oxides of nitrogen
and of excited oxygen atoms, species that play important roles in the chemistry
and photochemistry of the upper atmosphere. The research will provide excellent
training for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in experimental physical
chemistry, particularly in the further development of product imaging
techniques.