* 0852510
* Development of a Greenhouse Gas Ocean-Atmosphere Flux Sensor with MEMS-based Photoacoustic Technology
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Eugene Terray, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2015
* USD 1,104,321.00

Accurate measurements of the atmosphere?ocean fluxes of trace gases are
important to an improved understanding of the cycling of climatically relevant
gases. The direct eddy correlation (EC) method, which is considered to be the
benchmark for accurate determination of air?sea fluxes of trace gases, relies on
high? frequency measurements of the fluctuations of vertical wind velocity and
gas concentration, and requires fast response sensors in combination with high
sensitivity. These twin requirements have precluded oceanographic use of the EC
technique for many species of interest, and direct measurements have been
limited mainly to carbon dioxide at relatively high flux levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s request funding to develop a fast, highly
sensitive, gas concentration sensor, and to integrate it with a sonic
anemometer, motion sensing, and data acquisition into an EC flux package
suitable for operation from buoys and other platforms, such as ships. Our gas
sensor is based on infrared (IR) absorption, but utilizes a novel, highly
sensitive, photoacoustic detector. The PI?s expect that this combination will
result in an improvement in sensitivity of several orders of magnitude over the
IR absorption sensors that are currently in oceanographic use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted under the US?Ireland R&amp;D
Partnership Program by E. Terray (PI-US), WHOI; B. Ward (Partner-IE), National
University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland; and N. Mitchell (Partner-NI), Queens
University Belfast, Northern Ireland (NI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;