* 0852024
* REU Site: EURECA: Extensible Undergraduate Research Experience in Communication Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2013
* William Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2013
* USD 299,948.00

This project renews an exemplary existing Research Experience for Undergraduates
site focused on the areas of networking and communications. The project engages
students in a wide range of projects in wireless networking lead by a team of
faculty mentors. A key component of every research project is its extensibility
providing students with the capacity to build on knowledge provided to them by
their mentor and to generate independent results, and to sustain this effort
after returning to their parent institutions. A nationwide recruitment process
is used to select cohorts of undergraduate students to participate in a nine-
week summer research program at the host institution. Particular emphasis is
placed on recruitment of students from under-represented populations. The
project includes technical seminars and workshops, student presentations, and
field trips and other professional development opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this project
lies in strong research basis and the expertise of the faculty. The projects are
in current research areas that are of interest to the community at large and
that have clear practical applications. The research projects are created as a
focused plan to guide the students from a passive learning state to the state of
being active self-sustaining researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The broader impacts of the project include providing a quality research
experience to undergraduate students, particularly students from
underrepresented groups. The participating faculty members are committed to
including under-represented minority students in their research. Thus this
project has the potential to produce new computer science graduate students and
faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding while promoting
learning. &lt;br/&gt;