* 0852942
* PECASE:  Antibiotic Resistance Genes (ARG) as Emerging Pollutants in Our Water:  Pathways, Mitigation, and Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Amy Pruden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 01/31/2011
* USD 197,729.00

Pruden 0547342 This research opens a new paradigm of viewing biomolecules, such
as ARG, prions, ricin, anthrax, etc., as "pollutants". Biomolecules such as
these are of increasing health and security concern to society and this program
will help to open new approaches to mitigation and treatment. Investigating ARG
directly as pollutants using genome-enabled tools, rather than culture-based
methods, is an innovative aspect of this research. For the past two years the PI
has been studying the spread of ARG in the front range Colorado watershed, which
provides an excellent model system for studying the impacts of pharmaceuticals
in the environment because the primary source is snowmelt with minimal
anthropogenic input. Thus the PI is uniquely poised to succeed in this research
and to make significant contributions to the field. Institutional support is
substantial, including newly renovated labs, reduced teaching loads, TA support,
travel funding, and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project will provide a firm foundation for teaching, training and learning.
New courses that integrate MB&amp;B into the engineering curriculum will be
further developed, evaluated, and improved. Inquiry-based learning and peer-
learning with a laboratory component will be especially valuable for training
engineers in an interdisciplinary field. MERGE activities will also specifically
address the need for representation of women and minorities by focusing on
topics that have been demonstrated to attract underrepresented groups. Graduate
students will also benefit from MERGE by actively participating as mentors to
undergraduate students and in taking the lead in publishing and presenting the
results of their research. Furthermore, students will help organize K-12 STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) outreach activities. Results
will be broadly disseminated through conducting workshops in partnership with
other Colorado/Wyoming universities and with&lt;br/&gt;European collaborators
(University of Barcelona and Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique).
Finally, the overall results will be summarized as best management practices
(BMPs), which will be a helpful practical guide to farming and water
professionals. The activities are considered to be beneficial to society in that
they will take an important step in involving environmental engineers in helping
solve a critical problem that has been identified by the World Health
Organization (WHO) as one of the most pressing health issues of this
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;