* 0852263
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Controls on Anammox and Denitrification Rates in Estuarine and Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Joseph Vallino, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2012
* USD 482,144.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly discovered process of
anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) is an important process in marine
environments. The contribution of anammox to global N budgets remains highly
uncertain, however. To develop a predictive understanding of nitrogen sinks,
comprehensive knowledge on the dynamics of environmental controls that trigger a
switch from heterotrophic denitrification to anammox is necessary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers from Brown University and the
Ecosystems Center at the Marine Biological Laboratory will test the hypothesis
that coupled variation in organic matter and nitrate delivery to the zone of
anoxic nitrate respiration drives the switch from heterotrophic denitrification
to anammox. They will assess this hypothesis by integrating modeling, laboratory
experiments, and field measurements, with the following three objectives: (1) to
develop and empirically test bioreaction network models to predict the relative
flux of nitrogen sink pathways under varying organic carbon and nitrate; (2) to
test the interactive effects of varying organic matter and nitrate delivery
rates in sediment microcosm experiments; and (3) to conduct field measurements
along natural environmental gradients in Massachusetts Bay and Plum Island Sound
Estuary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microcosm experiment should provide a direct
test of the hypothesis that anammox is favored under conditions when nitrate
delivery rates are high relative to organic matter loading. The field
measurements will test the predictive power of models under in situ conditions.
In addition to nutrient flux measurements and sediment porewater profiles,
anammox and denitrification rates will be measured using two methods, based on
the isotope pairing technique: conventional slurries and intact cores under in
situ conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Theoretical and
methodological advances from this research will be distributed to the community
through the Denitrification Research Coordination Network. The proposed research
will support a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher in the Brown-MBL
program, strengthening institutional partnerships to the mutual benefit of the
graduate student, postdoctoral researcher and PIs. Undergraduate students will
be involved in summer research projects, as well as educational outreach
activities through Brown University's ARISE program in local high schools that
serve racially diverse students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;