* 0852467
* Evaluating the Processes and Timescales of Rhyolitic Differentiation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Frank Ramos, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 07/31/2011
* USD 58,703.00

Intellectual merit: U-series isotopes have revolutionized our ability to
evaluate magmatic timescales and will be used in conjunction with Rb/Sr
systematics to constrain the time in which large volumes of intraplate rhyolite
are generated. The timing and processes involved in the generation of silicic
magmas are relevant to modeling activity at potentially explosive volcanoes,
with significant climate and volcanic hazard implications. Baitoushan volcano
(NE China/North Korea) is ideally suited for such studies because it has
produced multiple young high silica rhyolites including a large volume (~100
km3) pyroclastic eruption as recently as ~1000 AD. All eruptive units are
sufficiently young that both short-lived 238U-230Th-226Ra and 235U-231Pa
isotopic systems as well as long-lived radiogenic isotopes can be used in
combination to assess magmatic timescales. Moreover, sampling is sufficient to
carry out the proposed work, thus saving on the time and cost of the proposed
research. Timing of magmatic fractionation events involved in the generation of
associated mafic and silicic magmas in this volcano will be evaluated through
analysis of accessory phenocryst minerals. Single crystal Pb and Sr isotope
analyses will also be used as tracers to quantify the effects of open-system
processes such as crustal contamination, magma recharge, and post-eruption
alteration. In combination these data will allow detailed assessment of such
processes on the overall evolution of the volcano as well as their effects on
the fidelity of the various isotopic dating
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts include (1) involvement of an
undergraduate into cutting-edge research in the geological sciences, (2)
international collaborations, and (3) relevance to volcanic risk assessment.
Regarding the latter point, a "seismic crisis" at Baitoushan within the last
decade raised concerns that the volcano could erupt again in the near future.
Better understaning of the timescale of magma evolution could be useful in
predicting future activity. Finally, Baitoushan's location on the border between
China and North Korea (DPRK) has potential political significance, and
contributions to understanding volcanic behavior could promote international
'good will'. &lt;br/&gt;