* 0852674
* CAREER: A Theoretical Foundation for Achievability and Optimization in Privacy-Preserving Data Mining
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2014
* Nan Zhang, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 12/31/2014
* USD 440,926.00

CAREER: A Theoretical Foundation for Achievability and Optimization in
&lt;br/&gt; Privacy-Preserving Data Mining&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data mining has
been successfully applied to support a variety of applications, including
marketing, weather forecasting, medical diagnosis, and homeland security. Mining
data without violating the privacy of data being mined, however, is still a
critical challenge. How to mine patientsÕ personal information, for example, is
an ongoing problem in healthcare applications. Emerging privacy legislation,
such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), as well
as the heightened public concerns about privacy protection, require immediate
and resolute attention from the computing community on the protection of private
information in data mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
understanding, analysis, and optimization of the tradeoff between privacy
protection, accuracy of data mining, and system resources in privacy-preserving
data mining. The methodology is to establish a solid theoretical foundation that
defines the requirements for privacy protection in data mining, identifies the
domain of privacy-preserving strategies, and determines the achievability of
such strategies. This theoretical foundation enables the design and optimization
of privacy-preserving data mining algorithms that are realistic, generic, and
efficient. The research results of this project have broader impacts on the
nationÕs higher education system and high-tech industries. The ability to mine
private data without violating the privacy of data owners is a must for a wide
variety of corporations, universities, hospitals, and government agencies.
Similarly, theoretically and empirically validated means to protect privacy in
data mining would benefit all privacy-concerned individuals at large. The impact
of this project also extends to academia through educational efforts, including
graduate and undergraduate student training, curriculum development, seminars,
and outreach.