* 0852095
* REU Site: Life in the Universe - Astrobiology at the SETI Institute
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Cynthia Phillips, SETI Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 09/30/2013
* USD 597,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These funds will allow for the
continuation of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
SETI Institute (SI), with a focus on astrobiology and the study of the living
universe. Astrobiology is cross-disciplinary, ranging from astronomy and
astrophysics to planetary sciences, life sciences, geology, and chemistry to
explore the universe. During this summer internship, students will participate
in 5 major components: 1. SI scientists mentor students as they conduct
individual research projects. 2. The SI scientists present a coordinated set of
presentations that introduce the REU students to the breadth of astrobiology
research. Students learn about graduate opportunities at the 16 US and 5
international research universities and institutions that comprise the NASA
Astrobiology Institute. 3. Student interns participate in the weekly
astrobiology "journal club" discussion led by scientists to learn literature
research skills. 4. Students participate in educational, social and cultural
activities via research-related field trips. The entire REU group spends a week
learning about radio astronomy at the Allen Telescope Array at Hat Creek Radio
Observatory, and touring an extremophile research site at nearby Lassen Volcanic
National Park. Other local field trips are also included. 5. During the final
week, students participate in a symposium where they present their research
results, and some students present subsequently at professional scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will continue active research
participation by undergraduates at SI, bringing more diverse students to the
field of astrobiology, and leveraging SI's relationships with NASA Ames Research
Center, California Academy of Sciences, and the University of California -
Berkeley Radio Astronomy Laboratory at Hat Creek Radio Astronomy Observatory.
These strategies will "advance discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training, and learning", and also will "enhance infrastructure for
research and education." Recruitment is on a national level, with emphasis given
to groups underrepresented in sciences, including women and minority students.