* 0852440
* Collaborative Research:  Patient-Adaptive Feedback Control of Rotary Heart Assist Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Marwan Simaan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2012
* USD 227,291.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project involves the development of
mathematical tools for modeling and control of a complex system consisting of a
physiological component (the heart) and an electromechanical component known as
a Left-Ventricular Assist Device (or LVAD). An LVAD is a mechanical device whose
purpose is to assist the heart of patients with congestive heart failure waiting
for heart transplantation. An important engineering challenge facing the
increased use of these devices is the development of an appropriate controller
that can automatically adjust the rotational speed of the device to meet the
circulatory demand of the patient. Such a controller, in addition to being
robust and reliable, must be able to adapt to the daily activities and
physiological changes of the patient. In this project, we propose to investigate
theoretical and fundamental issues associated with the development of such a
controller.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed research,
which is highly interdisciplinary in nature, will increase our understanding of
fundamental technical issues related to the modeling and control of this non-
conventional nonlinear time-varying system which involves interactions between a
physiological component (the heart) and an electromechanical device (the LVAD).
The development of the necessary theory and mathematical tools will enable us to
understand how to effectively control such a complex system as well as other
types of similarly complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The
impact of the proposed research will primarily be in improving the quality of
life for patients with end-stage congestive heart failure awaiting heart
transplantation. Any improvement in the existing technology of LVAD control will
have a tremendous effect on the physical condition and ultimately the recovery
of patients suffering from this heart disease. Another important impact of this
project is in educating and training engineering students, including female and
minority students, to work together as a team on a highly interdisciplinary and
challenging project.&lt;br/&gt;