* 0852850
* Phase Coherence in Elemental Auroral Structure
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Joshua Semeter, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 09/30/2012
* USD 260,114.00

This is a three-year research project concerning the physics of dynamic discrete
aurora, generally associated with geomagnetic substorms and storms. The specific
overarching goal is to determine the extent to which elemental (sub-100-meter)
structure in the discrete aurora is consistent with field and particle
configurations of dispersive Alfven waves. The work will utilize two
observational innovations. The first is the use a new narrow-field high-speed
imaging system based on Electron Multiplying CCD (EMCCD) technology. This will
make it possible to quantify phase coherence in fine-scale auroral structure in
space and time at unprecedented resolution. Additional data for this research
will be provided by a new permanent EMCCD imaging system that is being
established at Poker Flat. The second innovation is the use of the high-speed
steering capabilities of the Poker Flat IS radar (PFISR) to identify regions of
coherent scatter associated with filamentary (Alfvenic) current systems at &lt;1
s cadence. These local measurements will be placed in a global-scale context
using multi-station observations from the THEMIS all-sky camera array, as well
as measurements of the auroral power source from the THEMIS satellites
themselves. A comprehensive program combining unique observational capabilities,
the development of sophisticated new analysis tools, modeling, and theoretical
interpretation will be conducted to address three specific questions: 1) Can
wave dispersion account for spatiotemporal variability in observed precipitation
patterns? 2) Is there evidence for multiple reflections (resonant modes), or can
all fine-scale structure be accounted for by direct absorption of wave energy?
3) Is more than one fundamental mechanism required to account for all elemental
structure in the aurora? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has significant
broader impacts. Scientifically, the processes investigated in this project are
fundamental to our general understanding of multi-scale energy balance in the
high-latitude magnetosphere. The processes are also not unique to the
terrestrial magnetospheric plasma; the insight gained in this research will
inform our general understanding of energy transfer in cosmic and laboratory
plasmas. Educationally, it will contribute to the training of two PhD scientists
in the areas of auroral physics and image processing. Finally, the work will
produce fascinating imagery of the aurora that will be utilized in public
outreach efforts and shared widely over the web. &lt;br/&gt;