* 0852654
* IDBR:   Development of an Iso-dielectric Separation System for Large-scale Quantitative Cell Screens
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Joel Voldman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2013
* USD 508,600.00

Cell-based screens are widely used across biology and biotechnology to associate
genetic programs with outputs of those programs (i.e., phenotypes). As diverse
and large-scale molecular libraries become available, the need increases for
instruments capable of screening large populations of cells and separating those
with phenotypic differences. Methods for screening large populations are
currently limited primarily to growth, or require robotics and other expensive
instrumentation. There is increasing evidence that the electrical properties of
cells confer useful phenotypic information, as judged by ~20 yrs of separations
based upon dielectrophoresis. However, existing electrical separation devices
are not suitable for screening due to a variety of issues, including batch
operation that limits throughput, sensitivity to particle size that limits
specificity, and deleterious particle-particle interactions that limit both
throughput and specificity. The research supported by this grant will enable the
development of a microfluidic cell separation technology that separates cells
based upon their electrical properties, specifically their polarizability, and
is ideally positioned for large-scale screens. The instrument consists of a
microfluidic device that flows cells through a micrometer- width channel with a
liquid conductivity gradient, and separates them along that gradient by applying
an electric field from embedded electrodes, resulting in the cells attaining a
position that is dictated by their electrical properties. The first step in the
development of the instrument is to engineer a device that integrates valves for
recovery of cells and conductivity generators for automatic control of the
liquid conductivity. Then instrument will be optimized to increase resolution,
throughput, and specificity to make it suitable for large-scale screens, after
which the team will undertake a screen of a yeast library to validate the
instrument's performance. By disseminating this instrument through
collaborations, publications, and via providing microfluidic devices to the
community, this instrument will dramatically enhance the ability to undertake
high-throughput screens. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as interact with the Women's Technology program which brings
high-school girls to MIT for a four-week program, and a research program
involving local Boston high-school students in a week-long project.