* 0852743
* SEI: Unraveling the Structure and Kinetics of Biochemical Pathways from Time-Series Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Santiago Schnell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2010
* USD 149,761.00

Time series of gene expression of gene, protein and metabolite concentrations
are becoming available as the result of the rapid development of novel, high-
throughput experimental techniques in genomics sciences. Such time series
implicitly contain valuable information about the connectivity and regulatory
structure of the underlying genetic or biochemical network mechanism. The
extraction of this information is a challenging task because it requires the
development of new mathematical and computational methods of nonlinear
estimation that involve iterative search algorithms. Priming these algorithms
with high-quality initial guesses can great accelerate the search
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even when full genomic sequences for an organism
are available, the functions and&lt;br/&gt;interactions of only a small number
of gene components are clear. Presently, the functions of uncharacterized
proteins have usually been inferred on the basis of sequence similarities,
common structural motifs, gene order, gene fusion events, or similarities in
gene expression. The proposal goal is to develop a new method for functional
predictions based on the role of the gene in networks. This method allow us to
perform functional predictions for proteins independent of homologies in
structure or sequence, and provide a way to characterize proteins that have not
yet been studied using published biological data from high-throughput
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology will be applicable to any
organism, including humans, where&lt;br/&gt;only three to five percent of gene
function is known. As we better understand the functions of genes and proteins
in a network context, we can better predict and control their responses to
internal and external perturbations. For the foreseeable future, the type of
modeling predictions will likely be one of the many inputs into the decision
making process in the pharmaceutical industry, and biomedical sciences. The
research will provide interdisciplinary (biological, mathematical and
computational; experimental and theoretical) training to undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and help produce a generation of
scientists comfortable both with biology, mathematics and
computation.&lt;br/&gt;