* 0852416
* IDBR:    Controlling Oxygen in Standard Multiwell Plates with a Microfabricated Add-on
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* David Eddington, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 04/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Oxygen is a key metabolic variable that influences many different biological
phenomena. However, current tools to probe this variable are inefficient and
have not changed since the dawn of cell culture techniques. Yet, as oxygen is
increasingly implicated in many signaling pathways, enabling a simple tool to
explore this would greatly facilitate these investigations and accelerate
scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;In this project, a platform to independently
control local gas concentrations within each well of a multiwell plate will be
developed and optimized. The platform will consist of a polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) insert that will nest into a standard multiwell plate. The insert is a
passive network with a gas permeable membrane aimed to deliver gas to adherent
cell cultures in multiwell plates. The insert will act as a sink or source of
oxygen depending on the concentration of the oxygen in the microchannels and
will be immersed in the cell media of the well. The gas will be delivered to the
cell monolayer through simple diffusion of oxygen across a PDMS membrane and
dissolve into the culture media of the multiwell plate. This close spacing
between the PDMS membrane and cell monolayer allows for rapid diffusion to
impose steady state gradients of oxygen across the well within minutes. The
device will not only enable control of oxygen gradients, but will lead to a
whole class of devices that will allow researchers to precisely control the
microenvironment in multiwell plates to address a variety of &lt;br/&gt;The
platform has potential to facilitate new and exciting experiments not possible
with current techniques, by replicating the oxygen gradients that occur in
living systems (in vivo) in a laboratory model (in vitro) accessible to any
standard cell biology lab. The result would have a huge impact across many
fields.&lt;br/&gt;To develop interest in science and engineering,
underrepresented minority elementary students will be exposed to interactive
laboratory activities at the University of Illinois at Chicago. At risk
elementary school students will be targeted by working with the Girl Scouts of
Chicago to provide positive experiences with science and engineering. Program
evaluation will include both formative feedback, which will allow us to adjust
our methods as we learn from the activities, and a summative appraisal of
whether the stated goals have been met.&lt;br/&gt;