* 0852780
* Fundamental and Practical Studies of Capacitive Deionization Using Asymmetric Nanoporous Oxide Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Marc Anderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 04/30/2013
* USD 312,009.00

0852780&lt;br/&gt;Anderson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capacitive deionization (CDI) is
a process that operates by sequestering ions in the electrical double layer near
charged surfaces. Essentially, a solution of ions flows through a highly porous
conducting pair of electrodes and anions or other negatively charged species are
removed at the positive electrode while cations or positively charged species
are separated from solution at the negative electrode. During the removal
process, energy is being stored in a capacitive fashion and is readily available
to lower the cost of energy consumption. In a recharge cycle, a reverse bias is
applied forcing the electrochemically-sequestered ions to be released as brine,
much as in both RO and evaporative distillation processes. Brine production is
generally considered to be less for CDI than in RO operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal includes fundamental as well as practical
studies of the CDI process using a novel asymmetric set of electrodes coated
with nanoporous oxides. This research will utilize electrochemical impedance
measurements and models tied to real-world pore size and pore size distributions
to interpret our results. In addition, an insitu electrochemical FTIR system is
to be developed to study molecular behavior inside these nanoporous oxide
electrodes. From a practical perspective, many pairs of CDI electrodes must work
in tandem, controlled electronically, and matched to water composition and flux
for optimal ion removal. In this part of the proposed studies, a stack of
electrodes will be assembled into a module and benchmarked with respect to ion
removal versus time, electrode surface area, and energy cost per gallon of water
processed. This portion of the proposed work will be completed in four parts: 1.
Choosing an optimal supporting material for our electrodes 2. Coating this
support with our best nanoporous oxide films. 3. Testing electrodes in four pair
stacks and finally 4. Building a CDI prototype.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potentially, CDI can compete favorably as a desalination
process. The CDI system proposed could be used by municipal facilities or in
third-world communities providing potable water to people in severe need. This
project will result in the training of one PhD and several undergraduate
research students. It will contribute to renewed laboratory instrumentation to
be employed in both research and teaching. In addition, this project will be
used in a modified fashion as a device template for an undergraduate
introductory course in engineering taught at the University of Wisconsin each
fall semester. In this class, 16 students, forming an engineering team will
cooperate with Engineers Without Borders (EWB), to develop a solar-powered CDI
system that EWB will field-test in Kenya.