* 0852424
* Financial Institution and Immigrant Integration in the U.S. and Canada
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Alex Oberle, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2013
* USD 224,272.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world today functions in an age of
international migration and financial globalization, not only in terms of the
century-old phenomenon of people and money crossing national borders, but also
in the unprecedented scope and complexity that these crossings have reached.
Population and money often have a bi-directional flow, sometimes in the same
direction, while opposite in others. The latter flows have attracted the most
significant attention, with emphasis placed on remittances flowing from
destination countries back to the countries from which immigrants came. In
contrast, the wealth generated in source countries and recruitment by
destination countries has not been fully recognized or analyzed. This research
project will attempt to bridge these gaps by linking immigration study and
financial analyses. The investigators will examine the intermediary roles of
financial institutions of various kinds in the immigrant integration process
from the perspectives of both supply (banks) and demand (immigrants) through an
interdisciplinary approach. The investigators will examine the extent to which
financial institutions develop and use social capital-ethnic assets in outreach
to immigrant communities as well as whether financial integration is part of the
ultimate goal in immigrant integration into receiving societies. They will
compare and contrast the roles of different types of financial institutions
(banks and credit unions) in both the U.S. and Canada. They will explore the
strategies financial institutions use to reach out to immigrant communities, the
global, national, and local forces that shape these strategies; and ways in
which immigrant communities assess the fairness and effectiveness of such
strategies. The researchers will combine census data analysis, GIS-aided spatial
analysis, financial data analysis, interviews with bank executives and immigrant
entrepreneurs, and surveys of immigrants. They will examine major types of
financial institutions in San Francisco and Vancouver metropolitan areas, the
primary gateways to and the financial sub-centers of the Pacific Rim in the U.S.
and Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is especially timely given the
global financial crises that are profoundly changing economic systems and
societies. It will connect theories about financial geography, social capital,
and ethnic assets with empirical evidence to add broaden basic understanding of
the ways that ethnic factors interact with institutional roles with respect to
the financial globalization debate, and it will insert a financial angle to
social scientific study on immigrant integration. Evaluation of the validity of
the ethnic assets as a form of social capital in financial sectors and immigrant
financial integration will advance basic knowledge in both financial/economic
and ethnic/social geography as well as social science in general. The comparison
among two sites in the U.S. and Canada will provide empirical insights into
contemporary financial dynamics pertaining to immigration that operates in
different ways with different groups. As such, the project will put people back
into an analysis of the financial system. The project will employ an
interdisciplinary mixed-method approach that will allow the researchers to
conduct international comparative research. The project will promote teaching,
training, and learning with students who will be directly involved in research
and classroom interactions. The project is likely to yield policy
recommendations across the border for financial institutions to tap into
immigrants' financial and social capital and to contribute to the broader
immigration debate.