* 0852032
* REU Site Project: REU in Applied Mathematics and Biostatistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Kevin Knudson, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Noel Brady
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This is a proposal of an REU site project during the summers of 2010 and 2011 in
the Center for Computational Sciences at Mississippi State University. The
project is aimed at involving 6 undergraduate students each year in active
research under the supervision of four applied mathematicians and statisticians
who are dedicated researchers and mentors. The major area of concentration will
be applied mathematics and biostatistics. The cross-cutting themes of the
project are image processing, population dynamics, computational mathematical
biology, and highly stratified model in biostatistics. In order to help the
students develop a good understanding of contemporary research methods of
selected problems, the investigators plan to provide them with well-marshaled
lectures/workshops. The participants will be selected on the basis of their
academic performance, their aptitude in mathematics, and the recommendation
letters. There will be various mathematical sciences and industrial colloquia,
scientific, cultural, and social activities enhancing the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this project is mathematical
and statistical training, active participation in research, and mentoring. The
objectives are to provide the undergraduate students with meaningful research
experience in applied mathematics and biostatistics, to show them the enjoyment
of doing research, and to encourage them to pursue advanced degrees in
mathematical sciences. Conference presentations and publication of their
research findings will also be strongly encouraged. The senior personnel in this
project are active researchers in applied mathematics and biostatistics and they
have considerable experience in guiding and mentoring students to become
successful researchers. This project will greatly contribute to the excitement
and development of mathematical research among undergraduates. Materials used
for the REU program will be freely shared with the community and posted on an
on-line project library. There will be Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
activity after the REU program. In the fall semester after the second year
program, we will conduct a one-day workshop for teachers from neighboring high
schools to disseminate new findings from the REU program and to help them to
have their students prepare for undergraduate research. Special efforts will be
made to attract women and underrepresented groups, and participation from
regions and institutions with limited research opportunities. This REU project
will help maintain and strengthen our nation's leadership in scientific research
in mathematical sciences and their applications.&lt;br/&gt;