* 0852826
* Arboreal Galois Representations and Applications to Arithmetic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/20/2008,07/31/2012
* Raphael Jones, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2012
* USD 98,177.00

This project involves the study of Galois groups of extensions of global fields
obtained by adjoining preimages of a rational point under iterates of a morphism
of varieties. The inverse limit of all such groups for a given point and
morphism form what we call an arboreal Galois representation. Piecemeal results
on these representations have existed for some 20 years, but the PI has recently
developed a more unified theory, and discovered several new applications. These
include properties of the p-adic Mandelbrot set, sets of prime divisors of non-
linear recurrences, and reductions of a given point on an abelian algebraic
group. The PI plans to pursue applications further, into the domain of dynamics
over finite fields, which is a natural direction. Several cryptographic
algorithms, including the Pollard rho algorithm, make use of dynamics over
finite fields, and the research proposed here is likely to have applications in
this area. Further research plans include the determination of the image of
arboreal representations in certain analogues to the case of CM elliptic curves;
the further development of the analogy between arboreal representations and
linear Galois representations, with the ultimate goal of attaching interesting
L-functions to arboreal representations; and finally, an examination of
irreducibility properties of iterates of polynomials with integral coefficients.

Generally speaking, this projects blends ideas from two a priori different
fields, number theory and dynamics. The study of extensions of the rational
numbers Q by algebraic numbers -- that is, roots of polynomials -- is one of the
most basic areas of number theory. The field of dynamics seeks to understand how
processes evolve over time, and the most basic dynamical system consists of
repeated application (or iteration, as it's known) of a map f from a space to
itself. The PI proposes to study the extensions of Q obtained by adjoining roots
of iterates of certain polynomials. Of particular interest are the Galois groups
of such fields, namely the group of field automorphisms fixing pointwise the
base field. When the Galois groups of all iterates of a single function are
taken together, we term it an arboreal Galois representation. Even in seemingly
simple cases such as the polynomial x^2 - 1, this arboreal representation is not
well understood. These representations turn out to encode density information
regarding a variety of dynamical phenomena. Moreover, they furnish an
interesting and potentially fruitful analogue to the well-studied case of linear
l-adic Galois representations, namely the study of fields whose Galois groups
embed in certain matrix groups. These have had a myriad of important
applications.

