* 0852094
* Bay Bridge REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience for Future Scientists and Teachers
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Valerie Burke, Saint Mary's College of California
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2010
* USD 117,338.00

The Saint Mary?s College ?Bay Bridge? REU site will bridge current and future
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) students by offering
exceptional research and training experiences for science students who intend to
pursue careers in research or in secondary education. The production of
research-literate teachers will subsequently improve the pipeline of future STEM
students. This project includes research topics in several key scientific
fields. Students will perform scientific research for a 10-week period, with
regular progress reports to the cohort, giving multiple opportunities for
discussion, constructive criticism, and support of their projects. Our
participants will include undergraduates who plan to pursue graduate degrees and
research careers, as well as those who plan to become science teachers. We will
recruit from underrepresented groups and those without the opportunity to engage
in research at their home institutions. We have taken advantage of several of
Saint Mary?s strengths: a focus on academic excellence; strong teacher/student
interactions; and Bay Area location with access to prominent science museums and
research centers. The Bay Bridge REU is distinguished by the emphasis on science
education and communication of science, and the inclusion of ethics workshops,
in-depth field trips to science museums, and guided visits to technology
companies and research institutes. This REU site aims to train future
researchers, as well as the teachers of future scientists. The cohort made up of
future researchers and teachers, the multidisciplinary research focus, and the
diverse interactions inherent in the program will enrich the research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The intellectual merit of this
proposal stems from the unique combination of science research with science
education, communication, and ethics. The key part of the program is to engage
students in innovative research in different disciplines, reflecting the
diversity of research interests and expertise at Saint Mary?s. All mentors have
science Ph.D.s, active research projects, and extensive experience mentoring
undergraduate researchers, including presentations and publications with
undergraduate student co-authors. Saint Mary?s resources are sufficient to carry
out the proposed projects and introduce students to advanced instrumentation and
techniques. The Bay Bridge REU also contains education, communication, and
ethics elements, through which students will communicate science at different
levels, explore the connections between their research and science education,
and identify and develop solutions for ethical issues.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The Bay Bridge REU program involves research projects to advance
scientific boundaries. Participants will contribute to science research and
thereby enhance their undergraduate education. This research experience will
improve the training of teachers in STEM disciplines, and these better-prepared
teachers will provide a better educational experience for the next generation of
STEM students. Each project will be submitted for publication, thus
disseminating the results widely. The effectiveness of the unique combination of
science research with science education, communication, and ethics activities
will also be evaluated and the results disseminated.