* 0852821
* Conference:   Hormonal Regulation of Whole-Animal Performance:   Implications for Selection (2009 SICB Meeting Boston, MA)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Duncan Irschick, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 04/30/2010
* USD 11,460.00

Despite intense public and media attention given to steroid use by humans to
enhance athletic performance, surprisingly little is known about how hormones
regulate whole-animal performance traits, such as running, biting, and swimming
ability. There is clear evidence that such traits are important to individual
survival and reproduction, but there is a lack of a general understanding of how
selection on performance, and indirectly it's underlying physiology (including
hormones), affects the phenotype via the wide-ranging effects of hormones. One
key aspect of the symposium at the 2009 Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology (SICB) meeting in Boston, MA will be to highlight the diverse ways in
which hormones may affect various performance traits across a range of animal
species. This symposium will encourage a synthetic approach by bringing
together, for the first time, an international group of researchers working on
hormones and performance in both vertebrates and invertebrates. These
researchers span a wide range of career stages and geographic locations that do
not normally have the opportunity to interact directly. Nearly one-half of the
symposium presenters are from outside the USA, and several of the participants
do not regularly attend SICB meetings. One benefit of this symposium is that it
will provide an excellent opportunity for students and junior researchers to
exchange ideas with more established investigators. This will be accomplished
through direct interaction during the symposium, planned social events involving
symposium participants and students, and a complementary contributed paper
session. Participation by historically underrepresented groups, with nearly one-
third of participants being women or minorities, is also being accomplished.
Publication of the symposium's proceedings in SICB's journal, Integrative and
Comparative Biology, will ensure that the intellectual products of the symposium
are broadly disseminated.