* 0852897
* Social Challenges of Global Change (IHDP Open Meeting 2009)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Falk Schmidt, United Nations University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 08/31/2010
* USD 65,000.00

Over the last two decades, increasing attention has focused on the need for
collaborative, interdisciplinary research on human actions, cognition, and
structures associated with human-environmental interaction at scales ranging
from the local to global. One of the activities that has sped the formation of
an international community of scholars addressing the human dimensions of global
change and other environmental problems has been open meetings of the global
research community every two to three years. Originally organized as semi-
independent gatherings, open meetings now are organized by the International
Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change (IHDP), which is
overseen by the International Council of Science (ICSU) with cooperation from
the International Social Science Council (ISSC). Core purposes of the open
meetings are to assist the IHDP in providing international leadership in
framing, developing, and integrating social science research on global
environmental change and to promote the application of the key findings of this
research. The triennial open meeting helps identify and catalyze new strategic
activities, it showcases results from IHDP research, and it facilitates the
development and strengthening of international collaborative research efforts.
This award provides support for the 7th open meeting of the international human
dimensions community, which was held in April 2009 in Bonn, Germany. Open
Meeting 2009 was the first under the strategic guidance of the IHDP Strategic
Plan for 2007-2015, and provided a platform for the launch of four new
scientific initiatives and the synthesis activities of two IHDP core projects.
It also instituted the activity portfolios on capacity development and knowledge
dissemination. This award provided support for some critical administrative
activities to ensure effective operation of the open meeting, and it provided
travel assistance for early-career U.S. scholars as well as scholars from
developing nations.

Support for the IHDP open meeting facilitates the development of social and
behavioral science understandings, conceptualizations, and theoretical
enhancements in a number of different fields, such as collective-action
problems, discourse analysis, policy processes, and enhanced understanding of
the interactions between human societies and the natural environment. The open
meeting encourages development of new initiatives and synthesis of findings from
past and current research. It also advances the research capacity in the social
and behavioral sciences for the conduct of larger-scale, highly
interdisciplinary, internationally collaborative research on the human
dimensions of global change and related environmental issues, and through this
award, the involvement of researchers at early stages in their career and from
developing nations is supported.