* 0852498
* Innovation and Inventiveness in Statistical Methodologies
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Huibin Zhou, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 11/30/2009
* USD 25,000.00

The field of statistics continues to offer profound contributions to many
branches of science, medicine, and industry. In the rapidly-evolving information
age, we have access to overwhelming quantities of data for the study of complex
phenomena. This creates both challenges and opportunities for statisticians, and
demands innovative and inventive statistical methodologies. Although some
research has been done on high-dimensional, complex data, the field continues to
evolve, offering a plethora of promising research topics. Now is a critical time
for the development of deep, broad, and formal statistical theory and
methodology; our field is in a position to grow and make influential, invaluable
contributions to society at large. This workshop will bring together some of the
most prominent researchers in the field. They will review the most important and
influential statistical advances in the comparatively short history of our
discipline while embracing the present and future challenges and opportunities
for the profession. The workshop will provide a venue for promising young
researchers to interact with these leaders of the field and each other,
presenting their new research, generating fresh ideas and leading to future
collaborations and discoveries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This workshop emphasizes
the balance between fundamental statistical theory and innovative and inventive
research that reaches out to areas like bioinformatics, biology, finance, image
analysis, analysis of sparse signals and genomics. Yale is an ideal venue for a
meeting of this type. Not only is the Yale Department of Statistics widely known
for theoretical work strongly motivated by applications, it is closely linked to
Yale departments in the biological, medical, physical and social sciences.
Significant attendance from these groups is assured, guaranteeing important
interactions during both the workshop's scientific meetings and other, less
formal discussions. The NSF grant is primarily used for getting young
researchers and graduate students, in particular minorities and under-
represented groups. We will advertise in IMS bulletin and AMStat News and send
fliers and emails to related departments of US universities to reach junior
faculty and graduate students.