* 0852866
* Skeletal Preservation and the Life History of Virunga Mountain Gorillas
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Timothy Bromage, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2014
* USD 119,277.00

Regular monitoring of known Virunga mountain gorillas (Gorilla beringei
beringei) from Rwanda has continued since the Karisoke Research Center was
established by Dian Fossey in 1967, and has contributed substantially to
knowledge of gorilla behavior, ecology and demography. However, there exists a
critical need for the preservation and management of skeletal remains of
deceased mountain gorillas from this population. Research on these remains will
contribute significant insight into the biology of these critically endangered
great apes. The availability of behavioral and veterinary records associated
with each of the skeletons greatly enhances the uniqueness of this resource for
scientific discovery. The major objectives of this project are to recover
skeletons from approximately 100 mountain gorillas of known identity, many of
which were previously buried, and to provide training and help build local
capacity for their curation, long-term preservation and management as a resource
for research and education in Rwanda. An international team of scientists and
Rwandan wildlife authorities will carry out this multidisciplinary effort, which
includes: location and excavation (where necessary) of recent mountain gorilla
skeletal remains; cleaning and preservation of these remains, skeletal curation
at the Mus√©e d'Histoire Naturelle in Kigali; and online data-basing of the
collection and associated data. Individual skeletal identities will be confirmed
using DNA analysis, where necessary. Project personnel will work closely with
Rwandan staff, to build local expertise in skeletal preparation, curation,
conservation and management practices, and implement post-necropsy protocols for
preservation of future remains. This project will yield significant broader
impacts for the scientific community and society at large. This unique skeletal
collection will serve as a resource for local and visiting students and
scientists alike, interested in all aspects of gorilla biology. Of note, this
resource will be the focus of collaborative research between Rwandan and US-
based scientists, to examine the effects of disease, environmental factors such
as human disturbance, and stress on skeletal tissue growth, development,
lifetime health and well-being of mountain gorillas. The educational potential
is also profoundly important; this resource will play a key role in
disseminating knowledge and enhancing public understanding of Rwanda's wildlife
and other natural resources, and building community support for conservation
initiatives.