* 0852392
* Symposium:  Evolution of mechanisms controlling timing of breeding in animals; SCIB Annual Meeting January 3-7, 2009 Boston, MA
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Thomas Coombs-Hahn, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard K. Zimmer
* 11/30/2009
* USD 9,600.00

This symposium at the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB)
focuses on how animals coordinate reproduction with a changing environment.
Recently, significant advances have been made in unraveling the physiological
and molecular mechanisms that form the basis of the reproductive machinery in
mammals and birds. Further, new studies in evolutionary ecology are pinpointing
the reproductive phenotypes on which selection acts to produce individuals that
breed at optimal times of year in different habitats. The goal of the symposium
is to meld these two fields, reproductive physiology /environmental
endocrinology on the one hand, and evolutionary ecology on the other, so as to
enhance progress in our understanding of the evolution of reproductive
mechanisms. This symposium will unite at one venue international experts working
on reproductive physiology and molecular endocrinology together with those
working in evolutionary ecology and life history to integrate these historically
separate fields. It will also serve to unite researchers working on diverse
vertebrate taxa, which will stimulate exchange of ideas across taxonomic groups
that often are approached in quite different ways. Consequently, the symposium
will facilitate progress in the field of integrative biology generally, and will
specifically enhance our understanding of both basic (e.g., evolutionary) and
applied (e.g., conservation) implications of the mechanisms by which animals
adjust their annual cycles to variable environmental conditions. SICB is heavily
student-oriented, and the annual meeting is attended by many graduate students,
undergraduates, and even some high school students. The meeting is also attended
by representatives of the media, and the society provides press releases
regarding presentations of significance to the general public. The content of
this symposium has particular import for understanding how animal populations
are likely to be affected by human-induced environment modification, a topic of
ever-increasing general public interest, and will consequently provide rich
opportunities for communicating with the general public about how basic science
furthers applied goals. The list of presenters includes several young
investigators and women, as well as a balanced complement of domestic and
international researchers.