* 0852689
* SGER: Social Informatics of Surface Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/19/2008,02/28/2010
* Steven Sawyer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 02/28/2010
* USD 30,208.00

This project explores a new approach to analyzing the impacts derived from
Federal funding for basic computer and information science research. The
motivation for pursuing this work comes in response to a series of charts
developed by the Computer Sciences and Telecommunications Board of the National
Academies of Science (CSTB, 2003). These charts detail the connections from
modest levels of Federal funding of basic research into computing and the
impressive number of $1 Billion industries that have emerged due in part to the
technological innovations that arise from this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will expand the CSTB charts to showcase
the development and evolution of the human capital through which the
technological innovations currently depicted arise. It will bring to the
foreground the development and value of the human capital, the formation of
intellectual communities, and the social ties and networks of relations among
scholars that provide a vehicle to inform funding for scholarly development,
improve technology transfer, and amplify the value to the Nation for funding
computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be done in the
social informatics tradition. That is, inquiry at multiple levels of analysis,
moving between macro-scale interests and detailed micro-scale analyses. The
macro-scale interests are the development and evolution of the scientific
communities from which technological innovations in computing arise, focusing on
the ways in which the development of human capital is shaped by, and shapes, the
technological innovations and situated contexts. The detailed micro-scale
analysis will be the development of the recently announced Microsoft computing
surface (see http://www.microsoft.com/surface/). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this activity is twofold: 1.) Develop better insights into
the growth, evolution and role of Federal funding to nurture and sustain the
human capital and intellectual communities from which arise the technological
innovations that drive the U.S. economy, 2.) Make clear the situated, mutually-
interdependent, and evolving patterns of social and technological activities
from which innovations arise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are at least two
broader impacts that arise from this activity: 1.) Provide empirical insights
and support for the importance of Federal funding for basic research into
computing by highlighting the development of the human capital and intellectual
communities that support technological innovation, 2.) Showcasing the forms and
levels of technology transfer among industry and academe, and the roles that
Federal funding plays in supporting these activities.