* 0852854
* IDBR:   Encounternet:   Ultra-Miniature Energy Harvesting MEMS-Based Tags Enabling New Social Network Research
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Brian Otis, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 04/30/2012
* USD 441,336.00

All animal societies can be viewed as networks of interconnected individuals,
linked by social, spatial, temporal, and other relationships. By studying the
links of association between individuals we can derive unique insights into the
workings of the society, and better understand the various behavioral strategies
that individuals use to enhance their success. The study of animal social
networks requires that associations between individuals be continuously
monitored for extended periods of time. The task of determining social
associations and movement patterns is usually attempted via direct observation
methods. However, in many cases, observation is not feasible, especially when
animals must be continuously monitored for long periods of time, when animals
behave cryptically (as they often do), or when animals are out of sight of
observers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Encounternet project will result in a
miniaturized tag device for social network and behavioral studies. This
microprocessor-based digital radio tag technology allows autonomous monitoring
of the proximity of each tagged animal to all other nearby tagged individuals on
a continuous basis. Encounternet consists of two components: small groving node
transceiver tags mounted on animals, and collection node devices placed at fixed
locations in the field. The roving node tags will weigh approximately 1g,
allowing placement on small animals such as song birds, rodents, and reptiles,
and will employ energy harvesting technology to extend their lifespan. To
achieve the desired encounter monitoring functionality and enable a significant
improvement in miniaturization, Encounternet will utilize integrated circuit
advances in wireless transceivers, a new social network monitoring radio
protocol design, and an energy harvesting low voltage solar powertrain to
augment battery power.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For behavioral recording,
Encounternet tags can be equipped with a variety of sensors, including
accelerometers, microphones, and light monitors. Sensor-equipped tags can be
configured to wirelessly stream sensor data to a receiver or store it in onboard
non-volatile memory for later retrieval. This technology allows researchers to
acquire an enormous amount of rich information about study animals, their
spatial movement patterns, behavior, even physiological state, which would be
impossible to acquire using conventional analog tracking technology, allowing
animal movements, social association, and behavior to be monitored on a
continuous basis for the entire study period.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
development of Encounternet will promote outreach in the following ways. A
prototype network will be deployed in field tests with various collaborators who
study animal social behavior. Although Encounternet is intended for small animal
social network research, it can be applied to a wide variety of applications,
including disease vector species interaction, below-ground social interactions
in fossorial species, and spatial/temporal decision making processes in herds
and flocks. Tours of the Discovery Park (Seattle, WA) prototype deployment will
be given to groups of high-school students to promote interest in both
technology and nature.