* 0852379
* Collaborative Research: Study of the Relationship between Regionally Localized and Zonally Symmetric Anomalously Persistent Weather States
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Steven Feldstein, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 06/30/2012
* USD 91,932.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-frequency atmospheric variability,
with time scales from one week to a few months, will be studied by identifying a
small number of flow states that persist longer than most other states. Such
states are widely referred to as flow regimes. The regimes are important for
medium-range forecasting since their elevated persistence may translate into
enhanced predictability. They are thought to arise due to planetary wave/zonal
mean flow interaction in the presence of topography (Pacific and Atlantic
zonal/blocked flow regimes), or low-frequency organization of the fast synoptic
eddies and their subsequent feedback onto the large-scale flow (regimes
associated with annular modes). Theoretical evidence suggests that the above two
regime types have different spatial patterns and persistence characteristics; it
is hypothesized that the regimes of the first type tend to be more
geographically confined, and less persistent than the regimes of the second
type. It is further conjectured that dynamical processes that drive the two
types of regimes are likely to coincide, resulting in mixed regime types such as
the North Atlantic Oscillation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be
explored using a combination of observational analyses, theoretical modeling,
and General Circulation Model (GCM) experiments. A new technique, which emerged
from the investigators' previous work, will be used to isolate regimes in the
observations of the Northern Hemisphere's atmospheric flow by, defining them as
the episodes of flow sequences for which linear statistical forecasts have an
abnormally low skill; these calculations will be performed for two-dimensional,
as well as for the zonally averaged fields. A set of long simulations of
idealized, quasi-geostrophic, baroclinic models, and simplified-physics general
circulation models will be performed and analyzed for a wide range of
parameters. Additional experiments will include case studies of regime episodes
and simulations subjected to surgical removal of potentially important
interactions; these analyses will elucidate processes responsible for regime
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study relate to the
societal significance of the problem of medium- and long-range weather
forecasting. The project will strengthen scientific partnerships between the two
institutions and further the development of graduate curricula and training in
atmospheric dynamics and statistical methods.