* 0852772
* Triboelectric charging in granular systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Lacks, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2013
* USD 262,452.00

0852772 Sankaran

This project is focused on studying triboelectric charging in insulating
granular systems of chemically identical materials. The proposed research will
carry out experiments closely aligned with theory to resolve the nature of the
charging that occurs in these systems and relate the charging to such effects as
particle size distribution.

Intellectual merit. The electrostatic charging that occurs when two surfaces rub
("triboelectric charging") is one of the most well known phenomena in physics.
It is thus very surprising that there is no clear scientific explanation for
this phenomenon. The triboelectric charging of granular systems of chemically
identical particles is particularly perplexing. While in mixtures with different
types of particles, net charge transfer from one type of particle to the other
can be attributed to a difference in the material properties, there is no such
difference in material properties when all particles have the same composition,
and yet these systems are known to undergo substantial charging when the
particles are insulators. Furthermore, when all particles are composed of the
same material, experiments show that smaller particles charge negatively and
larger particles charge positively. Why there is a particle size dependence of
the polarity of particle charge, and why charging occurs at all when all
particles are composed of the same material is poorly understood.

The proposed research will elucidate the charging behavior and mechanism in
these systems through two thrusts: 1) we will carry out experiments to
quantitatively characterize the effect of particle size on the triboelectric
charging of chemically identical granular materials, 2) we will carry out
experiments specifically designed to test the hypothesis for the mechanism of
triboelectric charging including non equilibrium dynamics in which collision-
induced electron transfer generates electron accumulation. Our experimental
methodology is uniquely capable of studying triboelectric charging in a
controlled environment and solely from particle particle interactions, removing
the effect of humidity and other contaminants (i.e. container or reactor wall).
The results of the proposed work will aid in a fundamental understanding of the
driving force and mechanism for charge transfer in chemically identical granular
systems.

Broader impacts. A particular emphasis of this project is a strong effort to
mentor undergraduate student researchers, including women and members of
underrepresented minority groups. The PIs have excellent records in this regard,
with a large number of undergraduate students in their groups publishing papers
in refereed journals and proceeding to Ph.D. programs in chemical engineering.

The project can also benefit society by enhancing the understanding of
triboelectric charging. Triboelectric charging occurs in a wide range of
contexts, and can have implications on a range of issues including safety (e.g.,
dust explosions can by cause by triboelectrical charging).