* 0852232
* RUI:  Organocatalysis of Nitroalkane Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/24/2008,04/30/2013
* Brian Linton, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2013
* USD 160,000.00

This project will address the development of catalysts for the stereoselective
formation of C-C bonds using nitroalkanes. The ease of deprotonation adjacent to
nitroalkanes along with their facile conversion to other functionality such as
amines and ketones makes them attractive targets for reaction control.
Organocatalysts have been developed that achieve asymmetric conjugate addition
of nitroalkanes with a variety of substrates, presumably through non-covalent
stabilization of the anionic intermediates. Catalyst design continues through
investigation of additional scaffolds that are complementary to nitroalkane
structure as well as expanding the scope of applicable nitroalkanes.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Linton of the Department of Chemistry at Bowdoin
College. Professor Linton's research efforts revolve around the development of
molecular catalysts that control the reactions of nitroalkanes. Since
stereoselective syntheses are required for numerous pharmaceutical and
biological substrates, these catalysts have broad applicability to a wide
variety of relevant target molecules. Additionally this approach uses
environmentally friendly organocatalysts that can perform these reactions with
minimal use of reagents and minimal production of waste.