* 0852387
* Political Context and Citizen Response in the 2010 Elections
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Walter Stone, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2014
* USD 266,821.00

A central question in the study of voting and elections is how voters respond to
differences between competing candidates in an election. A persistent problem in
large-scale studies of the electorate is that they depend on survey respondents'
perceptions and reports of the issue positions and non-policy characteristics of
competing candidates to explain their voting choice, candidate evaluations, and
related concepts. Such reports are strongly influenced by partisan
predispositions and biases, and many respondents lack the information to report
on candidate policy positions or characteristics. As a result, analyses of how
candidate differences affect respondents' behavior are suspect, and most
scholars do not even attempt to estimate the impact of candidate policy
differences on voting choice in non-presidential elections. Many studies in this
literature reach pessimistic conclusions about the capacity of citizens to
measure up to fundamental expectations in classical democratic theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs district experts in a national random
sample of U.S. House districts to report on the policy positions, electoral
prospects, and non-policy characteristics of congressional candidates in the
2010 elections. Expert ratings allow for an assessment of the impact of
candidate differences on citizen response, independent of perceptual biases of
survey respondents, and without assuming that voters must be aware of and able
to report candidate differences in order for those differences to affect their
voting choice. The use of district experts to assess candidate characteristics
leads to a much more positive view of the citizen in contemporary elections than
is true of survey-based studies that rely on respondents' perceptions and
reports about the candidates competing for their votes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase understanding of the theory and
practice of American democracy by providing a new approach to fundamental
questions about how candidate differences affect citizen behavior in elections.
By integrating expert ratings of candidate differences and other aspects of the
political context with data on voters from national surveys and making this data
widely available to the scholarly community, this project will direct scholarly
attention to the importance of context in explaining citizen behavior.