* 0852868
* Collaborative Research:   Development of a High Speed Cell Mechanical Property Testing Cytometer
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* David W. Marr, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 04/30/2013
* USD 364,278.00

Identifying a certain cell type based on a specific signature, separating cell
mixtures according to cellular differences, and studying changes in a specific
signature with cell environments are important techniques in biological
research. While various biochemical markers of cells have been extensively used
for decades, biomechanical properties such as cell stiffness are increasingly
recognized as an important indicator of cell type and physiological state. The
mechanical properties of cells are defined by the membrane, cytoskeleton and the
volume of the cell, and are likely associated with basic characteristics
including type, growth, stage of differentiation, and response to the
environment. Existing mechanical characterization tools, however, can only
examine a few cells at a time, severely limiting their utility and application
due to the low throughput associated with the sequential isolation and probing
of individual cells. Here, a high-throughput method will be developed, where
optical-based mechanical ?stretching? forces are applied to cells in
microfluidic devices. By the end of this 3-year project, a device capable of the
rapid measurement of cell mechanical properties will be built and tested on
bovine blood cells, vascular cells, and human HeLa cells. A number of broader
impacts are expected including providing new research opportunities for
undergraduate students, new teaching opportunities at the high-school level, and
new recruitment efforts for underrepresented groups within the state of
Colorado.