* 0852737
* IDBR:   In vivo multifunctional photothermal cytometry
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Vladimir Zharov, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 04/30/2013
* USD 668,919.00

Two methodologies have dominated in biological studies: Laboratory experiments
at the subcellular levels, and experiments examining populations of cells in
living organisms. This leaves a persistent and recurrent gap in our
understanding of biological phenomena. It is not possible to adequately
replicate in a test tube the full repertoire of environmental factors that are
important in living organisms, and whole-animal studies currently are limited
with regards to studying the structure and activities of individual cells with
sufficient resolution and sensitivity, especially in a bioflow context. This
award will fill this gap by developing a multiparameter photothermal cytometer
for real-time study of individual cells in living organisms, in both static and
flow conditions with molecular specificity, based upon intrinsic vibrational
spectroscopic contrast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advanced technical platform
with a spectrally tunable near-infrared nanosecond pulse laser will be built for
non-invasive, rapid (millisecond scale) detection and imaging of single cells
with high optical resolution, enhanced absorption sensitivity (four orders
better than in convention absorption spectroscopy), and accurate cell
positioning. The instrument can be applicable to studies of various living
animal models, including mouse ear and mesentery or C. elegans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outcomes encompass an almost unexplored area
of biological research associated with the use of weakly fluorescent, light-
absorbing cellular micro- and nanostructures as intrinsic cell-specific
photothermal markers for the non-invasive real-time study in living organisms of
various biological processes such as programmed cell death (apoptosis),
metabolic activity, and the influence of environmental factors (e.g., oxidative
stress) on homeostasis, immunity, and longevity. Long-term goals include
enhancing the photothermal cytometer for use in three-dimensional imaging,
developing photothermal multiphoton microscopy, and potentially integrating
photothermal, fluorescence, and light scattering techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research involves mathematicians,
physicists, electrical engineers, chemists and biologists, and will include
developing a training program and new coursework on advanced optical imaging,
animal &lt;br/&gt;models, and cell study in vivo to benefit the education of
undergraduate, graduate, and &lt;br/&gt;postgraduate students at University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences and University of Arkansas at Fayetteville at
Little Rock. Students from different ethnic groups from University at Pine
Bluff, and disabilities (through Arkansas School for the Deaf) will be mentored.
&lt;br/&gt;