* 0852975
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Biogeography and Evolutionary Turnover in the Context of Human Evolution
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Faysal Bibi, Bibi                    Faysal
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 12/31/2011
* USD 107,880.00

0852975 Bibi

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Faysal
Bibi to work with Dr. Jean-Renaud Boisserie at the University of Poitiers in
France.

This project will consist of: 1) conducting fieldwork to discover new fossils;
and 2) exploring the biotic similarities and differences between paleontological
sites of relevance to the history of human evolution. Work is focusing on fossil
sites from two spans of time; the late Miocene sites of the Baynunah Formation
(United Arab Emirates) and the late Pliocene sites in the Middle Awash (north
eastern Ethiopia), and the Omo Shungura Formation (southern Ethiopia). The
Baynunah is being investigated at the faunal level by way of annual fieldwork
activities, and is being compared with the biogeographic context at
contemporaneous East African and Asian fossil sites. Comparison between sites
aged 3?2.5Ma in East Africa focuses on the description of newly discovered
specimens of Bovidae (antelopes) from the Omo Shungura and the Middle Awash. The
comparative biogeographic context between these two fossil areas is developing
current hypotheses on the major climatic changes and resulting biotic responses
that are known to have taken place in the late Pliocene of Africa.

This research: 1) addresses the types of biogeographic barriers that produced
faunal differences between different portions of Africa and Arabia; and 2) tests
whether turnover took place in the Afar as it did in the Omo at 2.8?2.5Ma,
further investigating the effective presence of biogeographic barriers that
differentiated the Omo and Afar late Pliocene faunas (including hominids). In
addition to revealing further chapters of life history in Africa and Arabia,
this project is providing new and finely-resolved information on the
interactions between environmental change and evolution. This is achieved by
close comparison of the fossil record with local, regional, and continental-
scale climatic records. The significance of these fossil faunas is underscored
by the fact that the late Miocene and the late Pliocene are two important
periods in the history of human evolution. The human line split from that of the
chimpanzee in the late Miocene, while the late Pliocene saw the development of
both Homo and Paranthropus (?robust? hominids) from Australopithecus. By
understanding the factors that affected evolutionary change in these fossil
assemblages, we are working to understand the historical variables that in turn
shaped our own evolution.