* 0852548
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant:  Deaf Communities in Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jessica Lee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,400.00

Graduate student Jessica Lee (University of Colorado), supervised by Dr. J.
Terrence McCabe, will investigate how community is formed and maintained among
deaf people in Tanzania. The research will focus on the processes that influence
identity and community formation in the context of extreme marginalization and
the unique situation of visual communication. The researcher will use survey,
life-history and group interviews, photo visioning, and participant-observation
in order to understand (1) how and when do deaf people participate in public
life, (2) how are NGOs, particularly the Tanzanian Association of the Deaf,
transfer points of transnational discourses about deaf identity politics and
influence identity formation in deaf people, and (3) how the social contexts of
living in Tanzania affect deaf people's construction of self and categories like
culturally deaf, deafness, and disability. Participants will be recruited from
deaf people with variable levels of association with the NGO and other deaf
people. The research will compare these findings between a metropolitan city,
Dar es Salaam, and a more rural location, Iringa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to a growing body of knowledge on communities of deaf
people. It is particularly important in light of the dearth of research on
people who are deaf living in poor countries, such as those of Sub-Saharan
Africa. This study will also contribute to discussions about NGOs and their role
in transnational networks of influence as global discourses engage with local
lives. Tanzania makes for an interesting research site due to the deaf activism,
the distinctiveness of Tanzanian Sign Language, and the history of NGO
involvement. This project will contribute to theoretical discussions of identity
and community formation, NGOs and globalization, and Deaf studies. It will be
significant in applied issues like advocacy and policy formation for one of the
most vulnerable and marginalized populations in the developing world, the deaf.