* 0852796
* Collaborative Research: Ultra-fast and multiplexed time-resolved hydroxyl radical footprinting of nucleic acids and proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Michael Brenowitz, Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 04/30/2013
* USD 504,448.00

Time is linked to cellular function in two important ways. The first way is that
the rates of many biological processes determine their function. The second way
is that the mechanisms of biological reactions can be revealed by a study of
their reaction rates. The goal of this instrument development program is to make
tools that efficiently probe the time dependent evolution of biopolymer
structures. What is unique about the tools to be built is that they allow
reactions to be followed from their earliest steps from the point of view of
each monomer of the polymers DNA, RNA and proteins. These tools will be low-
cost, easy-to-use and inexpensive-to-operate machines so that biology
laboratories will have an entrée into quantitative analysis and biophysical
laboratories the incisive tools required for the analysis of very fast
biological reactions. The mixing devices that will be built will be able to
acquire time ? progress curves commencing from the earliest steps of
macromolecular folding and binding reactions with as spatial resolution as fine
as every residue of the polymer chain. From a quantitative understanding of the
molecular mechanism of individual systems flows a broader understanding of the
interrelationships among multiple systems. Ultimately, predictions of the
behavior of biological systems based upon the physical properties of their
constituent processes will be possible. While such predictions are an admittedly
ambitious goal, new technological tools such as those to be built in this study
will enable the acquisition of both the depth and breath of information that can
make this dream a reality. The project will undergraduates in research through a
Summer Undergraduate Research Program. Outreach activities include performing
demonstrations is middle and high schools, as well as make them available to
middle school and high school teachers.