* 0852454
* Summer School in Inverse Problems; June 2009; Newark, DE
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Peter Monk, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2010
* USD 20,291.00

Luke&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0852454&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; For the Institute for
Mathematics and its Applications (IMA)&lt;br/&gt;and its Participating
Institutions (PI), the principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator and his colleagues
organize the IMA/PI Summer School&lt;br/&gt;on the Mathematics of Inverse
Problems, June 15-July 3. In this&lt;br/&gt;project the investigators include
students who are not from the&lt;br/&gt;participating institutions. The program
is geared toward&lt;br/&gt;graduate students in the mathematical sciences. The
2009 summer&lt;br/&gt;program on the mathematics of inverse problems covers
three&lt;br/&gt;different themes: inverse problems for hyperbolic
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations, inverse scattering in the
frequency&lt;br/&gt;domain, and variational techniques for inverse problems.
The&lt;br/&gt;program covers the techniques used to tackle problems at
the&lt;br/&gt;cutting edge of mathematical research in each of these areas.
&lt;br/&gt;Week-long lectures and problem-solving sessions are presented
in&lt;br/&gt;an informal environment by world leaders in each of these
areas&lt;br/&gt;-- William Symes (inverse problems for waves), John
Sylvester&lt;br/&gt;(inverse scattering), and Jonathan Borwein
(variational&lt;br/&gt;analysis). Two of the three lecture series (inverse
scattering&lt;br/&gt;and variational techniques) are under contract to appear
as&lt;br/&gt;separate chapters in a book to be published by Springer in 2010.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Inverse problems are everywhere, from determining the
causes&lt;br/&gt;of global warming, to finding oil and natural gas under
the&lt;br/&gt;earth's surface, to diagnosing diseases with medical imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;The basic idea of an inverse problem is simple: given
an&lt;br/&gt;observation, determine the cause. Unfortunately, most
inverse&lt;br/&gt;problems are not easily solved: the model for the observation
is&lt;br/&gt;often incomplete or incorrect, and, even if the model is
a&lt;br/&gt;perfect match to the truth, it may be impossible to
accurately&lt;br/&gt;determine the cause from an observation (the curse of so-
called&lt;br/&gt;"ill-posedness"). The last 20 years has seen a dramatic shift
in&lt;br/&gt;the mathematics of inverse problems and the capabilities
for&lt;br/&gt;solving them, initiated largely by improvements in
computing&lt;br/&gt;power and the concurrent evolution of what is often
called&lt;br/&gt;"experimental mathematics." Never before have new
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;tools been able to be tested with such immediacy and
practical&lt;br/&gt;import. This IMA/PI Summer School on the Mathematics of
Inverse&lt;br/&gt;Problems aims at preparing future mathematicians for research
in&lt;br/&gt;this growing and increasingly vital field. The schools
bring&lt;br/&gt;students together with outstanding researchers in an
intensive&lt;br/&gt;setting that is intended to lead students from the more
familiar&lt;br/&gt;course-oriented problem solving skills to the frontiers
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical research. Students gain experience not only
in&lt;br/&gt;attacking problems on advanced and research-grade topics,
but&lt;br/&gt;also in working collaboratively with people from
different&lt;br/&gt;backgrounds. The 2009 program has received 51 applications
from&lt;br/&gt;a diverse group of individuals, 29 from participating
IMA&lt;br/&gt;institutions and 22 from non-IMA institutions. This
project&lt;br/&gt;supports students from non-IMA affiliated institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;