* 0852406
* Analysis of Volatile Organic Compound Oxidation Chemistry and Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation with Novel Instrumentation for in Situ Carbonyl Detection
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Frank Keutsch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2012
* USD 466,696.00

This project involves measuring formaldehyde and alpha-dicarbonyl (mainly
glyoxal) concentration gradients and fluxes within and above the canopy at
Blodgett Forest in the Sierra Nevada of California using state of the art
instrumentation as part of the multi-investigator Biosphere Effects on AeRosols
and Photochemistry Experiment - 2009 (BEARPEX-09) campaign. Resulting data will
be combined with photochemical modeling to provide new insights into the
mechanisms of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation and biogenic volatile
organic compound (VOC) oxidation chemistry. Improvements will be made to a
laser-induced fluorescence instrument for measuring formaldehyde and to a laser-
induced phosphorescence instrument for measuring alpha-dicarbonyls. The field
data will be combined with aerosol physical and chemical composition data to be
obtained by other investigators and analyzed using a photochemical transport
model based on the Master Chemical Mechanism.

The broader impacts of this work will include (1) improved understanding of VOC
oxidation and SOA formation, which are important processes affecting urban air
quality as well as regional/global climate forcing, (2) participation and
training of two graduate students, (3) participate of undergraduates through the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program at the University of Wisconsin -
Madison, and (4) participation of the Principal Investigator in a program that
facilitates interactions with local public school science teachers. This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).