* 0852029
* REU Site: The Integrated Science of Global Change and Its Impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2013
* USD 323,456.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students and K-12
teachers in University of Texas Environmental Science Institute's combined
REU/RET program will work in the research groups of faculty mentors working on
scientific topics related to The Integrated Science of Global Change and Its
Impacts. The program is focused on global change, defined as the processes of
climate change and land use/land cover change and their impacts upon ecosystems
and water. An emphasis is placed on interdisciplinary perspectives that
integrate diverse fields such as paleoecology, geology, ecology, atmospheric
science, urban ecology, policy, engineering, hydrology, and marine biology.
Group workshops and field trips will familiarize students and teachers with this
interdisciplinary approach and faculty mentors, their graduate students and
post-doctoral fellows will guide students in the development of independent
research projects. The goal of this independent research is a scientific
publication or presentation at a scientific meeting. Professional development
opportunities will include visits with professionals in environmental consulting
firms and state and federal government agencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancements in global change science require an
interdisciplinary approach that combines basic research in geology, hydrology,
and ecology, with applied and social science studies in engineering, urban
ecology, and policy. This REU/RET program will provide the disciplinary training
and collaborative experiences necessary to develop future integrative scientists
and science teachers with strong content understanding. It provides
undergraduates from colleges with limited research resources with training in
basic research and dissemination of scientific results, as well as hands-on
learning and broader exposure to science career options. The program will
provide grade 5-12 science teachers with an understanding of the nature of
scientific research and broad-based content knowledge.