* 0852641
* Organizations and their Impact on the Urban Community
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2012
* USD 181,129.00

SES-0852641&lt;br/&gt;Joseph Galaskiewicz&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general purpose of the research is to
understand how and why organizational establishments are located where they are
across the urban landscape and how the location of these establishments affects
the lives of families. In this phase of the research the first objective is to
see if organizational densities (the number of organizations in a neighborhood),
measured in 2003, affected the strategy, performance, relocation, and survival
rates of a sample of 619 organizations in the Phoenix metropolitan area that the
investigator has been following for the past five years. The second objective is
to explain over a five year period (2004-08) the birth and death rates, across
areas of the metropolitan community, of entire sub-populations of organizations
that provide services/activities for children (e.g., sports clubs, movie
theatres, and amusement parks). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the first
objective the investigators will document the status (open, closed, moved) of
the 619 panel establishments on which first data were gathered in 2003 by
recontacting the administrators/managers/supervisors/ owners of these
establishments. With current data on the population of establishments that are
similar to them, the investigator will use spatial regression techniques to see
if organizational densities in 2003 explain their current status. To address the
second objective, the investigator will compile the names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of the estimated 50,000-55,000 nonprofit, government, and
business establishments which provide activities for children on Saturdays in
the Phoenix-Mesa metropolitan area in 2008, replicating the 2003 study. The
investigator will then look at the change in densities across sub-populations
and across areas of the metropolitan community to identify the factors that
explain growth and decline in various sub-populations using ecological and neo-
institutional theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader significance,
because children's access to different types of activities is important for
their educational, emotional, and social development, yet not all children have
equal access to high quality programs, activities, and opportunities. The major
focus of the study is to better understand the urban institutions that reduce or
reproduce inequality in society. Previously findings showed that what children
did (e.g., swim, shop, or play soccer) and which venues they used (e.g., for-
profit, nonprofit, or government)on Saturdays in the Phoenix metro area in 2003
were directly affected by the number of different kinds of organizations in
their zip codes. This was especially true for children from low income families.
This research examines the dynamics which underlie the geographical distribution
of organizational establishments. This knowledge could potentially be used to
motivate providers to locate/stay in under-served areas and to empower families
to advocate for these services and/or to create their own organizational
resources.