* 0852688
* Collaborative Research:   Design Principles for Effective Interorganizational Public Safety Response Infrastructures
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Steven Sawyer, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2011
* USD 125,472.00

In the post 9/11 environment, a new form of organization has spawned in which
public sector agencies and private organizations collaborate in designing
complex IT-enabled infrastructures - systems that provide shared service
delivery. This research will study and recommend design elements essential for
architecture and governance structures that promote interorganizational success
in using these systems. This project will draw on relevant knowledge from public
administration, organizational theory, and information systems. It will focus
on: (1) the design of collaborative systems that explicitly address the
organizational needs of the technical infrastructure and (2) interactions among
the system design elements and participating organizations that can best
leverage such systems. Public safety collaborations currently use either
packaged or open-standards systems to support interoperability among police,
fire, rescue, homeland security and other public safety agencies. Examples of
the packaged software systems include those from COPLINK and Motorola. Examples
of open standards systems include Pennsylvania's Justice Network (JNET), the
D.C. area's Capitol Wireless Integrated Network (CapWIN) and the San Diego
area's Automated Regional Justice Information System (ARJIS). The current
proposal will expand upon initial empirical and theoretical work conducted by
its investigators based on CapWIN, ARJIS and JNET, and other interorganizational
collaborative settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected
contributions:&lt;br/&gt;The researchers identify three key reasons to focus on
infrastructures for interorganizational collaboration in the public safety
domain. First, such systems are exemplars of how future networked organizations
that exist because of IT, and effectively use it, might look. Second, they
represent some of the most innovative thinking in digital government. Third,
these systems, in their design and use, have direct benefits relative to public
safety. These include improved homeland security, better delivery of
governmental service and safer communities, while they impart substantial
scientific value relative to design principles for both collaborative systems
and the organizations using them. In furthering such research, the United States
will provide leadership addressing current challenges that national and
international public safety organizations face. The project will employ a
design-centered approach in order to achieve improved and more robust IT
infrastructures to support interorganizational information sharing. It will
combine detailed empirical investigation using several field-based data
collection methods, and will analyze extensive secondary data available on
public safety in the United States. It will synthesize existing literature
across a range of relevant disciplines to support theoretical and practical
design recommendations for collaborative IT infrastructure and supportive
organizational governance principles and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the work derives from:&lt;br/&gt;1. Interdisciplinary
insights drawn from public administration and political science, organizational
information systems, and information technology.&lt;br/&gt;2. Empirical research
design that leverages the best aspects of intensive case study and a large-
sample survey.&lt;br/&gt;3. Focus on technical design features and architectural
principles that are essential to collaborative success.&lt;br/&gt;4. Analysis of
institutional governance structures and processes that are critical for support
of successful&lt;br/&gt;implementation and operation of collaborative
systems.&lt;br/&gt;5. Emphasis on building theory that can be generalized to
many domains in which IT supports public-private
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the work is to
improve:&lt;br/&gt;1. Public safety and homeland security via better systems
design to support information sharing.&lt;br/&gt;2. IT-enabled public-private
collaborations, regardless of context.