* 0852986
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Fitness Cost and Neuroendocrine Correlates of Premature Breeding
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Timothy Greives, Greives                 Timothy        J
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2012
* USD 131,666.00

0852986 Greives

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Timothy
J. Greives to work with Dr. Michaela Hau at Max Planck Institute for Ornithology
in Germany and with Dr. Tom Hahn at the University of California, Davis in the
US.

Seasonal cycles in reproductive activity are observed in virtually all animals,
including birds. These cycles represent adaptations that ensure offspring
production during favorable environmental conditions. In the temperate-zone,
photoperiod (i.e., day-length) provides a ?noise-free? seasonal cue that does
not vary from year to year for a given day. Hence, most species rely on
photoperiod to determine the time of year. Seasonal changes in reproduction have
even been demonstrated in species living in relatively stable habitats (i.e.,
the tropics), suggesting that selection favors a seasonal regulation of
reproductive activity across latitudes. However, the nature of the selection
pressures that shape gonadal cycles in vertebrates remains unknown. This has
been due, in part, to methodological constraints limiting the ability to modify
experimentally the timing of gonad activation in the field. This fellowship
tests the hypothesis that the precise timing of reproduction has evolved in
response to fitness costs associated with mistimed breeding events. The timing
of gonadal activation is being advanced in free-living great tits through
manipulation of perceived photoperiod using a miniature light emitting diode
(LED) attached to the birds? head, providing photoperiodic stimulation prior to
the start of normal gonadal development. Further, the effect of mistimed
reproduction on novel neuropeptides (e.g., kisspeptin, gonadotropin-inhibitory
hormone) is being examined; this will enable a better understanding of their
specific roles in regulating vertebrate reproduction. In Experiment 1, behavior,
reproductive success and survival rates are being documented in breeding pairs.
In Experiment 2, neuroendocrine responses to precocious photoperiodic
stimulation will be investigated using state-of-the-art techniques. The proposed
experiments are the first to advance gonadal development using photoperiod
manipulation in a free-living vertebrate to quantify resulting effects on
fitness.

Understanding the selection pressures that act on mistimed seasonal processes
will help to resolve the question of why most avian species, and a large number
of vertebrates world-wide, exhibit pronounced cycles in gonad size. They will
also provide a unique opportunity to elucidate mechanisms by which diverse
environmental cues are integrated within the brain. The knowledge generated will
be useful in understanding the underlying processes (both ultimate and
proximate) shaping the ability of populations and species to respond to global
climate change or spread to new habitats.