* 0852633
* Conference: Lie Algebraic Systems with Origins in Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Alexander Kleshchev, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 12/31/2009
* USD 22,500.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Kleshchev,
Alexander &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0757852 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Oregon Eugene &lt;br/&gt;Title: Conference `Lie Algebraic Systems
with Origins in Physics'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In January-June 2009, a
half-year program "Algebraic Lie Theory" will take place at the Isaac Newton
Institute in Cambridge, England. One of the major events during the program will
be the workshop "Lie Algebraic Systems with Origins in Physics" planned for
23-27 March, 2009. The workshop will bring together mathematicians and
mathematical physicists working in such (overlapping) areas as W-algebras,
Yangians, vertex algebras, positive characteristic Lie theory, conformal
algebras, chiral algebras, quantum groups, Hecke algebras, Cherednik algebras,
infinite dimensional Lie algebras, as well as related representation theory,
geometry, combinatorics, and applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting
will provide rare and very important opportunities, especially for young
researchers (including graduate students). It will bring together people working
in different areas of Lie theory, mathematical physics, and representation
theory. Instructional workshops are planned as part of the larger program at the
Isaac Newton Institute. A volume of proceedings of the workshop is planned. This
grant provides support for participation of U.S. mathematicians in this
workshop. This support might be used by many participants in an especially
effective way: once there, people might be able to stay at the Isaac Newton
Institute for a longer period of time using additional funds of their own or
apply for per diem from the Institute. At least half of the funds will be used
to support women, minority, and young scientists (including graduate students).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;