* 0852875
* Collaborative Research:   IDBR:   Multiscale 3-D Observation System for Analysis of Predator Prey Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2015
* Ellen Longmire, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 04/30/2015
* USD 803,259.00

A unique instrumentation system will be developed that will allow simultaneous
characterization of the motion of plankton, small fish, and the surrounding
fluid within a complex interweaving biological and hydrodynamic environment. The
system will quantify evolving three-dimensional motion of organisms and fluid
over a continuous range of spatial scales spanning five orders of magnitude
(from 10 centimeters down to a micron) thus enabling the simultaneous
characterization of detailed behavior of small fish, zooplankton, and
phytoplankton or protozoa (species of three trophic levels). The system will
also have high temporal resolution down to 0.5 ms enabling the observation of
rapidly occurring flow events and behavioral reactions. Two state-of-the-art
velocimetry techniques will be integrated to resolve the wide range of spatial
scales. Holographic velocimetry will quantify small-scale motion of organisms,
microscopic appendages, and the surrounding fluid (scales 1-100 micrometer).
Simultaneously, tomographic velocimetry will capture and quantify larger scales
(300 micrometer - 10 cm) of motion in the volume surrounding one or multiple
organisms. The system will operate in a spectral range (near-infrared) to which
fish and plankton are insensitive so that the measurement system will not affect
or bias their behavior. The measurements obtained from the proposed instrument
would provide unprecedented quantitative observational capabilities in both
spatial and temporal domains. The instrumentation will permit the study of
predator-prey interactions among fish, zooplankton, ciliates, dinoflagellates,
and bacteria simultaneously within realistic environments. Therefore the data
captured by such a system will provide opportunities to transform understanding
of interactive behavior in aquatic environments. Hence, the system will lead to
new understanding of the reasons behind variations in productivity and biomass
in the sea and in freshwater bodies. &lt;br/&gt;Three graduate students and
multiple undergraduates will be directly involved in the research. Also, the
PI's will work with elementary school teachers and students at a school with
significant Native American population to develop interactive projects based on
understanding populations of plankton, minnows, and small fish in local
freshwater environments. As part of these projects, the instrumentation system
will be used to generate movies revealing detailed motion of individual species,
their interactions with one another and with the surrounding flow. The resulting
movies will be posted on a local website as well as on efluids.com and
youtube.com.&lt;br/&gt;The completed system will be available to visiting
scientists for studies of the effects of hydrodynamics on behavioral and
ecological interactions between organisms. Also, based on the results of this
study, the PI's will maintain a web page containing a detailed plan and
recommendations for development and operation of such systems by biological
researchers.