* 0852910
* Understanding of Lean Premixed Combustors from Cinema-Imaging of Turbulent Eddy- Flame Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2013
* James Driscoll, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 311,806.00

0852910&lt;br/&gt;Driscoll&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
establish how turbulent eddies control the chemical reactions that occur within
lean premixed combustors that are being developed for new gas turbine engines
and internal combustion engines. Unique laser diagnostics are being applied to
zoom in and image the thin, wrinkled chemical reaction layers and the adjacent
turbulent eddies, to determine the rates at which the eddies cause heat and
various gas species to diffuse into the reaction layers. This experimental
information is needed to guide the development of new computer models that now
can simulate the highly unsteady physical processes that are associated with
turbulence. &lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives are to take high-speed movies of
the unsteady velocity field and the gas concentration fields in highly turbulent
premixed flames. The work provides the first measurements of an important
quantity called the aerodynamic strain rate which appears in numerical models.
Information is extracted to determine this quantity and others that govern the
chemical rates of consumption of fuel and the production of nitric oxide
pollutants. High-speed movies taken at more than 1,000 frames/second are
obtained because the local chemical reactions are rapidly turned on and off by
the eddies, and this unsteady process can cause unburned fuel and carbon
monoxide to escape. The intellectual merit is to assess classic theories of
Damkohler and Landau for turbulent reacting flows and to determine how to
numerically simulate these concepts. The new diagnostics being applied provide
high-speed movies of the concentrations of formaldehyde (CH2O), hydroxyl (OH),
and other combustion intermediates, as well as the simultaneous sizes and
strengths of the turbulent eddies. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts of the work arise
through technical publication and presentations, by the training of students and
new scientists, and by synergetic collaborations between different disciplines
and different institutions, both domestic and international. For example, the
experimental data is being provided to researchers who are developing advanced
numerical models in Berkeley CA and in Stuttgart Germany.