* 0852217
* 2009 Coastal Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* James O'Donnell, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2010
* USD 18,000.00

The main goal of the 2009 Gordon Conference on Coastal Circulation to be held in
June 2009 at Colby-Sawyer College is to accelerate the rate of advance of
understanding of coastal ocean circulation and to enhance the development of
junior scholars. The intent is to bring together a diverse (in gender,
seniority, race, geographic location) group of scholars to share the latest
discoveries and theories in both formal presentation and informal settings. This
conference series is widely held to be the most important meeting in the
community. The Gordon Foundation is providing substantial cost sharing and
infrastructure support and additional contributions are being solicited from
other sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;A diverse
organizing committee has identified the international leaders in the field to
present critical summaries of a range of important problems and to highlight the
latest developments. Inquisitive discussion leaders have also been recruited to
provoke and moderate discussion among the participants. Almost a half of the
conference time is allocated to informal interactions among participants. This
format has proven to be very effective in meeting the objectives. The Conference
Chair served as the Vice Chair and program committee in the previous meeting and
is therefore has the experience to ensure the success of the upcoming
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The program committee
has ensured that the invited speakers list includes members of groups
traditionally under-represented in the field to provide role models and advice
for junior scholars and students. The mix of formal and informal meetings in the
program facilitates the exchange of ideas among people in different sub-areas of
the field, geographic region, age etc. Past conferences have lead to the
formation of new research collaborations. Among the most valuable outcomes of
the conference is the establishment of relationships between senior scholars and
students.