* 0852652
* Collaborative Research: Multicentury Drought Reconstructions from Guatemala and the Context for Past and Future Hydroclimatic Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Kevin Anchukaitis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2013
* USD 128,454.00

While the signature of anthropogenic climatic change is associated with observed
and ongoing increases in temperature, it is concomitant changes in precipitation
and the frequency and duration of drought that will have the most direct and
immediate consequences for human populations. Changes in regional hydroclimate
will exacerbate threats to sustainable water supplies from growing populations,
pollution, declining infrastructure, and resource conflicts. One robust
prediction of the most recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
climate model ensemble is that precipitation rates will decrease over Guatemala
and most parts of Central America in both the summer and winter under future
increased greenhouse gas scenarios. Critical to mitigating the consequences of
changes in water availability is a long-term perspective on the potential range
of variability in precipitation and the integration of this knowledge within
water planning and natural resources policy. However, long-term instrumental
records of drought are sparse in Guatemala and throughout the Central American
tropics. This is particularly true for high elevation regions, which are likely
to demonstrate the earliest and more severe local consequences of global climate
change. In the absence of long instrumental records, scientists investigating
the causes and consequences of climate variability and change depend on proxy
records that can be used to reconstruct past ocean-atmosphere conditions. Tree-
ring chronologies form the bulk of the available, high-resolution terrestrial
proxy records. However, they are almost entirely absent from the tropical
Americas south of Mexico. The lack of a high resolution, long-term perspective
on drought from this region also limits opportunities to validate climate model
predictions. The development of long, annually resolved records of climate from
this region is therefore necessary for understanding the local response to
broad-scale forcing, detecting and attributing long-term trends related to
anthropogenic climate change, and verifying the fidelity of the climate models
used as the primary forecasting tool for predicting future
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will expand the geographic
frontier of dendroclimatology into the mountains of Guatemala, identifying
species and sites which show sensitivity to precipitation, and developing
estimates of drought variability over the last several centuries. They will
investigate and utilize a combination of high elevation tropical conifer species
in this study. All candidate taxa will be carefully and systematically examined
to establish annual ring formation and chronology development. Once dating and
chronology development has been completed and verified, the tree-ring time
series will be compared against the available local and gridded meteorological
data in order to detect physiologically reasonable climate/growth relationships.
Models will be developed to estimate past climate anomalies from the absolutely
dated ring width series. Reconstructions of past precipitation and drought will
be objectively compared against independently developed climate fields as well
as estimates of past forcing. The drought reconstructions will also be used to
interpret the possible role of climate in important historical events of the
last several hundred years. This research will provide a long-term context for
drought variability that is critical for efforts to mitigate the consequences
for vulnerable human populations from climatic change. Active outreach and
participatory education in Maya communities in the regions are integrated in the
proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;