* 0852131
* CT-ISG: Collaborative: Enabling Detection of Elusive Malware by by Going Out of the Box with Semantically Reconstructed View (OBSERV)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/13/2008,07/31/2011
* Xuxian Jiang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2011
* USD 202,595.00

There is an alarming trend that elusive malware is armed with techniques that
detect, evade, and subvert malware detection facilities of the victim. On the
defensive side, a fundamental limitation of traditional host-based anti-malware
systems is that they run inside the very hosts they are protecting, making them
vulnerable to malware's counter-detection and subversion. To address this
limitation, solutions using virtual machine (VM) technologies advocate placing
the malware detection facility outside of the protected VM. However, a dilemma
exists between these two approaches: The "out of the box" approach gains tamper
resistance at the cost of losing the native, semantic view of the host enjoyed
by the "in the box" approach. To resolve the above dilemma, a new approach
called OBSERV ("Out of the Box with SEmantically Reconstructed View") is
introduced to achieve the advantages of both camps by reconstructing the
semantic internal view of a VM from external, low-level observations. OBSERV
enables two exciting malware defense opportunities: (1) malware detection by
view comparison and (2) real-time detection and stoppage of kernel-level
rootkits. The broader impact of this research is two-fold: (1) It will enhance
the trustworthiness and effectiveness of widely deployed anti-malware systems.
Moreover, OBSERV is expected to be viewed favorably by the anti-virus software
industry because of its support for existing off-the-shelf anti-virus software.
(2) Results from this research will lead to the development of education
materials for undergraduate and graduate courses and for professional training
sessions.