* 0852917
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Effect of Resource Availability on Mechanisms of Ant Species Diversity
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jessica Pearce, Pearce                  Jessica        M
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2012
* USD 162,456.00

0852917 Pearce

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Jessica
M. Pearce to work with Dr. Xim S. Cerda at the Estacion Biologica de Donana in
Spain.

Competition is considered one of the most significant influences on community
structure, especially in ant assemblages. In many communities, ant species
trade-off between the ability to be good discoverers, arriving at food resources
first, and to behaviourally dominate them, limiting access by other species.
Although the ways in which ants dominate food are well-characterized, little is
known about the patterns and mechanisms of resource discovery. This gap in the
understanding of ant community structure is relatively important because recent
theoretical work suggests that resource discovery, not dominance, may drive
assemblage dynamics. It is suggested that fast discoverers may influence
community structure by setting the rate of discovery that slow dominants must
meet to persist in the community. This perspective contrasts with the
traditional interpretation that discovery is used by less dominant species to
?escape? exclusion at food resources by more dominant species. Using resource
supplementation and species removal experiments, three hypotheses are being
tested: a) mechanisms for resource discovery by ant species vary depending on
resource availability; b) the dominance-discovery trade-off is present in
Mediterranean ant communities; and c) resource availability increases species
richness by allowing the persistence of slow behaviorally dominant species.
Resource discovery patterns and mechanisms are being characterized by performing
extensive surveys of discovery (time to discovery and proportion successful
discoveries) and species-specific forager density as well as by filming the
patterns of search behavior of individual foragers belonging to different
species. The expectation is that ant species will shift from an individual-based
foraging strategy at lower resource levels to a combined group- and individual-
based foraging strategy at higher resource levels. The presence and nature of a
dominance-discovery trade-off is being determined by correlating the above
discovery data with dominance rankings for Mediterranean species collected via
behavioral trials. Given the trade-off, it is expected that a slower median time
to discovery in higher resource environments occurs as a result of the
appearance, persistence, and abundance of slow dominant ants.

Since resource discovery is a crucial component of competition in any ant
community, this mechanism-focused research is generating data that clarify how
the trade-off persists and functions. These data are being used to generate
models that explore how different mechanisms of resource discovery contribute to
species coexistence under different levels of resource availability.
Furthermore, evidence for the existence of the dominance-discovery trade-off has
only been investigated in a limited number of communities. Testing for the
trade-off?s presence in a new assemblage of ants serves to examine its broader
importance as an explanation for species diversity. Third, this work examines
the novel hypothesis that discovery, not dominance, drives ant assemblage
composition. This perspective is a unique departure from past interpretation of
the trade-off that has not previously been empirically examined.

