* 0852959
* International Research Fellowship Program:  N-Body Simulations of Ring Formation in Non-barred Ringed Galaxies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Rebecca Grouchy, Grouchy                 Rebecca        D
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 10/31/2011
* USD 140,448.00

0852959 Grouchy

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Rebecca
D. Grouchy to work with Dr. Francoise Combes at L?Observatoire de Paris (LERMA)
in Paris, France.

In this project, the PI will attempt to establish the mode of ring formation in
non-barred galaxies through N-body computer simulations created by LERMA at
L?Observatoire de Paris. Rings observed in normal galaxies are typically
resonance rings formed in response to the gravitational torque of a strong bar.
By their very nature, non-barred galaxies are missing a key component needed to
form this resonance ring. However, the PI believes rings within a non-barred
galaxy may form in one of three ways. First, the galaxy formed the ring in the
past when it had a strong bar, and the bar has since dissolved through the build
up of the central mass concentration leaving the ring behind. Second, the ring
formed as a response to the gravitational perturbation of a companion at close
approach. Third, the ring formed after a minor collision between the galaxy and
a small companion in which the companion was completely consumed. To test these
possibilities, the PI will study a sample of twenty-four galaxies whose
photometric properties were previously analyzed. This project will have two
goals: 1. to determine whether the rings observed in the sample can be recreated
through a resonance or a collision; and 2. to recreate the rare counter-winding
spiral structure which has been observed in two non-barred ringed galaxies.

The results from this project, hopefully, will improve the current
understanding of galactic dynamics and evolution. By its very nature, a theory
must be able to predict that which is detailed observationally. Using N-body
simulations to recreate non-barred ringed galaxies, the PI will test the level
of the current understanding of galactic dynamics by comparing observations to
theory. If the observed galaxies are recreated then the current theories will be
strengthened. However, if the PI is unable to recreate the non-barred galaxies
using a simulation code based on the current theories, then modifications may
need to be made.