* 0852049
* REU Site: Tuskegee University Integrative Biosciences Research Experience for Undergraduates (IBS REU) Site
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Deloris Alexander, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2013
* USD 286,359.00

The Tuskegee University REU Site will provide a research program for
undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Eight students will be selected
each year to participate in a 10-week research program in the area of
integrative biosciences. Students who are rising juniors or seniors are eligible
to apply. Students who do not have research programs at their institutions or
from underrepresented minority groups are especially encouraged to apply.
Participants can select from a number of research projects on plant genomics,
biocomplexity in the environment, computational biology and bioinformatics,
animal sciences and cell/molecular biology. Aside from an intensive mentored
research experience in integrative biosciences research, which is defined as
involving the integration of two or more science disciplines, students will be
able to participate in an orientation session, an ?Introduction to Research?
course, an Ethics in Science component, a Research Certification and Safety
Training program, a GRE preparation workshop, and seminars in professional
development skills. A field trip will also occur during the course of the
program. At the completion of the summer, the participants will write and
present a report of their research projects. Research stipends, housing and
travel will be provided. Additional information is available at
www.tuskegee.edu/our/, or by contacting the Program Director, Dr. Olga Bolden-
Tiller at 334-727-8403 or obtiller@tuskegee.edu or the Director of the Office of
Undergraduate Research, Sharee Small at 334-727-8295 or
smalls@tuskegee.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;