* 0852495
* Collaborative Research:  GPOTS Special Meetings 2009/2010; High-Altitude Training for the Next Generation of Operator Theorists and Operator Algebraists
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Nicholas Ormes, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 03/31/2014
* USD 47,209.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Farsi/Latremoliere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The local organizers
at the University of Colorado at Boulder and at the University of Denver request
funding for two Special Meetings/Special Years in the area of operator
theory/operator algebras and their applications. These Special Meetings continue
the tradition of the annual Great Plains Operator Theory Symposia series (GPOTS)
spanning three decades. The GPOTS Symposia have become a premier conference
series in the fields of operator theory/operator algebras that host anywhere
from 100 to 150 participants each year. They have consistently focused on
important new developments and on exciting open problems to stimulate the
operator community, especially new researchers in the early part of their
careers. During 2009 at CU Boulder and 2010 at the University of Denver, the
PI?s will run the Symposia as cornerstones of consecutive ?Special Years?,
during which they will run focused ?GPOTS Seminars? and bring in ?GPOTS
Colloquia? speakers and researchers from the main institutions who have
sponsored GPOTS through the past decades. They will also sponsor training
opportunities for graduate students of their own and of sister institutions.
This proposal is requesting financial support, to be mostly given towards
participant support for the symposia activities, with support also going towards
Special Year Colloquium visitors and support for graduate students to attend
workshops. The two GPOTS Special Meetings/Special Research Years will enhance
activities that are vital for training graduate students and motivating junior
faculty of both our own and sister institutions. The Symposia themselves will be
held at the University of Colorado, Boulder in June 2009 and at the University
of Denver in June 2010. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;