* 0852101
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Measuring the Benefits of Reproductive Health Services
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Kelly Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 03/31/2011
* USD 32,500.00

Reproductive health services such as family planning, pregnancy care, and HIV
prevention services are readily accessible in the developed world. Yet in poor
countries, even basic reproductive health services are often unavailable. Though
governments and non-governmental organizations struggle to increase coverage of
these services, the benefits accruing from increased access are relatively
unknown. The purpose of this study is to assess the impacts of reproductive
health services (RHS) in the context of poor countries in Africa. Primary
benefits resulting from increased access to RHS may include improvements in
maternal health, especially post-partum, increased satisfaction with family
size, and lower incidence of HIV infections. However, the secondary benefits
have longer-term impacts on the wellbeing of individuals and the development of
the country economically. Such secondary impacts include improvements to the
health of the children of recipients, increases in education, and the resulting
benefits to future labor markets.

By correctly estimating the benefits of RHS in terms of maternal and child
health, child education, and HIV infection, this study will inform decisions
regarding efforts to increase or sustain access to such services. The broad
impact of this study will be to provide donors and service providers with the
information necessary to accurately compare the benefits of RHS with the cost of
providing the services. Current knowledge of such benefits is often
contradictory and is plagued with methodological shortcomings. Studies that have
attempted to quantify the benefits of RHS have been generally confounded by
important unobserved factors, such as family choice in receiving such services.
Without methodologically dealing with these unobservables, it is impossible to
identify the true causal effect of RHS on outcomes. In addition to the broader
impacts of this study discussed above, this project will also exhibit
intellectual merit in the methods used to address these substantial challenges.

The researcher will make use of an exogenous change in U.S. policy to circumvent
endogeneity issues that typically hamper research of this ature. The 2001
implementation of the Mexico City Policy affected U.S. development assistance
and reduced funding to major RHS service providers in around 10 African
countries. The policy effectively reduced availability of RHS to vrying degrees
in communities throughout these countries. First, the impact of the policy on
service provision in affected communities will be assessed. The analysis will
combine existing household survey data with institutional survey data to be
collected by the researcher. This preliminary analysis will involve differencing
methods based on the exogeneity of policy timing and location of organizational
cut-backs. After assessing the impact of the policy on service provision, the
policy change will be used as an instrument to identify the impact of RHS on
outcomes of interest.

By examining the impact of exogenous availability on outcomes, the project will
abstract from the family choice to receive services that would otherwise bias
the results. Outcomes of interest will be: indicators of maternal post-partum
health, indicators of health-at-birth such as prevalence of pre-term births and
prevalence of low birth weight;indicators of child health such as weight-for-
height and height-for-age of children under age six; and indicators of human
capital development such as percent enrolled in primary school.