* 0852471
* CAREER: Confinement and flow effects on synthesis of sol-gel materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Amy Shen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2013
* USD 430,550.00

National Science Foundation - Division of Chemical &amp;Transport Systems
Particulate &amp; Multiphase Processes Program
(1415)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this proposal is to generate fundamental
understanding of geometric confinement and flow effects on the synthesis of new
materials. Of major interest is the advances that will occur if micron-scale
confinement and flow conditions can be harnessed as synthetic tools to make
well-controlled nanoporous silica (NPS) materials. NPS materials are made by
using self- assembling surfactants or copolymers as templates together with
simultaneous sol-gel condensation of inorganic phase (e.g., silica) around the
templates. To overcome the long turn-over times and restricted ability to
precisely control the orientation of NPS that limiting traditional sol-gel
processing, the PI's group recently proposed and validated a technique which
exploits flow-induced transitions in surfactant solutions to generate
supramolecular structures that act as directing agents for NPS synthesis. This
proposal introduces a new approach designed to decouple the micelle formation
process from micelle-silica assembly by using microfluidics as a means of
confinement, combined with flow-induced self assembly and alignment, to offer
break-throughs for the synthesis of tailored NPS materials with continuous
manufacturing capacity. This research will combine systematic material
synthesis, characterization, and modeling to study NPS synthesis from a mixture
of silica-based and surfactant solutions using
microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive
educational plan will integrate the proposed research with ongoing educational
activities for both students and the general public to foster broad interest in
complex fluids and nanotechnology by: (a) Creating undergraduate teaching
modules and a graduate course to enhance existing courses and bridge various
engineering departments in the college; (b) providing undergraduate and graduate
student research opportunities, while continuing our well-established emphasis
on recruiting and mentoring members of underrepresented groups; (c) building
strong collaborations within academic, industrial, and public educational units.
Results from this project will be directly incorporated in undergraduate and
graduate courses and disseminated in Missouri Nanoalliance Communities. As part
of our outreach effort, we will disseminate results via the St. Louis Science
Center (SLSC) annual workshop on emerging technologies, annual workshop at WU,
and Public Broadcasting System (PBS) documentary programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;