* 0852620
* A Study of Multiple Environmental Influences on the Lightning of a Continental Cumulonimbus Cloud Simulated by a Numerical Model
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Vaughan Phillips, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 267,177.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental factors controlling
thunderstorm updraft speed, including instability and height of cloud-base, may
prevail in determining much of the pattern in global occurrence of lightning.
Nevertheless, additional influences from aerosol are likely. The goal of this
3-year project is to evaluate the influence of convective instability, height of
cloud-base, vertical shear of the wind, and aerosols, on the lightning produced
by a single continental cumulonimbus cloud observed in the Severe Thunderstorm
Electrification and Precipitation Study (STEPS). An already-developed 3D cloud-
resolving model will be extended to include an electrification component for use
in simulating this storm. Observational data from STEPS will validate the
model's predictions of cloud properties and lightning for the simulated cloud.
Responses of storm electrification to variation in these environmental factors
will be analyzed by simulating this single cloud multiple times with varying
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of the
physics of convective storms will help the scientific community to better model
and forecast storms. In the future, remote monitoring of lightning will be an
ever more useful source of information for inferring convective intensity,
precipitation, hail, and climate change. Codes developed will be made available
to the community of users of the Weather, Research and Forecasting (WRF) model
and to researchers at other institutions. Broad dissemination of results will
benefit the wider educational community. Outreach to community colleges and
public institutions (e.g. libraries) in Hawaii will include public talks.
Highlights from the research will be outlined on a web-page, and included in
lectures by the PI at the University of Hawaii, benefitting students. This
project will provide training in cloud physics for a post-doctoral scientist and
facilitate entry into a scientific career.