* 0852084
* "Lake Tahoe to Pyramid Lake": Summer Research Experience in Arid West
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Michael Collopy, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2010
* USD 108,300.00

The Academy for the Environment REU program will link nationally recruited
undergraduates with accomplished academic scientists to further our scientific
understanding of our bioregion. These research teams will work in Eastern Sierra
Region of Nevada, specifically within the Lake Tahoe-Truckee River-Pyramid Lake
watershed. The proposed REU site will encompass a wide range of biological and
natural resource science research. Topics range from studies on fire effects on
watershed restoration to the anthropogenic influences on water quality along the
shorezone at Lake Tahoe. Participants will be exposed to diverse scientific
inquiries and technologies to gain insight into the manner in which science
informs land use policy and conservation initiatives. The overarching goal of
this program is to explore the interdisciplinary intersections of the various
subfields in the sciences that are required for adaptively managing watersheds.

Broader impacts. The unifying approach of the program centers upon the necessary
union of the biological sciences and natural resource management policy. The
research projects are situated within a biologically diverse watershed, a unique
ecological system that provides varied and compelling research opportunities in
mountain, desert, and riparian biotic communities. More broadly, the program
will expose students to integrated research questions that connect these
ecosystems to larger questions of water usage and conservation in the west. The
exploration of these inquiries will entail utilizing state-of-the-art
technologies, while also allowing each student to explore in depth a particular
aspect of a given study. Nationally recruited students will consider how these
technologies influence knowledge production as they refine their scope of
research. An important emphasis of this program will be team building and
positive work environments and the role of students in these processes. As a
result, the impact of the REU program will expand a student's understanding of,
and participation in, effective research programs while producing research that
has the potential to contribute significantly to a particular field. The desired
outcome of our collaborative research will bridge students, faculty, and natural
resource managers in a collective effort towards enhancing our scientific
understanding of regional conservation issues in an applied context.