* 0852531
* The Border Wall, Immigration, and Citizenship on the United States/Mexico Border
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Miguel Diaz-Barriga, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2010
* USD 133,960.00

Dr. Miguel Diaz-Barriga, Swarthmore College, and Dr. Margaret Dorsey, University
of Pennsylvania, will undertake anthropological research on how people living in
South Texas understand and are affected by the border fence between the United
States and Mexico. In the context of heightened national attention to issues of
illegal immigration, South Texas has become a unique field site for
understanding contemporary American notions of citizenship and patriotism.

The researchers will use ethnographic methods to study residents along the
border in Hidalgo County, Texas. They will focus on "border wall talk" and its
relation to how people understand citizenship. They will conduct extensive
interviews with politicians, activists, business leaders, land owners, and local
residents. The researchers also will carry out participant observation research
in informal settings in Hidalgo County, such as locally-owned taquerias,
Veterans of Foreign Wars halls, and coffee shops to understand the nature and
circulation of border talk in local culture. These qualitative data will be
complemented with a quantitative survey of area residents, which will provide
data for comparison with national level surveys.

The research will enable social scientists to better understand the complex
interplay between transnational expressions of citizenship, national patriotism,
and multiple local perspectives. This will lead to better frameworks for
understanding the dynamic nature of borders in the contemporary world and
contribute to better policy for border concerns.