* 0852361
* The Sensory Basis for Ecological Paradigms on Wave-Swept Shores
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Joseph Loo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 381,880.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A marine ecosystem, circumscribed by
oceanographic processes, reflects the composite attributes of its inhabitants.
System-level processes, such as primary productivity, disease dynamics, and
stability in the face of natural and human-induced climate forcing, have
profound global significance. These properties are highly dependent on networks
of interactions among individuals both within and between species. Relying on
sensory information to shape decisions, organisms exploit beneficial and avoid
detrimental interactions. Stimulus-response dynamics can influence every level
of organization, from demes to ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry
(smell and taste) of food is a basic property determining eating preferences,
and hence, functional-response relationships between predators and prey,
irrespective of habitat. Remarkably, there has been no complete structural
elucidation of any compound exploited by marine predators tracking live, intact
prey. In this project, the investigators will study sensory basis for predator-
prey interactions across multiple trophic levels, in a tractable field
environment, and on a chemical cue for which isolation, purification, and
identification can be attained using existing, chemical-analytical techniques.
The investigators will determine the complete structures of molecules that
trigger predation by keystone (seastars and whelks) on foundation (barnacles and
mussels) species in the rocky intertidal. Whereas studies once asked if a given
predator consumed a given prey, we now are uniquely poised to answer what,
exact, prey compound triggers a predator and, thus, what are the sensory
determinants for established, community-ecological paradigms? Research on
sensory systems, in conjunction with behavioral and population studies, will
establish linkages between stimulus space, behavior, and the demographic
consequences of decision making processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include public outreach through publication in high profile journals and
popular press outlets. Training opportunities are planned for students at all
levels with significant emphasis on under-represented groups in science through
university programs in which the investigators are actively involved.