* 0852857
* IDBR:  Optical Fourier Processing Microscope Based on Two-Dimensional Gabor Filters
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Nada Boustany, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2013
* USD 421,506.00

Fundamental biological processes, such as programmed cell death, cell
differentiation and cell division, involve time-dependent dynamic alterations in
the structure of subcellular units, the organelles. These structural changes are
controlled by important molecular pathways, and must be quantified to gain a
more complete understanding of cellular function. The microscopic instrument
developed in this project will rapidly image and quantify, with nano-metric
sensitivity, organelle dynamics. The method utilizes a dark-field microscopic
method developed by the Principal Investigator, and allows rapid mapping of
subcellular structural changes by automatically probing and quantifying local
sample texture with very high sensitivity, and over large sample areas. The
technique is therefore applicable to rapid screening of unstained biological
samples for basic biological research or drug discovery. The instrument is also
likely to reveal novel subcellular dynamics by enabling highly sensitive
measurement of dynamic organelle changes as part of routine microscopic
observation. Data collected with the instrument may be combined with molecular
imaging data to provide a multimodal study of organelle function within living
cells. &lt;br/&gt;The usefulness of the instrument to biological research will
be demonstrated by measurements of mitochondrial fission during apoptosis.
Mitochondria are being increasingly recognized as significant players in a
number of cellular processes, including diseases such as cancer. As such,
structural markers that can track changes in mitochondrial shape due to the
deregulation of fusion and fission are likely to have a wide-raging impact on a
number of emerging biological studies. &lt;br/&gt;This instrument development
project exemplifies the principle that engineering design is prevalent in
methods, which enable measurement, understanding, and control of biological
entities, and will be used in various educational and training activities
involving students at the postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate levels, as
well as under-represented minorities from local public middle schools and high
schools.