* 0852488
* Constraints on the Hawaiian Swell and Plume-lithosphere Interaction from Kaua`i Mantle Xenoliths
* GEO,OCE
* 08/06/2008,09/30/2010
* Michael Bizimis, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Midson
* 09/30/2010
* USD 123,136.00

ABSTRACT: 0622827 (Bizimis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This work
seeks to understand the origin of the shallow ocean floor around volcanic ocean
islands of proposed hotspot origin. The work is crucial to our understanding of
plume geodynamics, how plumes interact with the lithosphere, and the origin of
plume volcanism. The Hawaiian swell, the most extensively studied of these
regions, is the research target. The work tests two different geophysical
lithosphere thinning models using detailed geochemical analyses (Hf-Os-Nd-Sr-Pb
isotopes, trace and major element concentrations) of peridotite xenoliths from
the island of Kaua`i. Chemical data will be used to identify the signatures of
peridotites from the Pacific lithosphere and from the mantle plume. If
peridotites with both plume-related and in situ Pacific lithosphere compositions
are found at Kaua`i, as they are in O`ahu, this is evidence for large-scale
erosion and replacement of the Pacific lithosphere by the plume downstream from
its present center under the island of Hawai'i. Rare garnet pyroxenite xenoliths
from Ka`ula island, and garnet pyroxenites with "majorite" precursors from Salt
Lake Crater, O`ahu, which represent some of the deepest samples from the oceanic
mantle will also be analyzed to try and identify different proposed origins of
the pyroxenites, and identify them as either recycled oceanic crust or high
pressure cumulates. The resulting work will provided a new and unprecedented,
4-dimensional (space and time) view of the lithosphere above a
plume.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research directly complements other
ongoing NSF-funded projects, whose objective is to image the root of the
Hawaiian swell and determine the origin of the secondary volcanism around the
Hawaiian Islands through the study of lavas. Results will be disseminated in the
form of publications and presentations at national professional meetings. The
research supports an early career scientist in at Florida State University and
will involve undergraduate Earth Sciences majors in projects directly related to
the main research objectives of this study. This research will also involve and
train undergraduate science majors through a NSF-funded REU program at the
National High Magnetic Field Lab (NHMFL), and will involve and expose middle
school students to research in earth sciences through ongoing outreach programs
at the NHMFL. Additional public outreach will occur at the annual NHMFL Open
House. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;