* 0852847
* Collaborative Research:  Multimode Adaptive 3D Microscopy for Quantitative Analysis of Live-Cellular Dynamic Processes in Thick Samples
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Chrysanthe Preza, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2013
* USD 168,952.00

The goal of this project is to design, develop and investigate a computational
optical microscopy system to generate three-dimensional (3D) images with greatly
enhanced resolution. The system will enable biologists to visualize and measure
live-cellular dynamic processes in thick samples that might otherwise go
undetected due to aberrations that worsen with imaging depth in conventional
microscopes. The new system will overcome these limitations while providing
additional benefits in terms of functionality and resolution. For example, it
will be possible to simultaneously provide high accuracy fluorescent images and
3D position information, as well as phase (refractive index) and amplitude
(absorption) information, so that each biological feature will be associated
with quantitative information in 3D space. Another capability of the system will
enable tracking moving micro-organisms accurately and even measuring the
velocity of dynamic processes. &lt;br/&gt;The prospect of obtaining 3D
information with high depth accuracy opens up myriad possibilities to address
new biological applications such as studies of epithelial wound healing
mechanisms and morphodynamic changes in cancer cells. The system could prove
useful to detect the remodeling of cytoskeletal proteins, such as actin, during
cell migration in culture or in lung tissue. &lt;br/&gt;The system, designed for
optimized performance with respect to various imaging conditions, will provide
significant advances in many biological and medical applications that critically
depend on 3D resolution that is not available with current systems.
&lt;br/&gt;Training opportunities will open for a diverse cadre of young
scientists and engineers in the multi- disciplinary field of biological
instrument development. A new laboratory for education, research, and
interdisciplinary work at the University of Memphis will be established.
Knowledge gained from the research will become part of a new graduate course in
Computational Imaging at the University of Memphis and new teaching lab modules
at the University of Colorado. The new multimodal microscope will be made
available to other biological collaborators in both campuses.The project will
also take advantage of synergistic partnerships with bio-imaging companies to
transfer new discoveries into industrial applications.