* 0852551
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Marathi Press and the Politics of Reading in Maharashtra, India
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Matthew Rosen, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2010
* USD 3,258.00

Doctoral student Matthew F. Rosen, under the guidance of Dr. Vyjayanthi Rao,
will examine the relationship between newspaper readership and the culture of
democracy in India. The goal of the research is to understand the relationship
between India's recent newspaper revolution and its ongoing democratic upsurge;
how political culture shapes the presentation and reception of print; and how
print in turn stimulates changes in political values, beliefs, and institutions.

The research will be carried out in the city of Pune, in the State of
Maharashtra, India. There Rosen will study the practices and experiences of
ordinary readers (in public newspaper reading rooms) and professional
journalists (in the editorial offices of a leading Marathi daily). The
researcher will undertake intensive study of three domains of the print media
field in Maharashtra: the circulation and presence of newspapers (by looking at
readership patterns); the production of news stories and representations in the
editorial offices of newspaper; and the uses and appropriations of newspapers
among members of the reading public. The researcher will employ the qualitative
research methods of participant observation, ethnographic interview, and media
production and reception analytical techniques.

This project will contribute to the emerging field of the social science of
democracies, and to cross-cultural ethnography of reading. By focusing on
democratic discourse and opinion formation circulated by Marathi newspapers to
readers in the city of Pune, this research offers an empirically grounded method
for analyzing the cultural specificity of Indian democracy and for examining
reading as a social and collective activity. The project also contributes to the
education of a social scientist.