* 0852129
* Superior Sorbents for Desulfurization of Gas and Liquid Fuels by Adsorption
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ralph Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 283,847.00

0852129&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Desulfurization of liquid
transportation fuels is currently accomplished by high temperature and high
pressure catalytic processes, while desulfurization of natural gas is performed
by solvent extraction using amines. These are costly and energy intensive
processes. Desulfurization by adsorption would be a simple and low-energy
process. It is not being used because of the lack of good sorbents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A class of pi-complexation sorbents has been discovered in
our laboratory that has higher sulfur selectivities and higher sulfur capacities
compared to all previously known sorbents, and the pi-complexation sorbents are
fully regenerable. This is the case for desulfurization of both natural gas and
transportation fuels. Only a very limited number of cations that are capable of
forming pi-complexation bonds with sulfur molecules have been explored in our
laboratory. Also, only a very limited number of large pore substrates have been
studied as supports for pi-complexation sorbents. Our most recent studies showed
that for both gas and liquid fuel desulfurization, pore diffusion causes severe
limitation on the sulfur capacity in fixed-bed adsorption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, a systematic study of the most promising
mesoporous, largepore, pi-complexation sorbents for desulfurization of both
gaseous and liquid fuels is outlined. Salts and oxides of the most promising
d-block metal cations will be spread in monolayer form on these large-pore
substrates. These sorbents will have the highest sulfur selectivities and
capacities. They will also be most stable and fully regenerable. They will have
large pores in order to minimize diffusion resistance and consequently provide
the highest fixed-bed adsorption capacities for sulfur.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Equilibrium isotherms and pore diffusivities (in terms of
diffusion time constants) for both pure-component and mixtures of sulfur-
containing molecules will be measured for these pi- complexation sorbents. A
basic understanding of the adsorbed species and bonding on various pi-
complexation sorbents will be obtained through molecular orbital theory
calculations as well as spectroscopic studies. The possible benefit of using a
dispersant for spreading monolayer pi- complexation salts on high-surface-area
substrates will be examined by studying the metal dispersion and stability.
Fixed-bed adsorber breakthrough curves will be measured for both gas and liquid
fuels on various new sorbents. An understanding of the diffusion limitation on
sulfur capacity will be obtained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve active participation of a diversity of graduate as well as undergraduate
students, particularly the minority and female students. The students will be
active in disseminating the findings and discoveries at national meetings and
through publications. The research will lead to entirely new technologies for
desulfurization of both gaseous and liquid fuels, which will result in cleaner
fuels at lower costs. Cleaner fuels with lower sulfur contents will reduce
sulfur emission into the atmosphere. The sorbents developed in this work can be
readily transferred to industrial applications. In addition, a basic
understanding on the bonding between sulfur containing molecules and d-block
metals (i.e., pi- complexation bonds) will be obtained.