* 0852081
* Bioinformatics Tools for the Analysis of the Spatiotemporal Organization of Protein Expression in Neural Functional Units
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Theresa Gaasterland, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Haake
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,234,729.00

The University of California at San Diego has received a grant to develop
computational tools to support the study of the development and repair of
nervous system development at the molecular level. Knowledge of the tissue
distribution of essential molecules is necessary for understanding how
biological systems function, how they grow, and how they repair themselves
following trauma or disease. In this project, a multidisciplinary team of
investigators will design, test and implement new tools to analyze data obtained
by means of the recently developed technique of mass spectrometry imaging
applied to the mapping of peptides and proteins in biological tissues.
Application of these new methods will yield detailed maps of the temporal and
spatial distributions of thousands of individual molecules and the capacity to
examine patterns of expression as well as correlations in expression within
ensembles of molecules. These new methods will be developed and tested first in
simple model organisms, to characterize and compare the molecular components in
the embryonic, adult and regenerating nervous system. Later, they will be
applied in studies of mammalian nervous system slices in order to answer, among
other questions, how stem cells are intercalated into and how they mature in
adult nervous systems, during normal replacement or artificial replacement
following cell loss due to disease or aging. All computational and bioinformatic
tools developed in the course of this project will be made available openly to
other scientists. The project will train a group of scientists at multiple
levels, from undergraduates to postdoctoral fellows, in this exciting new area
of basic and applied research. Addiitonal information may be found at
http://genomes.ucsd.edu/leechmaster/.