* 0852964
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Characterizing the Proteolytic Chamber of the Proteasome Using Solution NMR
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Alexandar Hansen, Hansen                  Alexandar      L
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 05/31/2011
* USD 173,064.00

0852964&lt;br/&gt;Hansen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellowship Program
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of
research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,
and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four
month research fellowship by Dr. Alexander L. Hansen to work with Dr. Lewis E.
Kay at the University of Toronto in Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large
biomolecular complexes, such as the proteasome, are common amongst the machinery
that makes up a cell. Gaining insight into the function of these large molecular
machines often requires detailed information regarding the motions and molecular
interactions that are crucial for their biological functions. Solution nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool capable of studying the
structure and dynamics of biomolecules with atomic resolution. Building on
previous work using methyl groups as probes for the molecular dynamics of
supramolecular complexes, the target of this study is the 20S proteasome from
the Archaeon T. acidophilum, a 670 kDa molecular machine with a focus on its
?Ã’-ring proteolytic chamber, the dynamics of this region, and interactions
between the proteasome and substrates. There are many fundamental questions that
remain to be answered and that can only be addressed via high resolution
solution studies. These include understanding the basic mechanism by which
product is extruded, the mode of interaction of targets with the proteasome,
including unfolded polypeptide chains, and structures of substrates within the
antechambers of the proteasome prior to their translocation into the proteolytic
chamber. The molecular weights of proteasome complexes can be in excess of one
megadalton and new technology and strategies must be developed to answer these
fundamental questions. Recently, new methodologies have been developed which
utilize the unique spectral properties of methyl groups to address some of these
questions. The major goals of this proposal are to (a) develop further the NMR
technologies necessary for the study of supra-molecular structures over a large
range of timescales and (b) obtain important biological insight into the
function of the proteolytic core of the proteasome. This study is providing
crucial insight into the biochemistry of the proteasome that builds upon
previous structural biology by going beyond static three-dimensional structures
to watch these machines in motion to monitor their dynamics which are critical
for function. The approach facilitates the study of complexes comprised of
components with binding constants sufficiently low, or are partially unfolded,
that they cannot be investigated by other structural techniques such as X-ray or
cryo-EM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is still the case that NMR applications are
limited to rather small proteins and protein complexes. Since specific cellular
tasks are often performed by machinery made up of large molecular assemblies,
the methodologies being developed to study such systems are critically
important. Given the unique ability of NMR to provide structural and dynamic
information with atomic resolution over a range of biologically relevant
timescales, the methodologies developed to study the proteasome push NMR
technology to new frontiers of discovery.