* 0852790
* Life at the Interface:  Biolocomotion Near Boundaries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Eric Lauga, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 09/30/2009
* USD 206,690.00

CBET-0852790&lt;br/&gt;Lauga&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant addresses the
locomotion of swimming microorganisms near deformable and rigid interfaces. Most
microorganisms spend much of their lives near interfaces such as soft biological
surfaces (e.g. blood vessels, muscle tissue and the epithelium), rigid
boundaries, and air-water interfaces. These surfaces may be characterized by
complex topography, malleability and complex physicochemical characteristics. In
addition to impacting the hydrodynamic stresses encountered by a swimming cell,
these boundaries may affect the local concentration of chemical species
including nutrients, oxygen levels and pH, consequently modifying the behavior
of neighboring organisms. The research addresses a number of unsolved scientific
problems through a combination of asymptotic analysis, numerical computations
and experiments. Despite its prevalence and importance in a variety of
ecosystems and medical applications, the dynamics of self-propelled
microorganisms near boundaries remains largely unexplored. The investigators
address a number of fundamental questions regarding the physical interactions
between swimming cells and their environment. The required interdisciplinary
work lies at the frontier of Engineering, Mathematical Sciences and Biology and
combines theory, experiment and computation: this is a realm where the
fundamental problems addressed herein are closely related to many natural
phenomena and technological applications. Small scale locomotion at interfaces
has important implications in microbiological applications including control and
understanding of surface-associated infections (e.g. the most common hospital-
acquired infection, catheter-associated bacteriuria), biofilm formation, and
biodegradation (e.g. using bacteria at polluted sites to metabolize undesirable
compounds). Knowledge gained through this research has the potential to impact
biomedical applications and environmental technologies. For example, bacteria in
biofims are more difficult to treat with antibiotics costing the U.S. billions
of dollars every year in equipment damage, product contamination and medical
infections. The societal benefits associated with the ability to understand and
eventually suppress this type of film formation are significant. Educational
impact includes the development of a new graduate-level course on biolocomotion,
jointly taught by all three investigators, and the interdisciplinary training of
graduate students jointly supervised by faculty in the Departments of
Mathematics and Mechanical Engineering.