* 0852353
* Theory and application of polyelectrolyte complexation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 320,197.00

0852353&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction between polyelectrolytes
and oppositely charged substances results in various self assembled structures
commonplace in industrial settings, health care, and biology. While there is a
large body of experimental work on polyelectrolyte complexation, much lagged
behind is development of a reliable theoretical tool to describe the underlying
structure and thermophysical properties. The theoretical predictions are
important not only for engineering applications but also for understanding
fundamental biological processes that involve association of oppositely charged
biomacromolecules. The proposed research seeks to develop predictive models
useful for quantifying structure and thermodynamic stability of polyelectrolyte
complexes from a molecular perspective. The theoretical models will be validated
with results from molecular simulations and well characterized experimental
systems. A case study is also proposed to apply the theoretical tools for
understanding genome packaging in viral
capsids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical techniques to be used in this research are built
upon&lt;br/&gt;recent work in the PI's group in development and application of
classical density functional theory (DFT). DFT provides a unifying computational
tool for describing the microscopic structure and interfacial behavior of
complex molecular systems. Preliminary investigations have demonstrated that it
is able to capture both the local packaging and long range electrostatic and
intra chain correlations essential for a successful description of strongly
charged polyelectrolyte systems. The planned research focuses on development of
complementary molecular models for investigating the structure and phase
transitions of polyelectrolyte complexes. If successful, accomplishments from
this work may open new avenues for understanding diverse molecular self assembly
processes and thereby will transform industrial design and practice of both
synthetic and natural polyelectrolyte systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The generic nature of the theoretical techniques proposed in this work
promises applications not only to polyelectrolyte systems but also to the
broader fields of complex fluids. In particular, development of advanced
computational methods may have unusual impacts in fundamental research toward
understanding the molecular basis of viral replication cycle that often entails
strong interactions of DNA/RNA chains with oppositely charged polypeptides or
proteins. Such understanding is essential for identification of potential drug
targets for treatment of virus induced contagious diseases and for formulation
of efficient gene/biopharmaceuticals health care delivery
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide opportunity for young
scientists to gain interdisciplinary research experience and motivate their
career interests in molecular modeling and engineering. In addition to
supporting one senior graduate student toward his/her advanced degree, this
project will recruit at least two undergraduate students from the University
Honors Program (UHP) by offering research based thesis projects. Based on the
introductory materials related to this research, the PI plans to prepare
lectures and special seminars to introduce recent developments in viral self
assembly and gene delivery. In addition to UHP, the introductory materials will
also be used for the university FastStart summer academy program, designed for
high-school students who aspire to biomedical and engineering careers