* 0852618
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Small-Scale Farmers in Local Markets: Production Strategies and Community Connections in the Palouse Agro-Industrial Region
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* John Bodley, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 9,450.00

Under the supervision of Dr. John H. Bodley, Washington State University
anthropology graduate student, Troy M. Wilson, will undertake an ethnographic
and social network analysis of the civic agriculture movement in the Palouse, a
major grain-producing region in the Pacific Northwest. He will use social
network analysis to understand the movement's place in the modern food system,
along with the structures that support its growth and which might impede
development. Despite this region's historical focus on large-scale grain
production for the global market, growing consumer concerns with food quality
and rising energy costs have contributed to a surge of interest in smaller-scale
production methods, farmers' markets, and community gardens, collectively
referred to as "civic agriculture." However, relatively little is known about
how farmers engage with and are affected by this new food production trend, and
how it relates to community development and sustainability.

Wilson will focus specifically on how small-scale farmers who participate in
local farmers' markets in the Palouse region connect with the civic agriculture
movement. He will employ a variety of social scientific research methods. He
will map the social networks around civic agriculture in the Palouse through
archival research and interviews with participants, including farmers, non-
profit organizations, commercial businesses, and land-grant institutions. He
will explore document production and distribution strategies by mapping farms
and distances to market with GIS, interviewing farmers and farm workers, and
undertaking participant observation on farms, in food transport, and at markets.
He also will analyze the personal networks that connect farmers to civic
agriculture and knowledge flows (e.g., between farmers and extension agencies).

The research will contribute to social scientific understanding of inter-scalar
network structures, generally, as well as their role in the contemporary
development of civic agriculture. Furthermore, by examining the unique
ecological relationships, practices, and social-political connections underlying
the civic agriculture movement, the research will help to better understand the
potential of smaller-scale practicies for national food security. The research
also will contribute to the education of a graduate student.