* 0852442
* Collaborative Research:  Democracy and Public Life in the United States and United Kingdom
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Donald Mitchell, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2013
* USD 274,409.00

Public spaces of the city are often thought of in two contrasting ways -- as
sites where people come together and forge a feeling of being a public or a
community and as sites that are a bit scary or uncomfortable because behaviors
of troublesome people are not controlled. Public spaces often are idealized as
places where democratic communities can come together, making it possible to
forge the bonds that enable debate and disagreement in a democracy. That ideal,
however, is challenged by disorderly and disruptive acts. Sometimes these acts
are overtly political, such as a protest or sit-in to draw attention to a
particular issue. Other acts do not seem political, such as when a church offers
food to homeless people outside its building or when a mosque broadcasts the
call to prayer, but some people in the affected spaces may view these actions as
disruption even as the churches go about what they see as acts that are central
to their mission or their existence. This collaborative research project will
examine the relationship between different kinds of disorder in public space,
the quality of public life, and the potential for expanding the range of people
included the democratic public. From this perspective, democracy is not a system
of government so much as it is a set of relationships between people and
institutions (e.g., government). In this sense, democracy is a process that is
conditioned by norms, values, and expectations as to appropriate behaviors in
different kinds of spaces. People are judged to be worthy of being included in
the community or in "the democratic public" on the basis of their conformance
with those social norms. The investigators will examine how the balance between
order and disorder is maintained, how it shapes the quality of public life, and
how this affects the quality of democracy. Sixteen case studies of conflicts in
public space will be conducted in four cities: Berkeley, California, and Denver,
Colorado, in the United States and Manchester, England, and Glasgow, Scotland,
in the United Kingdom. Comparisons across cities are expected to reveal the
roles local cultures and expectations of public behavior play in shaping how
spaces are used and managed. Comparisons between countries ought to reveal the
ways in which variations in national legal structures condition the kinds of
conflicts that arise, the ways they are understood, and the strategies used in
making claims on public spaces. The case studies will be developed using
ethnographic methods and data to construct narratives of the conflicts. The
narratives will combine data collected through intensive interviews, newspaper
searches, government documents, and observations at the sites of the
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing a spatially-sensitive analysis of
the paradox of order and disorder in public space, this research will combine
the results from the 16 case-studies to provide broader insights into how
conflicts arise, how disorder is accommodated, and what strategies exist for
managing public space. It also will reveal the complex sources of public life
and democracy and assess the importance of difference and diversity to this, and
it will help redefine the idea of "best practices" by showing the importance of
local spatial and political cultures to processes of democratization. The
project will provide education and training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. Research results will be made available beyond scholarly
publications though the preparation of "white papers" on democracy and public
life for each city and a documentary film on the Denver case
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;