* 0852660
* Dissertation Research: Responses to Technological Innovation in Insecure Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2010
* kimber mckay, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2010
* USD 14,989.00

University of Montana doctoral student Catherine Sanders, with the advice of Dr.
Kimber Haddix McKay, will undertake research on how people who live in insecure
environments respond to technological innovations (such as safe drinking water,
systems, solar lighting, and smokeless stoves). The research will be carried out
in two villages in Humla District, a western-region mountain district of Nepal.
There, because of rising population, failing national infrastructure, and the
effects of the recent political insurgency, villagers rank the acquisition of
basic resources, food, shelter and clothing, as major sources of stress.
However, when an NGO (non-governmental organization) introduced community
development technologies designed to mitigate these sources of stress,
communities were not equally receptive. In one village, the new technologies
were adopted quickly, while in the other, they were viewed with extreme caution.
This project will examine why this difference existed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will employ seasonal surveys and participant observation to provide
qualitative and quantitative information about local political and socio-
economic vulnerability, perceptions of risk in relation to the technologies, and
whether, and to what degree, villagers have accepted the technologies. Analyses
of these data will test 1)whether household status predicts differential
acceptance of new and risky technologies, as modeled by dominant risk theories;
2) whether marginal members of a household influence decision making about the
technologies in the household; and 3) whether exposure to the Maoist ideology
that accompanied the insurgency affects perceptions of and engagement with the
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This analysis of the uptake of new
technologies offers an opportunity to understand human decision-making in the
face of extreme resource and socio-political stress. It will contribute to the
science of livelihood decision making and risk taking by examining factors other
than socioeconomic status to understand household risk-aversion. Answers to the
questions raised in this research project also may help prevent the negative
consequences of livelihood decline in vulnerable environments. Finally, the
research will contribute to the education of a social scientist.