* 0852383
* SGER: Development of Levitated Drop Reactor for Chemical, Enzyme, and Nonlinear Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Alexander Scheeline, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 07/31/2011
* USD 195,178.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports
Professor Alexander Scheeline of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
to develop a levitated drop reactor to study the nonlinear reaction dynamics of
myeloperoxidase, an enzyme found in neutrophils and macrophages (white blood
cells). Such a reactor avoids surface reactions, adsorption, and contamination
which may trouble other microfluidic systems. Gas/liquid mass transfer is facile
because of the large surface area-to-volume ratio of the drop. Ultrasound is
used to levitate the drop, ensuring that the drop is well-mixed. Diagnostics to
be optimized for use with this microreactor include molecular fluorescence,
absorption, and chronoamperometry.

This research gains broad impact by allowing clearer understanding of the
chemical dynamics of an enzyme central to the innate immune system.
Myeloperoxidase chemistry has much in common with that in chlorination of water
supplies, yet that anti-bacterial, anti-viral chemistry, one of the two greatest
contributors to increased longevity in human history (the other is sanitation
and hand washing by health care professionals), is not well understood.
Supported research will measure rates of reactions central to this aspect of
immunochemistry. Professor Scheeline's group addresses the national
infrastructure needs for a diverse scientifically-literate work force through
outreach activities to high school teachers, high school students, and
underrepresented groups, and via active research participation by undergraduate
and graduate students, women, and underrepresented groups.