* 0852358
* Travel Support for the 13th IACIS  and  83rd ACS Colloid and Surface Science Conference in New York, New York - June 14-19, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2010
* USD 8,400.00

CBET-0852358 Somasundaran

This group travel project is for a combined meeting being held under the
sponsorship of the National Colloid and Surface Chemistry Division of the
American Chemical Society (ACS) and the International Association of Colloid and
Interface Scientists. The sponsors along with five presenters will participate
in the 13th IACIS and 83rd ACS Colloid and Surface Science Conference in New
York. The two meetings will be held jointly on the campus of Columbia University
during the week of June 14-19, 2009.

Intellectual Merit: Many of the topics impact on nanotechnology in the 1414
program; the topics are: (1) Interfaces and Interphases: Thermodynamics,
Structures and Adsorption including: (2) Particulate Systems including: Rheology
and Soft Matter Physics (3) Surface Active Agents.

Broader Impact: The annual conference has been held over the past several years
at university campus locations rotated throughout the United States. The joint
hosting of the meetings presents a unique opportunity to draw from a large group
of researchers globally, thereby insuring a forum in which a very diverse set of
ideas will be presented. Attendance at the conference insures cross
fertilization of research ideas potentially leading to greater advances in the
fields.

The PI is requesting foreign travel money to provide international travel for
four conference presenters to travel from Norway, Australia, Japan and the
United Kingdom to New York City.