* 0852900
* Biofunctional Nanofibers for Analyte Separation in Microfluidic Channels
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Antje Baeumner, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 05/31/2012
* USD 320,000.00

0852900 Baeumner

Biofunctional Nanofibers for Analyte Separation in Microfluidic Channels
Bioanalytical microsystems are miniaturized biochemical and molecular biological
assays that rely on highly specific binding of biological molecules such as
antibodies, receptors and nucleic acids to an analyte of interest. Taking
advantage of their small feature sizes, miniaturized analytical systems provide
for small sample volume, highly parallel processes and thus good multi-analyte
detection capabilities. It is a well-established research field with many
systems described in literature based on various detection and recognition
principles. Remaining key challenges are the integration with sample preparation
and sample concentration steps. The ability to identify an analyte in a complex
mixture of compounds is challenging for any detection system and needs to rely
in part on the biorecognition molecule's ability to specifically bind and or
react with its analyte. However, fouling of microchannels and the need for
automated separation of the analyte out of its matrix renders it even more
complicated for microsystems.

Electrospinning is a fiber formation process that relies on electrical rather
than mechanical forces to form nano and microscale (100 nm to 10 microns)
fibers. The fibers can be electrospun directly onto a conductive surface such as
copper and gold. It is proposed to investigate the possibility to incorporate
electrospun nanofibers for sample purification and analyte concentration within
polymethyl methacrylate microfluidic channels. First, nanofibers will be spun
within the channel, across the channel and along the channel length providing 3D
structures with high surface to volume ratios within a polymer microchannel.
Solvent bonding of the nanofibers to the channel surfaces will be studied and
the strength of their attachment will be measured. Conductive nanofibers
containing carbon nanotubes will be spun and investigated for amperometric and
electrochemiluminescence reactions. Second, biorecognition elements will be
included into the nanofibers (conductive and non-conductive) prior to the
spinning process using streptavidin and DNA probes as models. These functional
bionanofibers will be characterized physically using a variety of spectroscopy
and microscopy techniques as well as tensile testing techniques to confirm
successful incorporation of biological molecules, effect of this incorporation
on fiber morphology and mechanical properties and to determine the location of
the biological molecules within the fibers. The nanofibers will be characterized
with respect to their biological recognition ability using liposome
hybridization and binding assays developed previously in our labs. Third, these
functional fibers bonded in microchannels will be studied as bioseparators; as
electrodes; 3D guiding lines and concentrators and will be combined with
nanofibers with negative and positive surface charges, with hydrophobic,
hydrophilic surfaces.

The scientific merit of the proposal lies in the study of the integration of
nanofibers with polymer-based microfluidic channels and their use as
biofunctional nanofibers. Short term goals include the study of electrospinning
conditions on the stability of streptavidin and DNA probes, their effective
presentation on the surface of the nanofibers and usefulness as bioseparators
and concentrators. Long term goals will broaden the technology to other protein
and nucleic acid molecules, will result in an understanding of biorecognition
molecule activities in embedded situations. It is postulated that protein
molecules would be more stable when encapsulated in fibers than when in solution
or surface-immobilized. Finally, complex 3D bioseparators and concentrators can
be designed based on these initial findings.

The broader impact of the proposed research will be its direct applicability to
on-site and lab-based diagnostic tests for clinical, food, environmental and
biosecurity applications. Two graduate and at least four undergraduate students
involved in the research will obtain cross-disciplinary training in fiber
science, biology and nanotechnology engineering. High school students from the
Cornell New Visions program will participate in research throughout the academic
year, seniors from Onondaga Tribe high schools will be recruited for summer
internships. A high school teacher and additional undergraduate students will be
incorporated into the program via Cornell Center for Materials Research
programs.