* 0852515
* Collaborative Research: Geological and Paleoecological Context of Primate Evolution on Rusinga and Mfangano Islands, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Ian Tattersall, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2012
* USD 52,638.00

Fossil deposits on the Kenyan islands of Rusinga and Mfwangano comprise one of
the richest sources of information for understanding the origin and
diversification of the earliest apes. Best known for the primitive ape Proconsul
and catarrhine primates Dendropithecus, Nyanzapithecus, and Limnopithecus,
Rusinga/Mfwangano sites also preserve copious mammal, reptile, bird, and
invertebrate fossils, as well as rarely seen fossil elements such as leaves,
seeds, fruits, and insects. Thus, it becomes possible to reconstruct not just
the anatomy of these primates, but also their chronological context, aspects of
their feeding ecology, habitat preferences, and the broader ecological community
in which they thrived. This project will undertake new research on
Rusinga/Mfangano to further our knowledge of the chronology and paleoecology of
stem catarrhines and hominoids. Specific objectives are to: 1) establish
stratigraphic and chronological control within and among primate fossil sites on
Rusinga and Mfangano; and 2) reconstruct paleoenvironmental conditions
throughout the geological sequence to assess the ecological parameters in which
these primates lived. Work will be carried out over three summers and include
basic stratigraphic analysis, absolute and relative dating, controlled fossil
collection, analyses of stable isotopes, revisions of existing faunal
collections, and dental microwear analysis. The intellectual merit of this
project lies in combining geological, paleontological, and paleoecological
methodologies to substantially advance our knowledge of hominoid evolution and
adaptation through development of high-resolution chronostratigraphic data and
detailed paleoecological models for Rusinga and Mfangano catarrhine primates.
This project also has considerable broader impact in promoting education and
cooperation at the local level, advancing local involvement in the preservation
of the fossil heritage, employing local and national Kenyan workers, educating
undergraduate and graduate students, and promoting international and
interdisciplinary collaborations.