* 0852246
* SHINE:  Imaging and Analyses of Heliospheric Structures for Using InterPlanetary Scintillation (IPS) and Solar Mass Ejection Imager (SMEI)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Paul Hick, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

The team will apply a three-dimensional (3D) tomographic technique they have
developed to analyze real-time heliospheric plasma observations obtained by
ground-based interplanetary scintillation (IPS) instruments and the Solar Mass
Ejection Imager (SMEI) instrument on the Coriolis spacecraft. This team will
also use observations from the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO)
spacecraft to determine its ambient heliospheric environment, to reconstruct the
shapes of plasma structures observed remotely and in situ by STEREO, and to
evaluate and refine their existing tomographic models and techniques. The
Principal Investigator (PI) will continue collaborations in making IPS
observations with the Solar-Terrestrial Environment Laboratory (STELab) in Japan
and with the Ooty Radio Telescope in India, in anticipation of assisting the
ongoing deployment of the NSF-funded Murchison Widefield Array (MWA) being
constructed in Western Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to perform
more complete analyses of existing IPS radio data and SMEI Thomson-scattering
data that are of specific interest to the Solar, Heliospheric, and
INterplanetary Environment (SHINE) community for campaign events and
collaborative studies. The team will test both ground-based and space-based
remote-sensing observations to determine the extent to which these can best be
used to provide global 3D heliospheric density and velocity measurements. The
team also plans to incorporate solar wind models that include solar wind
magnetic fields into their tomographic reconstructions of solar wind velocity
and density. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analyses provided by the PI's team make
visible a region between the Sun and Earth that is otherwise difficult to
depict. Their tomographic model is currently available at the Community
Coordinate Modeling Center at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for "runs-on-
request," allowing use by researchers worldwide. As part of this effort, the
images and animations produced by the PI's 3D tomography technique will be made
available via the internet as an archival data set at the University of
California-San Diego. This archive will be a valuable education tool, as well as
a space weather forecasting tool, for the study of the global properties of
Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs), co-rotating plasma structures, and solar wind
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;