* 0853732
* Novel Intermetallic Chemistry: Approximants, Quasicrystals,  and Rare-Earth-Metal-Rich Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* John Corbett, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2013
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The principal goals of this research are to
discover and characterize certain totally new types of compounds in unknown
regions of metal-rich systems and to develop and understand their structures,
bonding and properties. Pioneering explorations will continue to define new
examples of aperiodic quasicrystals and their crystalline approximants,
intermetallic systems with particularly low valence electron concentrations that
exhibit unusual crystal structures and special electronic stabilities. The
active metal (Ca, Ba, etc.) ? Pt, Au, Ag ? triel, tetrel (group 13,14) elements
are typical ternary components. New chemical insights into their compositions,
structures, bonding and special electronic stabilities will be exploited. New
metal-rich compositions that exhibit different kinds of special electronic
effects are also sought, e.g., electronic pseudogaps. Synthetic explorations
together with physical characterizations will also examine new horizons and
unexpected chemistry within metal-rich cationic networks of rare-earth and
transition metals paired with main-group metalloid or nonmetal anions, of Te,
Sb, or Bi especially. These phases are in essence the inverse of the condensed
intermetallic ?salts? containing polyanionic networks and simple cations
described in the first part. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT
&lt;br/&gt;The majority of elements in the Periodic Table are metals, and thus
compounds formed between two or more metallic elements make up a large fraction
of possible compounds, all other factors being neglected. Moreover, very little
is known about most metal-rich materials, which are generally unique in their
properties and structures relative to compounds made of other more conventional
elements in the Table. We are seeking to extend and advance solid state and
materials chemistry concepts and knowledge into unexplored regions of
intermetallic chemistry, particularly those relatively poor in electrons around
a few classical examples of special chemistry and physics. Quasicrystals and
their approximants are examples of such special and contemporary phases. In a
broader view, educational and research programs at the frontiers of solid state
and materials chemistry around the world have over the years been broadened and
strengthened by our research programs. Among those who have completed Ph.D. or
postdoctoral research in these labs, 30 hold academic or National Laboratory
positions in this country, and 24 do so overseas, these groups constituting of
50% of the total participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;