* 0853528
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Analysis of High Energy Ultrashort Laser-Induced Plasmas and Shockwave
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Benxin Wu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2013
* USD 152,432.00

0853528&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
an understanding of, and ability to control plasma and shock wave formation
during high energy, ultrashort laser-solid interaction via modeling and
experimentation. In particular, the early plasma that occurs near a solid
surface that is irradiated by high energy, ultrashort laser beams will be
investigated. A goal is to control the shock wave and plasma properties so that
they may be exploited to create novel results such as filament effects, i.e.,
formation of a plasma chatter that results from the dynamic balance between
self-focusing and plasma de-focusing. The research will enable development of a
suitable modeling technique for laser-matter interaction that is associated with
the use of ultrashort, high power lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. A multi-scale hybrid model will be developed to investigate the early
plasma formation, its interaction with the laser beam and the target surface.
For the formation of early plasma, a combined molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo
model (MD/MC) will be developed to calculate the dynamics of neutrals,
electrons, ions, photons and phonons, while considering the interactions among
these particles. Since the temporal and spatial computation domain sizes of the
combined MD/MC are limited because of computational complexity, the MD/MC will
be interfaced with a finite difference model for the domain deep inside the
target material, and also interfaced with the hydrodynamic equations for the
domain above the target surface to model the plasma/ambient air region. This
combined model will reveal detailed information about early plasma formation,
and its interaction with the laser beam and the target surface. In the companion
experimental study, the interferogram and shadowgraph techniques will be used to
realize a more comprehensive measurement and observation of laser-generated
plasma and shock waves at different delay times. The experimental results will
be used for the validation of the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
High energy, ultrashort lasers have applications ranging from pulsed laser
fabrication of thin films to laser micro/nano fabrication. Improving the
understanding of high energy ultrashort, laser-material interaction can
significantly expand the potential applications of these devices. The research
will yield information relevant to the future development of suitable lasers for
specific applications. The research results will be broadly disseminated at
conferences targeted to both industrial and academic audiences, as well as at a
dedicated web site. Several undergraduate students will be involved through the
summer undergraduate research fellowship (SURF) program administered by the
College of Engineering at Purdue, as well as through undergraduate independent
projects. Involvement of underrepresented students will be pursued through
existing programs such as Women in Engineering Program (WIEP) and the Minority
Engineering Program (MEP). The research will be incorporated into an
undergraduate manufacturing class, Principles and Practice of Manufacturing
Processes. At the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), the new findings will
be incorporated into a class entitled Advanced Manufacturing Engineering.
Undergraduates and minority graduate students will be involved through the
Undergraduate Research Fellowships program and a Special Topics class at IIT.
Animation demonstration kits based on the project will be shared with the
Chicago Public School Students Science Fair, to attract more students
(particularly minority students) to become engaged in science and engineering.