* 0853959
* Fundamental Studies of the Thermoacoustic Effect: Interactions of Acoustic Waves with Viscous Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Bakhtier Farouk, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2014
* USD 311,997.00

Farouk&lt;br/&gt;0853959&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an experimental and
numerical study of acoustically-driven viscous flows in resonators embedded with
either a layer of closely-spaced thin plates (a stack) or with close-packed
plain-weave metal screens (a regenerator). Accurate and high-fidelity
computational models will be developed for nonlinear and time-dependent behavior
of acoustically-excited flows in compressible, viscous and conductive fluids in
such devices. The models will be validated with experiments to be carried out in
our laboratories. Optimization studies of the effects of acoustic power input to
the systems shall be conducted. Specially designed experiments will be conducted
for measuring the time-dependent pressure, temperature and velocity fields in
the resonators (with and without embedded stacks), driven by compression drivers
with acoustic waves of varying intensities and frequencies. The measurements
will provide fundamental data on the pressure, and velocity fields. Flow
visualization studies will determine the possible formation of steady streaming
flows and their behavior as a function of acoustic power input. The effects of
the resonator shapes on the pressure amplitude in the resonators will be
determined as functions of the operating parameters of the compression driver.
The Navier-Stokes equations for a compressible flowfield will be solved
numerically to obtain the velocity, pressure and temperature fields in these
representative problems. This research will enhance the current level of
sophistication in analyzing a wide variety of acoustically-driven problems of
technological importance, specifically related to the design improvement of
thermoacoustic refrigerators. The interdisciplinary nature of the problems
addressed in the proposal will interest a broad section of scientists and
engineers. The PI has significant past experience in the areas of computational
acoustics and experimental methods. The PI and his students will collaborate
with leading scientists from government laboratories (NRL, Washington, DC and
NIST, Boulder, CO) and industry (CFIC Inc., Troy, NY). The training of both
graduate and undergraduate students is integrated into the program and efforts
will be made to recruit graduate students from the underrepresented groups. The
software developed can be used as a tool for designing commercial scale devices
and optimizing the operating conditions to desired goals.