* 0853094
* Internaional Research Fellowship Program:  Understanding the Role of Plasticity and Genetic Variation in Parallel Invasion Fronts:  Range Expansion of Erodium Circutarium
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Brooke Baythavong, Baythavong              Brooke         S
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 138,149.00

0853094 Baythavong

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Brooke S.
Baythavong to work with Dr. Ernesto Gianoli at Universidad de Concepcion in
Chile.

Invasive species undergoing rapid range expansions experience a variety of novel
environments. Successful establishment in a novel range is likely to be
facilitated by some combination of genetic variation among lineages within a
population and phenotypic plasticity. This research is focused on understanding
the relative importance of quantitative genetic variation and phenotypic
plasticity in determining the relative success of populations of an invasive
annual plant species, Erodium cicutarium, undergoing a recent range expansion in
California and Chile. The project utilizes field surveys, greenhouse
experiments, and Bayesian modeling techniques to address several questions
including: 1) How does trait expression respond via phenotypic plasticity to
environmental variation?, 2) Do genotypes from habitats with greater
environmental heterogeneity express greater plasticity than genotypes from
relatively homogeneous environments?, and 3) Do the roles of genetic and plastic
variation in trait values in determining the relative success of a population
differ between invasion fronts in Chile and California? The PI will provide
novel insight into the role of phenotypic plasticity and quantitative genetic
variation in determining the relative success of populations in the process of
rapid range expansion in replicate invasion fronts. Although the spatial scale
of environmental heterogeneity has long been hypothesized to play an important
role in determining patterns of selection on the expression of phenotypic
plasticity no comprehensive tests exist. Previous studies examining the
importance of genetic variation or phenotypic plasticity in the range expansions
of invasive species have lacked comprehensive analyses of plasticity in response
to environmental variation similar to that experienced in natural habitats. This
research provides the first comprehensive analysis to date.

Invasive species pose a serious threat worldwide both to local and national
economies, and to the integrity of ecosystems and native species diversity. Over
the past 250 years, most of California?s grasslands have become dominated by
invasive Eurasian annual plants, including the annual forb E. cicutarium.
Although invasive Eurasian forbs also pose a threat to native ecosystems in
Chilean grasslands, invasive plant community composition and interspecific
interactions differ significantly between Chile and California. Because this
research incorporates lineages collected across replicate invasion fronts it
provides a novel comparison between populations collected in two geographically
distant range edges of the same plant species.