* 0853761
* Collaborative Research: Trophic Structure and Interactions of the Pelagic Nekton Associated with the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Tracey Sutton, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2010
* USD 183,822.00

Once considered pristine and undisturbed, the deep-sea environment is becoming
progressively impacted by anthropogenic activities. The impact of removing top
predators by deep-sea fishing activities cannot be assessed given our present
state of knowledge. A recent study found that oceanic top predator diversity has
declined between 10% and 50% in all oceans in the past 50 years, and that the
protection of regional "hotspots" may be critical in thwarting what may be an
ecological disaster. An understanding of trophic interactions is an essential
requirement for ocean management policy. This study will provide novel
information on the trophic interactions and ecological regulatory forces that
shape oceanic communities. The international collaborations developed for this
project, as well as the shiptime and equipment contributions of the MAR-ECO
program, from which the opportunity and the ecological framework for this
investigation is derived, represent a huge cost savings and added value.
Understanding the structure of food webs and the flow of organic matter in deep-
pelagic ecosystems requires an integrated approach in which several key
community elements are addressed in a quantitative manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent, large-scale exploration of the deep waters over
the northern Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR) has resulted in one of the largest (if not
the largest) multitrophic level, deep-pelagic (200 - &gt;3000 m) sample
collections ever obtained, presenting an unprecedented opportunity to understand
deep-sea food webs. Utilizing this collection, a comprehensive background
dataset, and an international partnership with some of the world's foremost
experts on deep-sea taxonomy, ecology, and hydroacoustics, this project will
comprise a coordinated investigation utilizing quantitative microscopical
trophic analysis, molecular prey-DNA analysis, and stable isotope analysis to
understand the trophic structure and interactions of the pelagic nekton
(actively swimming fauna) associated with the MAR. This investigation will
provide an initial characterization of a major but poorly known trophic
interaction in the deep ocean interior - the utilization of gelatinous energy
sources by biomass-dominant groups of deep-pelagic fishes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its intellectual contributions, the work
described in this proposal will contribute significantly to education and the
development of human resources in science at the K-12, undergraduate and
graduate levels, strengthening American position in ocean science and furthering
international collaborations. Interest in deep-sea science will be stimulated
through hands-on, interactive tutorials in which students will simulate an
ongoing scientific study, and compare their findings to those of the model
study. This tutorial, developed as a unit on "Deep-Sea Food Webs," will be
delivered via the Ridge 2000 SEAS (Student Experiments At Sea) educational
website. The project will also provide financial support and participation in
field and lab research for several graduate students. The students will share
authorship on publications, reports, and will gain experience through
presentation at national meetings.&lt;br/&gt;