* 0853569
* Liver Reengineering
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Arno Tilles, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 09/30/2012
* USD 305,700.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853569&lt;br/&gt;Uygun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
There is a critical shortage of organs, with the organ waiting list currently at
100,000 requests and increasing by 5% every year. This study focuses on the
liver: 27,000 die in the US annually due to liver disease, 4,000 essentially
because they cannot get a transplant. A long-term solution to donor organ
availability is to utilize embryonic stem cells to generate new hepatocytes for
cell transplantation. However, the delivery of cells directly is inefficient due
to low engraftment, and a tissue-engineered vehicle to ensure cell engraftment,
viability, and functionality in the long term is a necessity to make cell
transplantation work clinically. Such a scaffold has so far proven difficult to
manufacture in vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research
is to develop a natural hepatic scaffold for complete and stable maturation of
stem-derived liver cells, ultimately for treatment of organ insufficiency or
failure. The objective of this project is to develop a decellularized organ
bioscaffold for embryonic stem-cell derived hepatocyte transplantation. The
rationale of the study is that ischemically damaged, untransplantable organs are
available in numbers that far surpass the current demand, and they present an
ideal platform of delivery for stem cell-based therapies. As a result this study
is expected to i) create a new platform for cell transplantation, and ii)
identify the role of native liver extracellular matrix in hepatic
differentiation of embryonic stem cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merits. Scientifically, the identification of the role of native extracellular
matrix in stem cell differentiation may lead to much more effective and
efficient stem cell differentiation protocols, thus addressing the other
bottleneck in tissue engineering which is a practical source for adult human
cells. The recellularized bioscaffold could also be employed as a whole-organ
model for drug development and testing and pharmaceutical studies. Finally, this
work is expected to lead to sophisticated whole-organ tissue engineering
approaches with potential of developing entire organs in vitro.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clinically, the recellularized liver bioscaffold could
provide much needed alternatives to liver transplantation. Further, it could be
used as a partial liver support to prevent liver insufficiency, in cases such as
extensive hepatic resections in cancer patients and left lateral graft
transplantation - a donor-safe alternative which is currently used for children
but is not sufficient to treat adult patients. Finally, the grafts could be
potentially used to treat inborn liver diseases, as vessel for healthy
hepatocyte transplantation, leading to repopulation of the patient
liver.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The goal in Education is to train
graduate students and undergraduate students in tissue engineering, stem cell
engineering, surgical techniques, and quantitative systems biology. Further,
based on this research, teaching modules for undergraduate education in chemical
engineering/bioengineering will be developed and integrated to coursework by the
research team and collaborators, as projects in undergraduate and graduate
courses. These modules include a classroom decellularization display system, and
an interactive software module to be freely distributed. These teaching modules
and the study results will also be submitted for publication in educational and
scientific journals to enhance dissemination. The development of a graft
engineering methodology is expected to become a major enabling technology in
tissue engineering and ultimately make an impact on society by providing a
practical treatment for thousands of patients with liver failure.