* 0853465
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Sikh Diaspora in Australia: Migration, Militancy and the Imagining of Home
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Joseph Alter, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Pittsburgh doctoral student Rory G. McCarthy, with guidance from
Dr. Joseph S. Alter, will undertake research on the role of memory and nostalgia
in concretizing connections between groups of people living in one place, but
claiming origination in another. Of particular interest will be how ethno-
national political struggles of the past affect current conceptions of ancestral
homelands, and how those conceptions of homeland in turn affect notions of
cultural and religious identity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted among diasporic Sikhs in Woolgoolga, New South Wales, Australia. The
researcher will collect qualitative data through participant observation,
ethnographic interviews, and discourse analysis of local media about the Sikh
community. He also will gather family narratives, or histories of family
migration as they are understood by the families themselves, to explore the
relationship between political rhetoric and a history of violence, and the
discursive field surrounding ideas of homeland for diasporic populations.
Attention will be paid to the social, cultural and political forces in India and
Australia that have contributed to shaping this emerging diasporic identity.
Archival materials will be consulted to document the history of Sikh migration
to the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on the confluence of political
rhetoric, violence, and nostalgia for a cultural homeland, this research will
contribute to understanding how ethno-national political struggles continue to
affect the identities and activities of diasporic populations. Funding this
research also supports the education of a social scientist.