* 0853921
* Degradable plasmon resonant gold nanoshells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Ronald Lynch, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 307,658.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853921&lt;br/&gt;Romanowski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasm
on resonance, an optical phenomenon associated with metal nanoparticles, is
being investigated for biomedical imaging and intervention at the cellular
level. However, the size requirements for complete elimination of currently
available nanoparticles from the body may limit their clinical utility. In
response to this challenge we recently reported preparation and testing of a new
composite material, biodegradable plasmon resonant nanoshells. This
fundamentally new class of materials maintains optical tunability characteristic
of solid metallic shells, yet upon degradation yields individual clusters of
diameter compatible with the requirements of renal clearance. Biodegradable
metallic nanoshells may enable clinical translation of many research-stage
technologies, including imaging and therapeutic applications of gold
nanoparticles studied by these investigators earlier. The main goal of this
research plan is to evaluate applications of degradable gold nanoshells in
medical diagnostics and therapy. Photothermal conversion, content release as
well as molecular targeting of degradable nanoshells will be studied.
Specificity of delivering agents to cell types of interest will be determined.
The subcellular fate of the released contents will be detailed to evaluate
mechanisms to enhance delivery to cells, and the ability of the delivered agent
(siRNA) to effect cell function will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
integral part of this research project is to provide research and educational
opportunities to students with interest in engineering materials on the
nanometer scale for applications in human health. In addition to a graduate
student support, this research plan will create educational opportunities within
two programs active at the University of Arizona, Undergraduate Biology Research
Program and a summer research program for underrepresented high school students
with interest and abilities in science. This experience will subsequently help
these investigators enhance educational curriculum in areas of photonics,
molecular biology and material science, or more broadly, nanomedicine.