* 0853134
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Grant: Learning Networks and Social Diversity in the Chaco System, A.D. 850-1140: An Analysis of Basketry Technological Style
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Wirt Wills, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. W. H. Wills, Edward A. Jolie will conduct research
examining evidence for prehispanic social diversity within Chaco Canyon and
throughout the Chaco regional system of northwestern New Mexico. Between A.D.
850 and 1140, Chaco Canyon witnessed the rapid construction of large communal
structures where smaller settlements had existed previously and became the core
of an extensive regional system in the Four Corners region of the U.S.
Southwest. Although researchers debate the role of increased sociopolitical
complexity in this development, less attention has been given to social
diversity. This is remarkable because previous research has suggested the
possibility of multiple socially or biologically distinct groups both within the
canyon and throughout the regional system. Basketry provides an avenue for
improving understanding of Chacoan social diversity, but has been largely
ignored in research on Chaco due to the bias of preservation towards ceramics
and architecture. This research will examine archaeological basketry from 13
sites within the Chaco system to (1) examine evidence for social diversity and
(2) identify the possible cultural or geographic affinities of Chaco Canyon's
occupants. Using museum collections this study will employ analyses of basketry
technological style to identify past learning networks and investigate social
diversity.

Understanding the nature and extent of social diversity in the Chaco system is
vital to describing its internal structure. Without knowledge of social
diversity it is difficult to specify the details and processes of sociopolitical
organization that managed economic and ritual organization, or how it affected
post-Chacoan reorganization and migration. This dissertation will contribute to
existing literature on the archaeology of Chaco Canyon and aid interpretation
for the public by documenting understudied museum collections. Original data
acquired during this research will have implications for evaluating models
previously proposed to explain Chacoan sociopolitical organization. The
estimation of stature and, possibly, sex from sandal data constitutes a novel
application of anthropometric tools, while results of residue analyses and
radiocarbon dates will enhance our understanding of multiple sites' use and
chronology. There is also potential for this study to inform research on the
role of social diversity in the development of sociopolitical complexity among
middle-range societies more generally.

The broader significance of this project lies in its ability to aid
archaeological interpretation at several museums and national parks which are
important destinations for the visiting public. Drawing on understudied museum
collections, the project underscores the importance of these rare collections
and reinforces the need to curate and preserve them for future generations. This
study's findings may also contribute to discussions of policymaking and Native
American claims of cultural affiliation with Chacoan archaeological sites in the
Four Corners region because the project explores a case where archaeological
evidence suggests that there may have been multiple social groups living
together. This research is timely because it complements current research
programs in the Middle San Juan region and at Pueblo Bonito. Additionally, this
project will further the professional training of a Native American
archaeologist by serving as partial fulfillment of the requirements for a
doctoral degree in anthropology from the University of New Mexico.