* 0853249
* Stable Isotope Probing to Assess Bioremediation of LUST Contaminants: Addressing Existing MTBE/BTEX and Probable Future Ethanol/BTEX Contamination
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alison Cupples, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853249&lt;br/&gt;Cupples&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;Leaking underground storage tanks (LUST) sites have resulted in BTEX
(benzene, toluene, ethylbenezene and xylenes) compounds, oxygenates such as
methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) or tert-butyl alcohol (TBA) migrating into
surface and groundwater and eventually show up in drinking water supplies. Even
though MTBE is being phased out, the problem is not likely to be resolved soon
because of its historical widespread use, the recalcitrant nature of MTBE, and
the physiochemical properties of the compound that favor movement to water
supplies. Bioremediation through natural attenuation is the most favored cost-
effective way of cleanup. However, information on the microorganisms involved at
different sites and their ability to efficiently transform these chemicals under
various environmental conditions is still lacking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal objective of this proposal is to develop and apply stable isotope
probing (STP) methods to identify and to study the microorganisms responsible
for the transformation of contaminants from leaking underground storage tanks
(LUST) under in situ conditions. Major research tasks are: (1) to address the
limitations associated with STP and further refining methods accuracy, (2) to
apply STP to identify the organisms responsible for the biodegradation of BTEX,
MTBE, and TBA, and (3) to determine the impact of in situ conditions on the
populations and activity of these microorganisms. The proposed work builds on s
strong set of techniques already developed in the PI?s laboratory and is
national interest because of the potential contribution to better understanding
and the solution of water pollution by leaking LUST. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI has made a strong attempt to develop the broader impacts of the research and
has laid out a detailed set of plans for outreach to underrepresented groups,
K-12 education, and international collaborators. Information gained by this
project will be broadly disseminated. The proposed international collaboration
with a group in Newcastle that is exploring a related topic on biodesel will be
very enriching experience for the researchers involved in this effort.