* 0853936
* Multidisciplinary Engineering Capstone Design on Geriatric Assistive Devices and Systems (GADS)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Albert Shih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 125,000.00

0853936&lt;br/&gt;Shih&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
collaborate with the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
(PM&amp;R) and University of Michigan (UM) Hospitals to develop a
multidisciplinary engineering capstone design course focusing on Geriatric
Assistive Devices and Systems (GADS). The rapidly-aging societies of the
developed world present many new engineering opportunities for the 21st century.
The current layout of living spaces, the designs of furniture (beds, chairs,
tables, sofas, etc.), and even the means of using most household devices (for
cooking, bathing, entertainment, storage, etc.) are all targeted at healthy,
mobile adults, often ignoring the aged and/or disabled individuals who often
live alone and have limited mobility. To compound the problem, there is a lack
of system-level design for geriatric assistive devices on the market today;
meaning devices are often designed without considering their integration into an
overall assistive framework for an entire household, which can lead to unmet
needs or incompatibility between devices. The current development of geriatric
assistive devices is aimed in two extremes. On one end are systems designed to
be general-purpose: to address as many needs as possible with one device. Work
here has focused on complicated and expensive robotic systems, such as the HAL
exoskeleton (by Cyberdyne), and the PaPeRo (by NEC) and ASIMO (by Honda) robots,
which are capable of performing tasks autonomously. The other extreme seen in
geriatric assistive device development contains simple, low cost products that
have very limited functionality. Devices in this realm include plastic benches
for showering, or adhesive handles for gripping phones.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: of this project include advancing
design and therapeutic sciences, and applying the knowledge gained in basic
research of geriatric studies towards creating devices that will benefit
healthcare and quality of life for seniors. The project can have a great impact
in promoting collaboration between engineering and physical medicine and
rehabilitation. Apart from the elderly, caregivers, including occupational and
physical therapists, can benefit from this project as well. They have the
opportunity to communicate their needs to engineers and work together with them
to create new assistive devices and systems. We also plan to expose the GADS
class to the community via the Turner Senior Resource Center in UM Geriatric
Center. This project will work in close collaboration with two UM PM&amp;R co-
PI, Prof. Dr. Mark Ziadeh and consultant Prof. Susan Murphy as well as
occupational and physical therapists at UM Hospitals. This proposal is thus a
unique collaboration among an engineering faculty member, a MD in geriatric
rehabilitation, and a ScD in therapeutic studies, all working together in the
creation of new frontier in the design of GADS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The goal of this project is to create specialized, simple, and
affordable mechatronic devices that perform very specific household tasks. The
needs of aging adults with limited vision, mobility, sensation, and cognition
will be addressed. Student teams will work on a collaborative cluster of
projects for five major rooms of a living space: the bathroom, the bedroom, the
kitchen, the garage, and the living room. The instructor will coordinate among
projects to create a coherent system to improve the quality of life of the aging
population across the entire living space. This integrative approach to the
projects, where each becomes part of an overall system, is a critical aspect of
this project course. At the end of this five-year project, a GADS demo area will
be built to showcase the integration of the team-designed geriatric assistive
devices into a system. Students are required to interview aging adults and
occupational and physical therapists working with aging adults to identify
specific needs in their project area, work closely with PM&amp;R faculty, and
outreach to the community through the Turner Senior Resource Center of the UM
Geriatric Center.