* 0853385
* Collaborative Research:  Fixed Costs of Exporting, Trade Relationships and Real Exchange Rates
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Kim Ruhl, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2009
* USD 34,248.00

Some sets of countries have closer trade relationships than others. In 2003 the
United States, for example, had more than 57 percent more merchandise trade -
imports plus exports - with Canada and Mexico than it did with all of the 15
members of the European Union combined. This was in spite of the fact that the
combined GDP of the 15 EU countries was more than 6 times larger than that of
Canada plus Mexico. The data show that business cycles in the United States are
far more coordinated with business cycles in Canada and Mexico than they are
with the business cycles in the European Union. The data also show that
fluctuations in the U.S.- Canada real exchange rate and the U.S.-Mexico real
exchange rate are more correlated with fluctuations in economic fundamentals
than are fluctuations in U.S.-EU bilateral real exchange rates. This proposal
lays out a plan for developing models to analyze how the cross-country
characteristics of macro aggregates relate to the amount of trade between
countries. The proposed research would investigate the implications of modeling
the costs of setting up trade relationships in models of international business
cycles and real exchange rate fluctuations. Specifically, this project would
model firms as facing fixed costs of exporting specific goods to a specific
country, for example, in setting up a distribution network in that country.

This project plans to use the models developed for analyzing international
business cycles, real exchange rate fluctuations and the effects of
international trade and investment policy on aggregate productivity. Models
constructed in the early 1990s to analyze the economic impact of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) did a poor job of predicting the changes
in trade patterns that actually occurred following this agreement. The proposed
research would help us to develop better models for analyzing the impact of
trade and foreign investment liberalization. The models are also intended to
help us understand why financial crises produced by a sudden reversal of
international capital flows result in severe economic crises. In both Mexico in
1994-1995 and in Argentina in 2001-2002, sudden stops produced severe crises and
large drops in productivity.

Broader Impact: Providing satisfactory answers to the sorts of questions posed
in this proposal is essential for both policy analysis and for raising the level
of political debate here and abroad. Currently, the United States is negotiating
free trade agreements with a number of countries in Latin America. To build
better models to analyze the potential impact of such agreements, economists
need to understand why the models built to analyze NAFTA did so poorly. The work
on exchange rate fluctuations within and across trade blocs will help produce
models to analyze the increased macroeconomic interdependence that follows
liberalization. It will also provide measures of the potential gains from
increased future trade between the countries of NAFTA and the European Union.
This work offers a potential explanation of why the recent depreciation of the
U.S. dollar against the euro has not resulted is a large change in trade flows
between the United States and Europe. The work on modeling financial crises and
trade and foreign investment policy will provide measures of the potential costs
and benefits of liberalizing trade and foreign investment policy, especially in
developing countries that liberalize their trade and foreign investment
policies. It is essential that economists develop a better understanding of
events in Mexico and Argentina over the past decade if they are to reassure
policy makers and the members of the press and the public who are having second
thoughts about such liberalization policies.

