* 0853471
* Plasma-Enhanced Combustion of Hydrocarbon Fuels and Fluel Blends Using Nanosecond Pulsed Discharges
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mark Godfrey Mungal, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 60,000.00

AWARD &lt;br/&gt;Public Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Plasma-
Enhanced Combustion of Hydrocarbon Fuels and Fuel Blends Using Nanosecond Pulsed
Discharges&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Cappelli, Mark A.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Stanford University &lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-0853471
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion of new, complex fuels such as bio-fuels, low-
grade fuels, and fuel blends places new demand on reliable ignition and flame
stability for safe, clean, efficient operation. This research with characterize
and seek to understand a new approach using pulsed nanosecond plasma discharges
to ignite and sustain combustion of these complex fuels over a broad range of
operating conditions. Nanosecond pulsed discharges efficiently transfer
electrical energy into chemical potential energy, without energy wasted to
thermal heating of the gases. This chemical potential energy should lead to
effective combustion under conditions where combustion might otherwise not take
place at all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research necessarily brings together
plasma physics, combustion chemistry, and fluid mechanics. Specifically, the
fundamental phenomena will be studied in three classical combustion
configurations: diffusion flames, premixed flames, and complex flames (e.g.,
flames with significant swirling and/or flow recirculation). For diffusion
flames, plasma-based flame-holding strategies are being explored for non-
premixed jet flames in both coflow and crossflow conditions. Studies of premixed
flames will focus on novel discharge-enhanced expansion of the lean flammability
limit. Studies of complex flames involve sustaining combustion with plasma
enhancement under conditions of strong convective flow recirculation, where the
degree of mixing is strongly dependent on the imposed flow field. The intent is
to understand the processes for a range of fuel types (pure fuels, fuel
mixtures, nitrogen-containing fuel mixtures) in a way that is not specific to a
particular combustor but rather makes it applicable to a very broad range of
combustion processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to
establishing a fundamental knowledge base of linked combustion and plasma
systems that will ultimately advance the nations need for clean, safe energy. It
will also educate graduate students, undergraduates, and high-school students in
this multidisciplinary field, combining aspects of electronics, spectroscopy,
high-powered lasers, fluid and plasma science, and combustion.