* 0853668
* Collaborative Research: Ligament Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mariah Hahn, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 82,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854149/0853668
&lt;br/&gt;Goldstein/Hahn &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of clinically
effective materials for the surgical repair of ruptured ligaments remains a
challenging biomedical engineering problem. Currently, tissue grafts from the
patient and cadaveric sources are the only clinically effective materials for
repair, as synthetic materials fatigue under cyclic loading. However, intrinsic
limitations with these tissue sources include donor site complications and risk
of disease transmission. An alternative approach to form functional ligament
tissue - by combining a population of the patient's own adult stem cells with an
oriented nanofiber scaffold - has been proposed, but is hindered by three
technological constraints: 1) nanofiber scaffolds produced by electrospinning do
not have the appropriate shape and size for ligament reconstruction, 2) cells do
not migrate into electrospun scaffolds, and 3) adult stem cells do not readily
form a robust collagen-rich extracellular matrix (ECM). Therefore, the specific
goals of this project are to establish a methodology to process electrospun
scaffolds into three-dimensional structures, implement co-electrospinning to
facilitate cell penetration into scaffolds, and to employ cyclic uniaxial
stretch to enhance deposition of a ligament-like ECM. The novelty of this
project is that it seeks to create new technologies that can be used to
fabricate engineered ligament tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of this project are three-fold. First, it will establish novel
methodologies to process electrospun scaffolds into three dimensional scaffolds,
while ensuring cell penetration. Second, it will identify dynamic mechanical
stimuli regimens that induce gene expression and the synthesis of ligament ECM
proteins. Third, the objectives of this project are fundamental, and the new
technologies that will be developed can be applied generally to the engineering
of oriented soft tissues (e.g., peripheral nerve, blood vessel, muscle). Thus,
successful completion of this project would significantly advance the field of
tissue engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
include the development and implementation of a new K-12 outreach module
"Healing Biomaterials" for Virginia Tech summer engineering camps, and the
design of a new module for the undergraduate "Tissue Engineering and Drug
Delivery" course at Texas A&amp;M University. In addition, the work will be
incorporated into the module "Biomimetic Approaches to Tissue Engineering" to be
presented annually at the International Workshop and Summer School "Bioinspired
Materials: Biomimetic Design and Assembly" in Lugano, Switzerland