* 0853130
* Tailoring Hydrogen Storage Performance by Novel Mg-Catalyst Nano-Architectures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Yiping Zhao, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 01/31/2011
* USD 106,000.00

0853130&lt;br/&gt;Zhao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Hydrogen
storage is the bottleneck for using hydrogen energy in on-board vehicle
applications. In the pursuit of metal hydrides as solid state hydrogen storage
media, magnesium hydride is considered to be a good candidate because of its
lightweight, low cost, and high theoretical hydrogen storage capacity of 7.6
wt.%. Unfortunately, its high thermodynamic stability and sluggish reaction
kinetics limit its practical applications. By tailoring the structural
properties of nanomaterials, the thermodynamics and kinetics of hydrogen
adsorption can be designed to satisfy the future hydrogen storage requirements.
A fundamental understanding of hydrogen-nanostructure interactions also depends
largely on the ability to fabricate nanostructures with the desired structural
properties. In this proposal, the main goal is to use a novel nanofabrication
technique, glancing angle deposition (GLAD), to design and produce novel Mg-
catalyst nano-architectures with different topography, structure, and
composition. This fabrication technique provides one with a vehicle to
investigate the following important questions for hydrogen storage applications:
(1) How would different nanoscale structures change the hydrogen storage
behavior? (2) Would nanoscale catalysts, incorporated into nanostructured
hydrogen storage materials in different forms, greatly enhance the storage
behavior? Using this nanofabrication technique, the PI proposes to fabricate
metal hydride nanostructures with different topographic structures to
investigate the hydrogen storage ability and sorption performance. The hydrogen
sorption performances of the nanostructures will be further improved by
depositing different catalysts with different sizes and geometric forms.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The success of this project will generate the
following benefits: (1) It provides a generic methodology to fabricate well-
designed metal hydride nanostructures or multilayered nanostructures. Therefore,
the metal hydride materials that can be tailored into nanostructures are not
limited to the proposed materials. (2) With the systematically designed metal
hydride nanostructures and advanced characterization techniques, one can study
at a fundamental level how hydrogen interacts with well-defined metal hydride
nanostructures. (3) Optimal structures and conditions for fabricating the best
metal hydride nanostructures for highly efficient hydrogen storage could be
found. The lab-based nanotechnology course module that the PI will create will
allow undergraduate and high school students to obtain provide hands-on
experience on nanofabrication.