* 0853942
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Principles of Swimming in Viscoelastic Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Arshad Kudrolli, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 90,317.00

Kudrolli 0853942

Cell movements play a central role in a host of biological processes, such as
fertilization, bacterial infection, and transport of mucus and fluid in the
body. The complex fluids that motile cells encounter are laden with polymers.
When deformed by a swimming cell, the polymers stretch, leading to an elastic
resistance in addition to the viscous resistance of the fluid. The
microstructure of biological materials is often anisotropic as well. The goal of
this research is to use theory and experimental models to establish the
fundamental principles of swimming in viscoelastic media such as mucus and
biofilms. To study swimming mechanics in a controlled environment, the PIs will
develop a series of table-top macroscopic scale experiments. These experiments
will determine how swimming speed depends on viscoelastic properties for a
swimmer with a prescribed stroke, how viscoelastic forces can alter the shape of
a beating filament, and the role of viscoelasticity in the hydrodynamic
synchronization of beating cilia. The PIs will develop new theories for these
phenomena, and also study how non-Newtonian effects change the hydrodynamic
interactions between nearby swimmers and boundaries, and the nature of the
collective motion of dense populations of swimmers. The basic hydrodynamic
theory for microorganisms swimming in a Newtonian liquid such as water has been
largely established. Nevertheless, the field continues to be very active since
many issues such as hydrodynamic interactions between cells, synchronized
ciliary beating, and the actuation of flagella are only partially understood.
The natural environments of microorganisms are predominantly non-Newtonian, and
every basic element of the theory must be considered anew. Our work will also
establish the design principles required to build artificial microswimmers
capable of negotiating viscoelastic as well as viscous fluids. The PIs will work
with the K-12 Teacher Training program within the Brown MRSEC outreach program
to develop new demonstrations of cell motility. The PIs will continue to build
on their successful history of recruiting under-represented groups. Finally, the
fundamental principles of this work have the potential to impact applications
such human fertility, the treatment of bacterial infections and diseases such as
cystic fibrosis, and the artificial insemination of livestock.