* 0853106
* International Research Fellowship Program:  A Comparison of HAB Dynamics in Two Upwelling Regions Using Novel Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Andrew Lucas, Lucas                   Andrew         J
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2012
* USD 133,524.00

0853106 Lucas

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Andrew J.
Lucas to work with Dr. Grant Pitcher at Marine and Coastal Management in South
Africa, Dr. Frank Shillington at the University of Cape Town, Dr. Raphael Kudela
at the University of California, Santa Cruz and with Dr. John Largier at the
University of California, Davis.

Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) are a growing global problem, causing hundreds of
millions of dollars of economic, environmental, and health losses each year.
Autonomous, wave-powered profiling instruments (Wirewalkers, WW) are being used
to study HAB dynamics from a Lagrangian (freely-drifting) and Eulerian (moored)
perspective. These studies are being performed in the Benguela Current System
(BCS) and California Current System (CCS) in collaboration with researchers from
Marine and Coastal Management (a Department of Government of South Africa), the
Department of Oceanography, University of Cape Town, South Africa, the
University of California, Santa Cruz, and the University of California, Davis.
The autonomous wave-driven WW profilers are providing the first Lagrangian
dataset of sufficient resolution to explicitly test hypotheses concerning
advective versus in situ change in HAB populations. The results from this study
are augmenting ongoing comparative studies of HAB dynamics in the southern
Benguela and northern Monterey Bay upwelling systems. The interplay between the
physical dynamics of upwelling systems and phytoplankton (HAB) bloom formation
is not fully understood. This fact limits the ability to predict the onset and
severity of individual HAB events as well as the influence of global climate
change on HAB frequency, intensity, and geographic extent. The ongoing research
is providing the first set of well-resolved, simultaneous measurements of
physical and biological variables from the perspective of moored and Lagrangian
measurements under conditions of active upwelling and during periods of
relaxation.

This uniquely detailed dataset is advancing our understanding of the small-scale
physical dynamics that control phytoplankton bloom initiation, maintenance, and
transport of HABs to coastal waters. Our increased mechanistic understanding of
these physical controls will permit an improved predictive capability of HAB
events. Accurately forecasting HAB events from a combination of low-cost
monitoring, satellite products, and numerical models can provide enormous
societal benefit, particularly as HAB mitigation strategies evolve?potential
saving significant sums of money and, most importantly, safeguarding human
health in impacted coastal communities. Strong secular change in the CCS, driven
by global climate variability, has modified the physical environment and led to
increased occurrences of dinoflagellate HABs. Changes in hydrographic properties
of the CCS show that it is becoming more like the BCS under forcing by global
change. Thus comparative studies between the BCS and the CCS, such as the
current project, are increasing our understanding of the potential for
significant biological change in the CCS and BCS driven by global warming.