* 0853171
* Thermoacoustic Phenomena in Small-Scale Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Konstantin Matveev, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2013
* USD 245,851.00

&lt;br/&gt;0853171&lt;br/&gt;Matveev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A promising candidate for compact electricity
generation and refrigeration is a thermoacoustic engine integrated with a heat
source and an electroacoustic transformer. Thermoacoustic systems are
environmentally friendly, highly reliable due to their simple structure
involving a minimal number of moving parts, and potentially highly efficient.
The general objectives of this project are to understand the fundamentals of
oscillatory gas thermodynamics and heat transfer in miniature enclosures, to
develop efficient solutions for small scale energy conversion, and to advance
education in high performance energy systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: There is evidence that use of tortuous porous materials as stacks or
regenerators in thermoacoustic devices can raise the efficiency of small scale
thermoacoustic systems. To understand the oscillatory gas thermodynamics and
heat transfer, and implement miniature devices with high performance,
fundamental research is required that addresses several problems important in
small scale systems. These problems include thermoacoustic transport in tortuous
porous media, strong non uniformity of acoustic and temperature fields in the
system elements, mitigation of viscous and thermal losses, and coupling with
small heat sources and electroacoustic transformers. The research involves
graduate and undergraduate students and focuses on: (1) analytical and numerical
analysis of small scale thermoacoustic phenomena, (2) macroscale experiments
under conditions specific to small scale systems, and (3) small scale tests with
optimized miniature thermoacoustic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The development of compact thermoacoustic energy conversion devices
will enable implementation of a variety of small scale systems, such as MEMS,
sensor networks, and unmanned vehicles. Thermoacoustic systems can also be used
for waste heat recovery and conversion. Improved understanding of
thermoacoustics at small scales will benefit emerging biomedical applications,
such as thermoacoustic tomography and therapy. The educational plan related to
the research will improve the quality of undergraduate and graduate education in
the energy area. This will be done by integrating research into curricula and
developing workshops for summer schools. Students from underrepresented groups
will be recruited as research assistants. Research results and education
innovations will be disseminated through publications, the internet, and in
short courses during summer schools.