* 0853147
* MS PHD'S Classroom and Community Engagement and Mentoring Program:  A Track 1 Project
* GEO,GEO
* 09/09/2008,02/28/2011
* Sandra Thomas, Institute for Broadening Participation
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/28/2011
* USD 77,018.00

This Track 1 project is working to increase the Earth system science competency
of 12 elementary science teachers and 280 4th and 5th grade minority students in
the state of Florida through a collaboration between the University of South
Florida, 3 digital libraries, and existing mentoring programs for minority
undergraduate and graduate students. Teachers and minority Scholars in the
Minorities Striving and Pursuing Higher Degrees of Success (MS PHD'S) and Bridge
to the Doctorate programs will attend a summer training institute to begin the
process of connecting with each other, as well as receive orientation to digital
library teaching and learning modules that can be most efficiently integrated
into the Florida Earth science curriculum and address state learning standards.
In addition, the Scholars will engage in supplemental virtual training
activities to learn key strategies to support teachers in the development of
lesson plans and activities to facilitate successful integration of selected
digital library materials with state standards. Teachers will receive financial
support to purchase materials, supplies and related teaching aids to facilitate
creative 'hands on' learning activities. MS PHD'S and Bridge to the Doctorate
Scholars will serve as young role models and mentors for the students through
on-going virtual interactions. This project aims to develop a replicable model
for professional development of elementary teachers working with minority
students, in order to broaden participation in the geosciences.