* 0853523
* SGER: Seismic Waveform Inversion Study of the Layer 2A/2B Boundary in Young Oceanic Crust
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Gail Christeson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard L. Carlson
* 06/30/2010
* USD 50,424.00

Seismic velocities in the uppermost oceanic crust (Layer 2A) increase with age.
This progressive change is evidence of age dependent geologic processes,
probably related to hydrothermal circulation and alteration that affects the
crust soon after its formation. One significant consequence of this process is
mineralization, including, for example, most of the world?s economic copper
deposits. However, the process and its relationship to the seismic structure
remain poorly understood. Resolving the seismic structure of the uppermost
oceanic crust and its relationship to the geologic structure and evolution of
the oceanic crust has been a persistent problem for more than three decades.
Both drilling (e.g., at Site 504) and submersible studies (e.g., at Blanco
Fracture Zone and Hess Deep) have improved our understanding of the geologic
structure, but a clear correlation between the geologic structure and the
seismic structure has failed to emerge in large part because the seismic
structure has defied resolution, even by the most determined efforts. The
waveform inversion approach proposed by Christeson holds the possibility of
resolving the Layer 2A/2B seismic structure, and hence producing a breakthrough
in this area of study after decades of frustration. If successful, the technique
can be applied to a great deal of existing seismic data from a variety of
localities, particularly in the Pacific. The primary broader impact of this SGER
will be the introduction of the wave-field inversion technique to marine seismic
data and its interpretation to a variety of problems. This award will also
support a female investigator.