* 0853459
* TT Virus: A Potential Indicator of Human Enteric Viruses in Source and Drinking Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Sharon Long, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2013
* USD 255,677.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853459&lt;br/&gt;Long&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
widely recognized that bacterial indicators do not co-occur with infectious
viruses, nor do they respond in the same manner to environmental or engineered
stressors. Thus, a more appropriate indicator for health risks of infectious
viruses is needed. The principal objective of this proposal is to study the
utility of the Torque Teno (TT) virus as an alternative viral pathogen
indicator. TT virus is a small, non-enveloped DNA virus that likely exhibits
similar transport characteristics to pathogenic enteric viruses. TT virus is
unique among enteric viruses in that it appears to be present ubiquitously in
humans; elicits seemingly innocuous infections; does not exhibit seasonal
fluctuations or epidemic spikes; is transmitted primarily via the fecal-oral
route; and can be assayed using rapid, molecular techniques. This research will
be conducted in four phases: (1) to develop a robust TT virus assay, (2) to
monitor the density and occurrence of TT virus in sources and source waters, (3)
to assess the co-location of TT virus with bacterial indicators, male-specific
coliphage, norovirus and adenovirus:, and (4) to compare TT virus data to
occurrence and survival data for coliforms, coliphages and enteroviruses. This
project will greatly expand the understanding of viral pathogen risk and the
utility of TT virus as an indicator system by assessing an as yet untested
indicator, and will potentially develop a completely new, reliable, efficient
indicator system for viral pathogen risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
include support of students and will offer a multi-disciplinary experience for
each. The students will have the opportunity to present results at conferences.
, and the investigators are women and have involved underrepresented students in
their work previously. The project is expected to contribute to improving public
health, and the results will be broadly disseminated.