* 0853068
* Developing a Theory of Relaxation Dynamics for Fluids Confined in Porous Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0853068 Monson

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Intellectual Merit. This project supports for a research program on development
and application of modeling techniques that can simultaneously describe both
thermodynamic and dynamic transport phenomena for fluids confined in porous
materials. The scientific motivation for this work is two fold. One motivation
is the need to understand adsorption desorption hysteresis in mesoporous
materials. The absence of true equilibrium in these systems makes it of
particular interest to understand the dynamics. Another motivation is to develop
a more sophisticated understanding of the transport resistances to equilibration
in adsorption isotherms and how these depend on the structure of the porous
materials. These are both problems with long histories and are even in some
sense classical. However, the project proposes modeling research on developing a
consistent description of both the thermodynamics and transport phenomena. This
has the potential for a truly transformative contribution in this field. The
approach we take here is to develop a theory of the time dependent molecular
density distribution in the system. We then consider the dynamic evolution of
this distribution in terms of the probabilities of transitions between states of
the system. We use a lattice gas model to describe the interactions in the
system and the PIs theory, dynamic mean field theory (DMFT), yields a mean field
(classical density functional) description of the equilibrium and metastable
states of the system. Ther proposed research has following components: i)
Application of the DMFT to a variety of model pore geometries. They will choose
geometries that illustrate the impact of pore structure on the relaxation
dynamics. ii) Application to pore geometries in real systems. They will study
systems of independent pores, including MCM 41 and porous silicon and ordered
pore network systems such as KIT 6 and SBA 16, as well as disordered pore
network systems exemplified by porous glasses. iii) Developing a theory of
transport and self-diffusivities. The DMFT can also be analyzed from the point
point of view of diffusion and provides a theory of transport diffusivity as
well as self diffusivity. iv) Application to mercury porosimetry. We will use
the DMFT to understanding the nature of mercury entrapment in mercury
porosimetry, building on their recent work showing how gas adsorption and
mercury porosimetry can be modeled in a single framework. v) Accuracy assessment
and additional developments. They will make a detailed assessment of the impact
of the approximations built into the approach using Kawasaki dynamics and
molecular dynamics simulations. They also investigate including thermal
fluctuations in the theory and plan to investigate an extension of the approach
to off lattice molecular models.

Broader Impacts. The research proposed here is fundamental in nature and
addresses the nanoscale modeling of dynamic relaxation for fluids confined in
porous materials. This is potentially transformative research since it will
provide a bridge between two research communities in the area of confined fluid
properties: one that focuses primarily on adsorption measurements and
thermodynamics and the other that focuses on transport phenomena. The immediate
impact is in the development of characterization methods for porous materials.
However, given the very extensive world-wide effort in developing new porous
materials for applications ranging from separations to catalysis to
microelectronics the ultimate impact could be very broad including energy-
related applications. The project has a number of educational components
including research experience for under- graduates, outreach to community
colleges and development of course materials for undergraduate courses in
thermodynamics, reaction engineering and transport phenomena based on the
research.