* 0853680
* Dynamics of the HIV Virological Synapse
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Irwin Chaiken, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 05/31/2013
* USD 299,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

0853680 Papazoglou

The overall goal of this research is to elucidate the dynamics of the molecular
interactions that occur between an HIV viral particle and a host cell, and to
explore methods to change and control the steps that lead to virus-cell fusion.
The HIV-1 life cycle that leads to cell infection and AIDS is triggered by a
sequence of interaction steps and conformational re-arrangements between
proteins at the virus-cell interface, the virological synapse. The underlying
hypothesis is that the coordinated dynamics of receptor assembly and envelope
conformational changes at the synapse can be perturbed by engineered and
targeted nanoparticle constructs. Understanding how nanomaterials affect the
molecular events at the virus-cell interface can lead to methods to interfere
with cell and tissue infection by altering the timing of envelope-receptor
transitions.

The proposed research has the followings specific steps: a) create fluorescent
constructs to track receptor diffusion and assembly, b) trigger assembly of
receptors by virus-like particles, and c) use nanomaterials, as well as envelope
protein inhibitors, to control the rate of movement of receptors and viral spike
proteins. This research embodies several components of high impact innovation.
1) Combined use of virus-like particles and recombinant cells expressing
fluorescent host cell receptors will enable an experimental bridge between
molecular events of HIV entry and downstream infectivity. 2) The dynamics of
both receptor diffusion and assembly as well as the rearrangement steps of viral
envelope proteins will be quantified. This will enable an assessment of how
controlling dynamics of protein assembly and re-arrangement at the virological
synapse can control infection. 3) Gold nanoparticles will be used to determine
coordination of the time-dependence of assembly and conformational
reorganization in the HIV-1 virological synapse and whether modulation of these
time-dependent events can ultimately be utilized for disease intervention. The
ability of the research team to combine expertise in recombinant cells, virus-
like particles and nanomaterials will allow them to follow and quantify the
dynamics of both receptor diffusion and assembly events, and test the impact on
infectivity of nanomaterial and inhibitor constructs.

The results of this research will generate valuable new knowledge on the
mechanism of viral fusion machines and promote new thinking for the design of
molecular entities that could retard or totally abort HIV-1 infection. The
potential benefit of creating more effective inhibitors by fusing gold
nanoparticles with envelope-binding molecular inhibitors will be explored. At
the training and education levels, lab modules to enrich bio/nanotechnology
training will be developed and used as portable modules in other Departments /
Universities. Enrichment of 7-12th grade education with exciting research
examples from the HIV-AIDS field will allow bridging the gap between rigidly
identified educational levels and students interested in scientific career
paths. HIV/AIDS is a globally impactful and relevant topic that is critical to
teach to upper middle school and high school students. The concept of viral
spikes attacking cells using fusion machines is one that exemplifies
nanomachines and biomimetic concepts. Methods to target the viral spikes and how
they can lead to different treatment types (drugs, vaccines, microbiocides) will
teach students the connections between fundamental knowledge and biomedical
applications.