* 0853737
* Rotation Diffusion of MOON Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Steve Granick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2013
* USD 312,000.00

0853737&lt;br/&gt;Granick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses
on an undeveloped subject, how fast colloidal particles rotate. The recent
development of optically anisotropic MOON particles (modulated optical
nanoparticles) by Kopelman and coworkers sets the stage for much interesting
work predicated on this conceptual breakthrough. Specifically: (a) Task 1:
Translation-rotation decoupling in concentrated colloidal suspensions. Brownian
motion, manifested as rotation, will be studied at the single-particle level.;
(b) Task 2: New and interesting anisotropic colloidal structures with MOON
particles as building blocks will show dynamical rearrangements proposed to
study here; (c) Task 3: Magnetic fields will be used to drive rotation, thus
enabling not only linear and nonlinear viscoelastic studies, but also, when a
yield strength is exceeded, studies of particle-particle friction. This opens
the door to study microrheology/nanorheology at the level of individual
colloidal particles. Particle tracking has had a huge impact on the colloid
field, yet has dwelt nearly exclusively on translational motion. This proposal
argues that the time is right to seek to do the same concerning particle
rotation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is twofold. First, this
will develop new understanding of colloidal dynamics, which is fundamental in
many scientific and technical applications, including paints, slurries, powders,
raw material extraction, the mechanical behavior of composite and nanocomposite
materials -- as well as applications of these materials in other fields such as
catalysis and energy harvesting. This research will result in new experimental
tools to quantify particle dynamics that is impossible to characterize by
conventional methods. Second, the methods developed may find general application
in other research groups, as they should also find wider utility after protocols
have been developed and their value has been demonstrated. This work will
import, into the field of multiphase flow, imaging methods with single-particle
sensitivity that hold exceptional promise for this field. This will improve
research infrastructure in the multiphase flow field by developing new
techniques not previously used in this discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact is to integrate research and education. As these methods are new
to the field of multiphase flow, their use will accomplish a significant
intellectual transfer between disciplines. Furthermore, the graduate students
will be part of an interdisciplinary research group with other students from
chemistry, chemical engineering, physics, and materials science. Efforts will be
made to recruit graduate students from underrepresented groups. An REU
supplement will be requested so that undergraduates can be involved. This
laboratory has an excellent track record of involving women and Hispanic
undergraduate researchers starting in their freshman year, continuing until
receiving their undergraduate degree, and writing honors theses based on this
research. This proposal discusses at length the broader impact activities that
will be enabled by this proposal, as well as this laboratory?s track record in
this area.