* 0853627
* LES Subgrid Modeling of Liquid-Gas Phase Interface Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lynn Cozort, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 155,000.00

CBET - 0853627 &lt;br/&gt;Herrmann, Marcus &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many liquid/gas two-phase flows involve topology
changes, where atomization of the liquid is governed by the dynamics of the
phase interface. Although atomization is crucial in many technical applications
ranging from energy conversion to pharmaceutical sprays, no predictive models
derived from first principle currently exist. Development of such a predictive
model using large eddy simulations (LES) for atomizing flows is the objective of
this research. Since the phase interface dynamics during atomization do not
appear to follow a cascade process, a novel approach is planned to determine the
unclosed terms in the LES formulation involving the phase interface dynamics.
This approach, based on a multi-scale decomposition, combines features of direct
numerical simulations (DNS) and LES that inherently incorporates the interaction
and competition between different forces and atomization mechanisms acting on
multiple length and time scales. While the focus of this project is on
liquid/gas interfaces, the planned methodology can be applied to other thin,
interface-like structures that may or may not follow a cascade process, such as
premixed and partially premixed flame fronts. All solvers and models developed
in the project will be made freely and readily available. Being based on the
CHIMPS paradigm, adaptation to other researcher's codes is straightforward, thus
ensuring wide dissemination of the project's results. This efficient, predictive
LES approach for atomization has the potential to initiate a transformative,
bold new design philosophy, because the cost of pre-selection feasibility
studies using the LES approach is significantly lower than experimental studies.
This study will incorporate results into a new cross-listed graduate/advanced
undergraduate course to be developed by the PI on multiphase flows. Projects
developed in the courses will help recruit undergraduates into REU projects that
will focus on supporting and enhancing a high school outreach program. The
investigators will collaborate with the Scottsdale Unified School District to
involve high school calculus and physics students in experimental research by
designing, testing, analyzing, and optimizing water hose nozzles to meet
different goals. The best designs will then be analyzed experimentally in the
Biopropulsion Laboratory at ASU, and will also be analyzed numerically with the
models and tools developed in this project with the REU students. The high
school students will tour the ASU Biopropulsion Laboratory and monitor the
experiments in their classrooms via two webcams that are remotely controlled.
&lt;br/&gt;