* 0853728
* Search for New Physics at ATLAS with Leptons and Photons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yongsheng Gao, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 460,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;The award will support the research and
educational outreach efforts at the California State University at Fresno. The
research on the ATLAS detector at the CERN LHC will include further development
of electron identification algorithms, improved statistical analysis method to
be used in the search for new physics, and performance studies using reflections
of Z decays. The Fresno State ATLAS group plans to apply its performance studies
to the incoming ATLAS data. The work will have significant impacts on
calibration, detector performance studies, event selections, and systematic
uncertainty studies for many new physics searches with the incoming ATLAS data.
The award will also support the plans to perform model-independent searches for
final states with lepton(s) or photon(s) with statistically optimal method.These
final states are sensitive to many new physics beyond the Standard Model, e.g.
Higgs, Graviton, and SUSY.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;On Broader Impacts, The
California State University at Fresno ability to participation in the LHC
research program will allow the creation of new outreach and educational
possibilities in the CSU system. The research program provides new
opportunities, previously unavailable to CSU campuses, for CSU graduate and
undergraduate students to pursue research at the LHC. A summer program to allow
beginning graduate and undergraduate students to work at CERN for 6 weeks has
been initiated. The group plans to foster collaboration with faculty and
students from other CSU campuses, high school teachers and students in Central
Valley area, with the creation of new outreach and educational programs,
including participation in the QuarkNet.