* 0853913
* 31st Annual International Conference of IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society in Minneapolis, MN from September 2-6, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 02/28/2010
* USD 15,000.00

0853913&lt;br/&gt;B. He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As educational programs in
Biomedical Engineering have grown rapidly over the past several years, faculty
at over ninety universities have recently developed or are developing courses in
biomedical technology innovation, design, prototyping, testing, evaluation,
entrepreneurship and associated social/ethical issues. Approaches to teaching
this material are diverse and there is little shared information between
programs. With this seventh forum (sixth as BME-IDEA -BioMedical Engineering -
Innovation, Design, Entrepreneurship Alliance), we will continue to collect key
figures in the area of education for biomedical engineering innovation and
continue our development of shared resources begun at our past six conferences
(Houston, 2002; San Francisco, January, 2003 and Nashville, October, 2003;
Philadelphia, October, 2004; Baltimore, September 2005; Chicago, October 2006).
In addition, the conference will include opinion leaders and visionaries from
the biomedical technology industry, foundations and government. We believe the
BME-IDEA alliance plays a key role in informing educators as they plan
educational experiences to meet future needs. The theme of the 2007 conference
is "Innovations in Teaching Design and
Entrepreneurship."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference Goals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Continue collecting data re: the initial experience of different university
programs involved in innovation, design, technology transfer and
entrepreneurship in biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;2) Discuss objectives,
challenges, and opportunities for further development of these programs
including industry and academic perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;3) Continue to explore
the potential for sharing resources and creating community-wide assets and tools
and recruit participants in the existing collaborative efforts (e.g. bmesource
web portal, the design contest, IP survey)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past meetings have shown that much can be gained
by bringing together faculty who have innovative practices as their common goal.
There is much to share in terms of approaches to courses, curriculum, funding,
facilities, teaching resources and team-based learning. In addition, by hearing
from leaders in industry, foundations and others in academia, the faculty
members develop a better perspective on where their students are headed, what
needs to be done to prepare them for the future and how others are meeting those
needs in their environments. Collaborative education conferences are not new, of
course, but focusing on these topics, Innovation, Design and Entrepreneurship,
within the context of BME is.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe that this conference, titled Innovations
in Teaching Design and Entrepreneurship, will produce a long-lasting benefit by
offering innovative teaching resources and materials to a larger audience
through publication on the BME-IDEA.org website. In addition, attendees can take
ideas back to their colleagues at the many universities that are represented at
our conference. All past attendees of the meeting are notified when new
resources are made available on the website, thus any one BME-IDEA meeting can
provide additional resources to faculty at over ninety universities.&lt;br/&gt;