* 0853771
* Hyperthermophilic Affinity Ligands for Protein Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Ruben Carbonell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 298,106.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853771&lt;br/&gt;Rao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by
Professors Balaji M. Rao and Ruben G. Carbonell at North Carolina State
University to create novel affinity ligands for protein purification
applications. Affinity chromatography has great potential in reducing the cost
and complexity of protein purification steps in the production of
biopharmaceuticals. However, availability of robust affinity ligands for use in
industrial chromatography remains a challenge. Ideally, affinity ligands must
have all of the following properties: high binding affinity and specificity for
the target protein to be purified, mild elution conditions, ability to withstand
several 'clean in place' (CIP) sterilization cycles (typically involving a wash
step with sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution) and low cost. This work aims to
develop novel protein-based ligands that satisfy all these criteria.
Specifically, small protein domains from hyperthermophilic archaea will be used
as scaffolds or 'templates' to produce affinity ligands for two representative
targets of commercial relevance. Conventional protein ligands for chromatography
such as Protein A or antibodies have one or more of the following limitations:
high cost, low stability, harsh elution conditions. Small ligands such as
peptides can offer milder elution conditions and higher stability relative to
protein ligands, in addition to lower cost. However small ligands typically have
low affinities for their targets and lack the selectivity required for many
applications. Affinity ligands based on our hyperthermophilic protein scaffolds
will overcome several limitations of conventional protein and small ligands, and
facilitate greater commercial use of affinity chromatography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program supported by this award will also be
integrated with science and engineering education at multiple levels, from K-12
to professional education. A hands-on summer course on "Applied Flow Cytometry"
will be offered to graduate students and industry professionals. A graduate
course, "Principles of Bioseparations", will also be offered. Both these courses
will utilize experimental and/or theoretical concepts underlying the proposed
research. Undergraduate students will be involved in our program to expose them
to career options in research. Through presentations to student groups on
campus, participation of women and minority students will be encouraged.
Professors Rao and Carbonell will also work with one of the K-12 teachers in the
Kenan Fellows for Curriculum and Leadership Development Program to create a
module on -Proteins and Molecular Recognition? for middle-school students.