* 0853079
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Introduction of Field Theory into the Causal Set Context
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Roman Sverdlov, Sverdlov, Roman M
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2011
* USD 5,000.00

0853079 Sverdlov

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Roman M.
Sverdlov to work with Dr. Sumati Surya at the Raman Research Institute in
Bangalore, India.

Causal Sets, originally proposed by Rafael Sorkin, is one model of discrete
space time intended to develop quantum theory of gravity. According to this
model, the space time we live in can be described (both macroscopically and
microscopically) as a locally finite set of points and their causal relations.
On a macroscopical level, a causal relation between the two points is an answer
to the question as to whether or not it is possible to travel between them
without going faster than the speed of light. It has been shown by Hawking that
if the volumes of regions are specified which, in discrete setting, can be done
by assuming each point takes up the same volume, one can deduce metric from the
causal structure. Thus, causal structure can be viewed as a generalization of a
metric for a microscopic setting, where manifold-like geometry breaks down due
to quantum fluctuations. One unexplored area of the theory, however, is to show
how the approximate manifold structure is restored on a larger scale. Scientists
focus on addressing topological questions in a toy model of absolute vacuum, and
have postponed introducing particles until topology is under control (although
there are few exceptions, such as the work of Johnston and Jacobsen). On the
first glance, this makes sense: geometry is needed in order for particles to
propagate. This, however, is a point in which the PI?s research deviates from
the norm substantially. Since geometry is identified with gravity, which is a
field, it is not possible to have geometry literally without matter. This also
means that the manifold-like topology on a large scale might well be a
consequence of the dynamics matter is subjected to (in particular, gravitational
field). Thus, he proposes to reverse the steps of the program: first introduce
fields and Lagrangians in non-manifoldlike causal set, and later explore the
large scale geometry once the non-manifoldlike dynamics is defined. However, in
light of the fact that the prediction for a manifold-like scenario is the
ultimate verification of a theory, he often considers ?special cases? where
manifold structure is being put by hand; typically, these cases involve Poisson
distribution of points on Lorentzian manifold. In his dissertation he proposed a
way to define the known fields and their Lagrangians for a general causal set.
However, the next step of going from Lagrangian to propagator is very
problematic, due to the fact that the number of degrees of freedom of path
integration is equal to the number of points (or even worse, pairs of points) of
the entire universe. In regular quantum field theory this is done by imagining a
regular cubic lattice, in which case it is possible to perform different
integrals ?all at once?. However, due to the fact that the difference between
the edges of the lattice and its diagonals violate relativity, such structure
cannot be used, so in order to obtain some results one has to think of another
method. This can be somewhat justified by analogy with Einstein?s equation,
which does not have an exact solutions either. However, in order for this
analogy to work, there has to be some simple cases that do have exact solution.
The goal of his project is to find such cases. One direction of research is a
toy model of a causal set consisting of two points A and B on a manifold singled
out beforehand, together with random sprinkling of n other points. Then causal
set based propagator is computed between points A and B, where all geometry is
ignored, except for causal relations between relevant points. That result is
compared to the propagator between A and B computed by ordinary methods of
quantum field theory, where selection of n points is ignored. The above work can
realistically be done by numeric simulations of toy models of causal sets
consisting of very few points (10 points, 100 points, etc). However, he hopes to
analytically show that for very large number of points the causal set based
propagator satisfies some form of differential equation, which would allow the
application of the theory to many point scenario.