* 0853873
* Particle Electrophoresis in Curved Microchannels: Fundamentals and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Xiangchun Xuan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2013
* USD 249,565.00

0853873 Xuan

The problem of particle electrophoresis in confined microchannels has practical
significance in a variety of applications involving bounded electrokinetic
flows, which range from traditional gel electrophoresis to those occurring in
microfluidics-based lab-on-a-chip devices. To date, however, studies on particle
electrophoresis have been limited to primarily theoretical or numerical analyses
in straight microchannels of simple geometries. Very little work has been done
on the particle electrophoretic motion in real microchannels which usually
consist of one or multiple turns in order to fit them into the small footprint
of, for example, a glass slide. Our goals in this proposal are to obtain a
fundamental knowledge of particle electrophoresis in curved microchannels, and
to explore the applications of microchannel turns as passive control elements of
particle transport in microfluidic systems. We will understand and implement the
continuous focusing, filtration, and separation of microparticles during their
electrophoretic motions through curved microchannels. All these processes stem
from the turn-induced dielectrophoretic force that deflects particles across the
streamlines of electrokinetic flow. Three research thrusts will be carried out
by a PhD student using a combined experimental, numerical, and theoretical
method: 1) fundamental study of particle electrophoresis in single microchannel
turns; 2) application study of particle focusing in serpentine microchannels;
and 3) application study of particle separation in spiral microchannels.

Intellectual merit: The proposed fundamental study of particle electrophoresis
within turns will fill the blank in the current knowledge of electrophoretic
motion in real microchannels. The proposed electrodeless dielectrophoretic
focusing of particles in serpentine microchannels eliminates the use of sheath
flows and in-channel or on-chip electrical components, and thus substantially
simplifies the fabrication and operation and reduces the probability of device
fouling. The proposed electrodeless dielectrophoretic separation of particles in
spiral microchannels can work in a rapid continuous manner without the need for
external force fields or mechanical or electrical parts as the applied electric
field generates the concurrent pumping, focusing and separation of particles.

Broader impacts: The acquired knowledge of particle electrophoresis within turns
will essentially benefit every engineering application of this transport in
microfluidic devices. The ability to continuously focus, filtrate and separate
particles in curved microchannels as described here will stimulate the
exploration and exploitation of inert microstructures (e.g., turns, ridges, and
posts, etc.) as passive control elements in larger microfluidic systems. We
envision direct near-term applications of the proposed electrodeless
dielectrophoretic focusing approach in continuous bioparticle separation, high-
throughput flow cytometry, and continuous filtration systems for a wide range of
technological solutions in biology, medicine and industry.

Education: This proposed research will be intimately integrated into the
undergraduate and graduate education at Clemson University and the high school
outreach in South Carolina. Undergraduate and high school students will be
actively involved in this research through various programs available in the
department, university, and state, with an emphasis on the inclusion of women,
underrepresented minority groups, and persons with disabilities. The results of
this research will be disseminated through journal publications and professional
conferences, and will also be posted on a self maintained website for open
access to students, researchers and educators around the world.