* 0853454
* Novel Biocatalytic Structures for Sustainable Synthesis of Fine Chemicals and Biologically Active Substances
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Ivan Gitsov, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2014
* USD 309,289.00

0853454&lt;br/&gt;Gitsov, Ivan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biocatalysis plays a very
important role in numerous natural and technological processes. One of the major
deficiencies of many native enzymes, however, is their inability to transform
water-insoluble substrates, which often necessitates the use of harsh reaction
conditions and polluting technologies based on toxic organic and inorganic
catalysts, solvents and their mixtures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective
of this proposal is to develop a family of new highly efficient, recyclable and
environmentally benign biocatalytic structures for the synthesis of hydrophobic
substrates of biological, pharmaceutical or biotechnological importance, and
test the ability of these nanodevices to facilitate biotransformations in water
and at ambient temperature. The novelty in the design of these nano-constructs
is that individual or multiple glycoproteins will be positioned in the core of a
micelle or supramolecular hydrogel, constructed of linear-dendritic copolymers.
This macromolecular architectural principle is clearly distinguishable from
previous and current research on dendrimer- and polymer-supported enzymes. In
this project the dendritic fragments do not serve as crosslinking agents and are
not covalently attached to the enzymes. They bind the glycoproteins by soft
regioselective nanocontacts. Thus these perfectly branched fragments will serve
not only as supports of the enzymatic functions, but will also act as a
cooperative micro-environment to provide transition state stabilization,
enhancement of enzymatic activity, and selectively promote the uptake and
internal transport of substrates and release of products. This protective
nanoporous shell will also facilitate the recovery and recycling of the
enzymatic assemblies by simple filtration or centrifugation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three specific aims will be pursued to produce the
targeted biocatalysts and demonstrate their advantages and applicability for
sustained, "green" chemistry processes: 1) Construct series of recyclable
linear-dendritic enzyme complexes in micellar- or physical hydrogel form without
chemical bond formation and explore the influence of chemical, structural and
environmental factors on the mechanism and kinetics of the catalyzed reactions;
2) Test single-enzyme constructs with the highest catalytic activity in selected
tandem processes, which will involve formation of novel biologically active
dimers, oligomers and polymers for multi-purpose applications; 3) Evaluate
single- and dual-enzyme complexes for "green chemistry" cascade reactions, where
the products, formed in the dendritic shell or through the first enzyme will
serve as exclusive substrates of the second enzyme. The project will integrate
in a unique way elements from the kinetics of enzymatic biocatalysis and
fundamental self-assembly processes with the synthesis of chemically functional
organic and polymeric materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this
research will result in the development of novel environmentally friendly
synthetic strategies for important fine chemicals and pharmaceutical
intermediates using water, low energy consumption and renewable natural
resources. Broader impacts of the proposed activities will be manifested by the
creation of new procedures for in situ drug synthesis and delivery using unique
biocompatible nanodevices. The proposed work will also pave the way to a better
understanding of vital natural biosynthetic processes involving multiple
enzymes. The investigations in this project also provide excellent educational
and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in a truly
interdisciplinary research at the intersection of polymer materials and
supramolecular chemistry, biotechnology and enzymatic catalysis, organic
synthesis and macromolecular nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;