* 0853805
* Multidisciplinary Design Projects to Assist Individuals with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Judy Cezeaux, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 125,000.00

0853805&lt;br/&gt;Cezeaux&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide undergraduate
biomedical and industrial engineering students at Western New England College
the opportunity to apply the principles of design to the development of
assistive technologies. The proposed multidisciplinary design projects will be
coordinated with a variety of organizations, both in the local Springfield, MA
area as well as in the New England region. These organizations include Shriners
Hospitals for Children in Springfield, Goodwill Industries of the
Springfield/Hartford Area, Inc., the Eastern Alliance in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (EAST), and the Western New England College Student
Disability Services. Services provided by these organizations include clinical
care, employment services, and educational support for individuals with
disabilities. When possible, students will apply universal design principles to
their designs so as to impact the maximum number of individuals that could
benefit from their designs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biomedical and industrial engineering
departments at Western New England College have successfully collaborated on
multidisciplinary design projects, offered as a shared requirement in each
programs' senior laboratory course. The projects described will be completed
either within the shared design project in the laboratory courses or as
collaborative projects in the capstone design courses for each department.
Students will be encouraged to submit their designs to a variety of
undergraduate design competitions as a means of dissemination of their results.
These projects will offer engineering students design problems with realistic
constraints and significant societal context. Those projects involving EAST will
have an additional impact. Following the mission of EAST to promote the
participation of individuals with disabilities in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and careers, these projects may
increase opportunities for these individuals to be successful in these fields.