* 0853105
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Characterization and Modeling of Higher Order Phyllotaxis in Helianthus
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Siobhan Braybrook, Braybrook               Siobhan        A
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 141,900.00

0853105 Braybrook

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Siobhan
A. Braybrook to work with Dr. Christopher Kuhlemeir at the University of Bern in
Switzerland.

Phyllotaxis describes the arrangement of plant organs as they are formed during
development. The formation of aerial organs occurs mainly from the shoot apical
meristem, a specialized population of ?stem cells? situated at the apex of the
main stem. The high order phyllotaxis observed in Helianthus annuus floral heads
(sunflower capitulum) displays striking spiral patterns which develop as a
result of precise patterning at the meristem. The numbers of these spirals in a
given capitulum are members of the Fibonacci series, which is likely an emergent
phenomenon resulting from the repetition of the Golden Angle during the
capitulum?s development. Recent work in phyllotaxis research has highlighted the
important role of the plant hormone auxin in establishing spiral phyllotactic
patterns and the repetition of the Golden Angle; however, all of this work has
been done with lower order phyllotaxis in tomato and Arabidopsis and involves
small cylindrical meristems unlike the large flat sunflower capitulum.
Historically there has been a large body of mathematical and biomechanical work
attempting to describe the high order patterns seen in sunflower capitula. These
works postulate that mechanical forces within the meristem may also be important
pattern generators or enforcers. The investigators are examining the interplay
between chemically established patterning (via auxin) and mechanically enforced
patterning is investigated in the developing sunflower capitulum using an
interdisciplinary approach by combining biology, physics, mathematics, and
computational modeling. The dynamics of auxin transport are being examined using
immunohistollogy to visualize the auxin transport protein PIN1 which establishes
directional auxin flow. The gene encoding sunflower PIN1 (HaPIN1) has been
cloned and its expression is found in the shoot apex. In addition, tools are
being developed to introduce molecular markers for auxin concentration into
sunflower plants. Subsequently, changes in auxin dynamics are being examined
after manipulation of both auxin levels and mechanical properties of the
capitpulum. Various methods are being employed to disrupt mechanical forces in
the capitulum such as microdissection, laser abalation, and the imposition of
extraneous forces via compression. Biomechanical measurements of differential
tissue stiffness across the capitulum are being gathered using a
MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) force sensor. Measurements are also being
made after the aforementioned manipulations of auxin levels and mechanical
properties. The resulting data describing the relationship between auxin
dynamics and tissue biomechanics is being used by the investigators to refine
and expand existing computational models of phyllotaxis to include the high
order patterns seen in sunflower capitula.

This multidisciplinary and integrative approach to an age old phenomenon, the
establishment of Fibonacci based patterns in nature, will add understanding to
the fields of biomechanics and plant biology. It will also serve to increase
scientific discourse and collaboration between biologists and non-biologists,
itself a likely example of emergent adaptation within the field of science.