* 0853513
* Acquisition of a High-Energy, Narrow Linewidth Laser for Gas-Phase Scalar Mixing Studies in Turbulent Spray Flows
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jeffrey Sutton, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2010
* USD 84,021.00

0853513 Sutton

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This is small equipment grant for the acquisition of a high-energy, narrow-
linewidth, injection-seeded Nd:YAG laser. This instrument will be the primary
component for advanced imaging studies to investigate the gas-phase scalar
mixing in turbulent spray flows. Probably the best known examples of turbulent
sprays exist in practical energy conversion systems where a liquid fuel issues
into an oxidizing environment, disperses, evaporates, and mixes with the
oxidizer before reacting. Although these systems are complicated by several
physical and chemical processes, they are ultimately limited by the rate that
liquid fuel evaporates and the fuel vapor mixes with the oxidizer at the finest
physical length scales. Gas-phase scalar mixing, while studied in-depth for
single-phase turbulent flows, has not been studied extensively in multiphase
flow environments primarily due a lack to reliable experimental techniques that
can determine the gas-phase concentration with sufficient accuracy. The PI
intends to use the procured laser to validate a new experimental methodology for
a novel variation of the Filtered Rayleigh Scattering (FRS) imaging technique to
quantitatively measure the vapor-phase scalar concentration discriminately in
the presence of liquid-phase droplets. Important quantities such as the gas-
phase mixture fraction, which describes the degree of mixing between two non-
premixed streams, and the scalar dissipation rate, which describes the that the
two streams mix, may be derived without interference from the droplets. Such
measurements are crucial for understanding the fundamental physics describing
the evaporation of the liquid phase and the subsequent mixing of the vapor
phase. In addition, these measurements will provide valuable assessment and
development support for Large-Eddy Simulation modeling of turbulent sprays.
Multiphase turbulent flows are of significant interest in many engineering
applications including direct-injection automotive engines, liquid-propellant
rocket engines, industrial furnaces, and water-mist fire-suppression systems. A
graduate student will be supported directly by the PI to develop and implement
the gas-phase scalar measurement technique. Every effort will be made to include
the participation of students classified as underrepresented including women and
ethnic minorities.