* 0853739
* SCALING OF MICROCAVITY PLASMAS TOWARD 1 um: SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING OF SPATIALLY-CONFINED, LOW TEMPERATURE PLASMAS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* James Eden, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

0853739&lt;br/&gt;Eden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to produce ultra-
small-sized plasmas as small as 1 micrometer in diameter and then to determine
their properties using laser and other optical techniques. Microplasmas,
operated at sizes of 0.5 mm and below, offer exciting new possibilities for
plasma applications and scientific study. They can have very high power density
yet can operate continuously at atmospheric pressure and higher. Recent studies
have shown that plasmas so confined behave quite differently from macroscale
plasmas such as in a fluorescent lamp or a neon sign. It is expected that as
plasmas are reduced to sizes previously unattainable, they will become
increasingly cold and dense and resemble a
liquid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplasmas will be generated within cavities
having a characteristic dimension below 20 µm. Electron and neutral gas
temperatures, and electron and excited state number densities will be studied
primarily by optical techniques such as inverse bremsstrahlung and laser-induced
fluorescence. Spatially resolved studies will also be conducted with a recently
constructed vacuum/optical system having an integrated microscope. By using
plasma channels with cross-sectional dimensions approaching those of
conventional optical waveguides (~2-10 µm), new opportunities are created for
monitoring the microplasma optically by coherent and incoherent processes such
as Raman scattering, and the results can be compared with simulations. Laser
probing experiments will also investigate the interaction between a gas-phase
plasma and an e--h+ plasma in hybrid microplasma/semiconductor
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of this program is educational
outreach, critical aspects of which focus on undergraduates and a close
interaction with science teachers in a semi-rural school district in east
central Illinois, primarily at the junior high school level. At least one
science teacher will participate in research each summer, developing
plasma/optical experiments for students to be integrated into both the junior
and senior high school curricula. Such outreach is meant to attracting more
women and underrepresented minorities to this field, while increasing the
interest of all precollege students in the physical sciences.