* 0853657
* Effects of hydrophobicity-induced wall slip on turbulence drag and turbulence structure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 02/28/2013
* USD 229,997.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBET -0853657
&lt;br/&gt;Papavassiliou, Dimitrios V.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the fundamental molecular mechanisms that can result in fluid slip
at a solid-fluid interface and how exactly, if at all, fluid slip affects the
structure of turbulence away from the viscous wall sublayer. It has been
recently documented that ultra-hydrophobic surfaces induce slip in fluids moving
over them. For laminar flows, this slip at the wall results in drag reduction
that has been observed both experimentally and computationally. Recent
computational work shows that ultra-hydrophobic surfaces can lead to turbulent
drag reduction only when they result in significant fluid slip at the wall.
Turbulent drag reduction has been achieved with the introduction of a very small
amount of additives, such as polymers, surfactants or microbubbles. Such methods
are mainly feasible for internal flows. However, when a fluid flows around an
object, the use of additives to alter the fluid properties is at best
impractical. If treating a conduit (or a vehicle) surface such that it becomes
ultra-hydrophobic can result in drag reduction, then such treatment will present
a drag-reduction technology feasible for both internal and external flows. This
study is focused on the fundamental investigation of the conditions that
generate fluid slip at the solid-water interface, and the effects that such slip
can have on turbulence drag reduction. Specific issues to be investigated
include the correlation between hydrophobicity and fluid slip and its
interpretation based on the molecular structure of the fluid next to a solid-
fluid interface, the exploration of the type of fluid and the type of interface
that can result in fluid slip, and the determination of the mechanism by which
slip affects the generation and maintenance of turbulence. These findings will
be significant for the theory of fluid flow next to solid surfaces and for
turbulence, as well as for many industrial applications. Aspects of this
research project will be instrumental in the development of a new course and
will be integrated in existing courses. In addition, the database generated
through this project will become available to the community through existing web
servers, and databases that can serve as validation benchmarks are planned.