* 0853864
* Identifying and Quantifying Active Denitrifiers in Complex Environments Using Functional Gene Expression Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Francis de los Reyes III, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 12/31/2012
* USD 299,995.00

0853864 de los Reyes III

Determining the identity of microorganisms responsible for specific
biotransformation processes remains one of the major challenges in environmental
microbiology and environmental engineering. The classic approach of using 16S
rRNA gene sequences to detect and analyze bacterial communities in environmental
samples without isolation and cultivation is not possible when studying
denitrifying bacteria, because they are phylogenetically diverse. This is a
major issue, given the importance of denitrification in water and wastewater
pollution, greenhouse gas emission, and ozone layer destruction. This proposal
is to develop and to optimize a novel molecular technique to determine the
phylogenetic identity of functionally active nitrate-, nitrite-, nitric oxide-,
and nitrous oxide-reducers in activated sludge and soil. Specific objectives
are: (1) to optimize the Sequential mRNA FISH Flow Cytometry (SmRFF) method
(developed previously in our lab) and investigate its potential for other
microbial processes; (2) to determine the effect of floc structure, DO and
carbon and nitrogen levels on the active denitrifying community; (3) to identify
ammonia oxidizing bacteria (AOB) that denitrify; and (4) to examine the
denitrifying ecology of a bioreactor that uses denitrifying AOB for treating
high ammonia, low COD wastewater.

The Sequential mRNA FISH-Flow Cytometry (SmRFF) method holds tremendous promise
and may lead to significant results, as well as open new areas of research. This
proposed project will be among the first studies to perform the following: (1)
separate cells that are actively expressing the nitrate-, nitrite-, nitric
oxide-, and nitrous oxide ?reducing genes; (2) capture nearly full-length 16S
rRNA genes of active denitrifiers; and (3) apply combinatorial flow cytometry to
identify AOB that are expressing the nirS and nirK genes. Determining the
minimum level of mRNA copies needed for mRNA FISH will allow the more general
application of SmRFF to other microbial ecology areas, such as bioremediation.
The proposed research if successful would be a potentially significant
methodological advance that would impact general microbial ecology as well as
biological processes in environmental engineering. This project will contribute
to the multidisciplinary education in the areas of microbiology, molecular
biology and engineering. The PI has mentored 24 REU students in the last 7
years, and will continue to expose undergraduates to research and the excitement
of discovery. This project will also potentially benefit municipal and
industrial wastewater treatment plants that perform nitrogen removal. In
addition, results from this project will be incorporated in summer workshops for
high school students, and microbiology workshops for wastewater treatment
professionals that are regularly organized by the PI.