* 0853935
* Long-term stability of Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Thomas Fuller, Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/28/2011
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0853935 Fuller

Intellectual merits Remarkable advances have been made over the last decade in
energy conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells, thermoelectric
generators, batteries, and super-capacitors. These are expected to play an ever-
growing role in meeting our energy needs. In large part, progress is due to
fabrication of structures at the nano-scale: improved electrocatalysts for
oxygen reduction, low-dimensional thermoelectric materials, and highly
conductive olivine materials used in advanced rechargeable batteries for
instance. In order for these devices to impact the energy challenge, they must
be affordable-a critical aspect of which is their long-term stability in
service-a fundamental issue for nanostructures. Georgia Institute of Technology
will investigate the structure and function of materials and use physics-based
modeling to elucidate the ageing mechanisms of nanoscale catalysts. Fundamental
questions about the surface energy of nanometer sized particles will be
addressed and the results integrated into physics-based models of catalyst
ageing. From a detailed mechanistic understanding of failure mechanisms, the
broader objectives of the work are to guide the development of new materials and
to identify strategies to mitigate these failure modes in full systems.

Broader Impact The number of vehicles in the world is approaching 1 billion, and
these contribute about 20 percent of the anthropogenic emissions of CO2. What's
more, nearly all of these vehicles are powered with petroleum. Fuel cells and
advanced lithium batteries show great promise as a future power sources. Both
require electrodes with features with nanometer dimensions to improve kinetics,
but whose structures can also be unstable. As a result of this, cost and
durability are barriers that must be eliminated before these technologies are
found in wide use commercially. A systematic framework will be developed to
rigorously account for durability of electrochemical systems that can be
generalized to ageing of catalysts and to other nano-scale devices. The program
will provide graduate training and promote extensive interaction with industry.
In addition to disseminating the results of this proposed research through
publications and presentations, educational and outreach activities are
integrated into the project. Outreach will be done through the LEAD program for
ENGINEERSÂ®, summer programs with Morehouse College and local high schools with a
high percentage of under-representative and low income students.