* 0853437
* US-Chile Planning Visit:   Ecological Forecasting of Intertidal Ecosystems in Chile
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Sean Place, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2010
* USD 18,645.00

This U.S - Chile Planning Visit proposal will support four senior and one junior
researchers and two students from the U.S., under the direction of Dr. Brian
Helmuth of University of South Carolina-Columbia, on a planning visit to Chile
in July 2009. The primary goal of this visit is to develop a collaboration
between researchers at University of South Carolina, Columbia, University of
California-Santa Barbara, and Pontificia Universidad Cat贸lica de Chile and
Universidad Cat贸lica del Norte in Chile. In this collaboration, researchers will
develop and test mathematical models for predicting how climate change will
affect marine communities, specifically intertidal organisms along the Chilean
coastline. The team will meet with Dr. Sergio Navarrete of Pontificia
Universidad Cat贸lica de Chile, one of the leading marine ecologists in Chile,
and Dr. Bernardo Broitman of Universidad Cat贸lica del Norte in Chile, an expert
in biophysical coupling. During the visit, the researchers will select study
sites for further analysis, collect preliminary data for their model, and a
develop a strategy for future collaborations. The investigators plan to submit
joint proposals to NSF and FONDECYT, the Chilean funding agency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The visit will involve one early-career researcher and two
students, one graduate and one undergraduate. It has the potential to generate a
series of future comparative studies on marine communities in the northern and
southern hemispheres and will further our understanding of climate change
effects on coastal ecosystems.