* 0853837
* Flow and rheology of interfaces at microscopic length scales
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eric Weeks, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 252,247.00

0853837&lt;br/&gt;Weeks&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Viscoelastic interfaces are
ubiquitous in nature; such as in cell membranes and in the alveoli of the lung,
and can be artificially constructed; such as in emulsions/foams and soap films.
Determining their rheology is, therefore, critical to our understanding of the
dynamics of many processes that occur at these interfaces. Furthermore, this
knowledge may help in the design of better materials for industrial
applications, particularly in the food and cosmetics sector. In this project,
the PIs will investigate the use of microscopic particles (diameters 20 nm - 2
microns) as probes of the viscoelasticity, and obtain the surface viscosity and
elasticity by observing the thermal Brownian motion of the particles. Because of
the size of the probes, this method is more sensitive than most interfacial
rheology techniques that currently exist. By correlating the Brownian motion of
pair of particles at different separations, they also will measure length-scale
dependent viscoelasticity. This will relate the bulk properties of interfaces
with their microstructure and dynamics, an approach that is lacking in other
techniques. They plan to apply our method to: a) Systems with extremely low
surface viscosity; specifically phospholipid molecules at an air water
interface. Accurate measurements of surface viscosities below 10-8 Pa-s-m do not
currently exist. b) Systems that have spatially heterogeneous domains, and
therefore surface rheology that depends on the size of these domains. They will
create these domains by applying surface pressure to phospholipids and fatty
acids, and measure their length scale dependent rheology. c) Soap film
hydrodynamics; the motion of a probe particle creates a flow field affecting the
motion of other particles. Correlating the motion of particles by our technique,
we will be able to measure this flow field. Further, The PI plans to actively
perturb these interfaces by applying a known force to the probe particles. The
drag experienced by the particles in response to the force is a direct measure
of the viscoelasticity. By applying large forces to a particle, they will obtain
the non linear response of the interface, which will be of fundamental
importance and will have industrial relevance as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viscoelastic
interfaces are ubiquitous in nature; such as in cell membranes and in the
alveoli of the lung, and can be artificially constructed; such as in
emulsions/foams and soap films. Determining their rheology is therefore critical
to our understanding of the dynamics of many processes that occur at these
interfaces. Further, this may help in the design of better materials for
industrial applications, particularly in the food and cosmetics sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will conduct at least one field trip each year, for
groups of primary school students. We have done these in the past; these field
trips give students hands on laboratory experiences. In particular, they plan to
develop new activities around interfaces such as soap films (and foams in
general). These field trips generally take everybody in our laboratory group one
day of time (including preparation, interacting with the students, and cleaning
up). The PI has an extensive commitment to undergraduate research, and has
mentored 18 undergraduate researchers in our laboratory over the past five
years. They plan to continue this by working with at least one undergraduate per
year on this research, and possibly two per year (as often students work during
the school year for academic credit). These undergraduates, and also the
graduate student involved, will learn microscopy skills, computer data analysis,
and some wet lab chemistry, providing useful experiences for whatever career
directions they choose.