* 0853648
* Direct visualization of strain-induced yielding in colloidal gels
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Michael Solomon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 12/31/2012
* USD 347,000.00

0853648&lt;br/&gt;M. Solomon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gels of colloidal
particles are systems with slow, constrained dynamics and unusual, viscoelastic
rheology. They are central to the chemical processing of ceramics, the formation
of membranes for microfiltration and the quality of paints, finishes, coatings
and consumer products. Next generation technologies such as direct-write
assembly and microfluidic valving also rely on the gelation transition and the
rheological properties of colloidal particle gels. A unifying feature of these
technologies is their dependence on the fact that gels yield if a stress or
strain of sufficient magnitude is applied. This yielding is a poorly understood
convolution of colloid pair interactions and gel microstructure. Yielding has
features common with mechanical failure: a dramatic rheological transition
results in fluidization of the previously rigid material. Recently, substantial
progress has been made in both experimental description and theoretical
explanation of the origin of&lt;br/&gt;gelation. However, from the point of view
of engineering design and practice we require more: we must also understand
stress-induced yielding, rupture and fluidization. Whether our interest is to
produce a microfluidic valve that will open at a critical stress, or a detergent
that will remain homogeneous and stable over its product life, we should
address: What is the sequence of events that leads to gel rupture and internal
failure upon application of strain and how does manipulating gel structure
affect this sequence? How do these transitions feedback into suspension
microdynamics to determine the local yield rate? How does an applied strain
induce evolution of the stress bearing backbone of a gel network? To address
these scientific questions, we will execute a research program to directly
visualize strain-induced yielding and internal failure in
gels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of our research plan arises
from our comprehensive application of confocal optical microscopy in pursuit of
these aims and our development of novel, well posed methods to induce yielding
in colloidal gels and study its implications. First, the power of confocal
microscopy rests on its ability to directly visualize local, colloid-level
structure and dynamics in three dimensions (3D) and with nanoscale resolution.
Since yielding is a local phenomena, the direct visualization methodology is a
key strength of our approach. Second, we recognize that previous attempts to
visualize internal failure and rupture of gels have foundered because the
nonideality of shear banding was encountered. Because shear banding is
particular to the flow geometry studied, it does not directly characterize
yielding, an intrinsic material property of broad fundamental interest. To
address this issue, we will directly visualize yielding by high-rate stepstrain
deformation. The literature and our prior work demonstrate that this flow avoids
shear banding by generating homogeneous yielding and rupture of colloidal gels.
In this project, we seek to extend fundamental understanding to the microscopic
scale by probing the step-strain induced rupture of gels comprised of micron-
scale sterically-stabilized colloidal poly(methyl methacrylate) in refractive-
index and density-matched solvents. Because this system's pair potential
interactions are both tunable and well characterized, results for this model
system are applicable to the broad range of materials and gel structures
encountered in engineering practice. Three tasks will be executed to address the
three fundamental questions posed above. Project outcomes will include the first
experimental assessment of the local yield rate of a colloidal gel, a key input
to the successful soft glassy and model coupling models of gel rheology. This
study will broadly impact technology and engineering in diverse areas such as
ceramic, membranes, consumer products and direct write assembly by discovering
fundamental features of the relationship between gel yielding and
microstructure. Additional outcomes with broader impact include: (i) the
training of a graduate student in state-of-the-art methods in confocal
microscopy, colloidal science and rheology; (ii) development of a new
engineering design component for a summer outreach program that introduces
middle school girls to chemical engineering and materials science through hands
on lab activities and experiments in complex fluids.