* 0853705
* Nanomechanics of intercellular adhesion
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Deborah Leckband, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 05/31/2013
* USD 309,748.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

0853705 Leckband

The broad goal of this research is to use engineering approaches to identify
fundamental mechanisms and biological design rules that control the assembly and
stability of intercellular junctions in tissues. This research focuses on a
class of proteins, cadherins, which are essential for the formation and
maintainenance of organized tissues. Engineering approaches, including
nanomechanics, cell manipulation, and surface chemical modification will address
three key aspects of cadherin function that are central to cadherin's role in
developmental biology, tissue formation, and bioengineering: specifically, (1)
the physical chemical basis of selective cell-to-cell adhesion, (2) molecular
mechanism(s) of cadherin activation and affinity modulation by a novel class of
activating (and potentially therapeutic) antibodies, and (3) mechanical
transduction between cells and the link between cadherin subtype, adhesion
biophysics, and cadherin-dependent intracellular signaling.

The intellectual merit of this research lies in the novel discoveries engendered
by this multidisciplinary combination of engineering, biophysics, and cell
biological approaches. Preliminary studies by this PI already identified unique
thermodynamic and kinetic signatures of cadherin-mediated cell-to-cell adhesion.
This enabling discovery will further the identification of distinguishing
mechanistic features that are postulated to underlie the selective adhesion
between cells, affinity regulation, and signal transduction by these essential
adhesion proteins. Aim 1 exploits these findings i) to identify mechanisms of
cadherin adhesion and ii) to quantify kinetic and thermodynamic parameters that
influence selective cell-to-cell adhesion. The transformative power of these
investigations lies in their capacity to identify the physical chemical
properties of cadherin bonds postulated to direct cell segregation during tissue
formation (Aim 1). Related investigations will in turn identify how recently
isolated, cadherin-activating antibodies increase (or modulate) cadherin binding
affinity (Aim 2). Activating antibodies have tremendous therapeutic potential,
and these studies will define general, molecular design rules for biochemical
modulators of cadherin adhesion. Finally, Aim 3 extends the PI's preliminary
findings that different cadherins elicit distinct intracellular signaling
responses that are seemingly independent of the protein bond strengths. This
entirely novel result constitutes a major paradigm shift, because in four
decades of research, attempts to determine the basis of cadherin-specific cell
interactions exclusively focussed on the extracellular domains. Aim 3 exploits
this unique discovery, and will break new ground in identifying key biological
design rules that regulate tissue (cadherin)-specific cell functions.

The broad impact of this program derives from its direct relevance to
bioengineering and human health and from its educational impact through outreach
to women and minorities at both the pre-college and undergraduate levels.
Cadherins are essential for tissue genesis and they maintain the structural
integrity of all solid tissues; consequently, the results of this program will
impact several areas of bioengineering and basic cell biology, including, neural
development, embryogenesis, cancer, diseases of the intestinal epithelium,
vascular leakage diseases, wound healing, tissue regeneration, stem cell
differentiation, and tissue engineering. For example, in collaboration with B.
Gumbiner at the University of Virginia Medical School, the research team will
uniquely determine the mechanism(s) of cadherin affinity modulation by novel,
cadherin-activating antibodies, which could potentially treat a wide range of
cadherin-related diseases. Investigations of cadherin binding and intracellular
signaling will further identify physical and bio-chemical mechanisms that may
contribute to cell segregation, tissue patterning, and possibly tissue-specific
functions during tissue formation, repair, and regeneration. These
investigations will also identify biochemical and biophysical parameters that
are required to mimic cell-cell interactions in tissue scaffolds and engineered
environments.

Several of the technologies described in this proposal will also be used as
vehicles for outreach activities to middle school girls, minority
undergraduates, and women and minorities in Chicago area high schools. In
partnerships with outreach programs at the University of Illinois, the PI seeks
to alter preconceptions of science and scientific careers often held by middle-
and high-school students. She will also use some of the research activities
described in this proposal to mentor undergraduates participating in summer
research projects for underrepresented minorities in science and engineering.

This program will also continue to support the training of students from
underrepresented groups in science and engineering. The PI has mentored 16
senior thesis students, approximately 40% of which were women. At the graduate
level, the PI mentored 2 female Masters candidates, 9 female PhD candidates, 2
African American PhD candidates, and one Hispanic male PhD student. This program
offers timely research opportunities that will continue to attract diverse
students and provide quality opportunities in research and engineering from pre-
college to graduate educational levels.