* 0853019
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Construction of an Artificial Kinesin via Metal-Templated, Unidirectional, Molecular Ratchet Dimers
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* John Beierle, Beierle                 John
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2011
* USD 149,600.00

0853019 Beierle

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. John M.
Beierle to work with Dr. Ben L. Feringa at the University of Groningen in the
Netherlands.

Chemists regularly look to Biology for inspiration in the design of molecular
motors, defined as molecules capable of performing work. Though there have been
many successful examples of molecular motion stimulated by light, electrical
current, and chemical energy, there are less examples of those molecules that
are capable of performing physical work (W =F?d). In collaboration with Prof.
Ben Feringa of the University of Groningen, the PI will work toward the design,
synthesis, and application of an artificial kinesin motor, named for its
biological inspiration in that the final product combines unidirectional motion
on a specialized surface and the ability to transport cargo.

By combining the complexities of organic synthesis, metal-templated synthesis,
and dynamic surface chemistry we will synthesize a dimer of Feringa?s
unidirectional light driven molecular motors that will have a site for metal
templated assembly of a cargo molecule. Furthermore, the designed motor dimer is
functionalized so that it will act in dynamic equilibrium with a functionalized
surface similar to kinesin?s interaction with microtubules. The progress made on
this project will not only enrich the PI?s educational background in its
complexity, but it will also prepare him for his endeavor to run an independent
academic laboratory returning to the United States by strengthening
collaboration with one of the best laboratories in Europe. The success of this
project will also fulfill one of the long time standing goals of the scientific
community focusing on molecular motion, a synthetic molecule capable of
performing work.