* 0853809
* Eliminating 'Nonpoint:' Using nanotechnology to identify pollution sources in the landscape
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Dan Luo, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 06/30/2012
* USD 494,805.00

ABSTRACT

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." CBET- 0853809 Walter, M Cornell University ? State

Eliminating 'Nonpoint:' Using nanotechnology to identify pollution sources in
the landscape

To identify the source of pollutants once they reach receiving water is one of
the major problems of nonpoint-source pollution management. The principal
objective of this project is to develop a ìtracer-system for identifying and
characterizing different flowpaths at field and watershed scales by labeling or
coding ìtracers with unique DNA-based nanobarcodes so that many flowpaths can be
simultaneously identified. The goal is to have the capacity of introducing
ìtracers at different points in a watershed and collecting them elsewhere in the
watershed; using a portable nanobarcode reader, the hydrological linkages and
transport times between the collection point(s) and the points of ìtracer-
introduction could then be determined. The ìtracers used are nanobarcodes
encapsulated in safe, degradable microspheres. A nanobarcode is an engineered,
tree-like network of non-coding DNA with a fluorescent marker attached to the
end of each branch. The barcodes are distinguished by their unique combinations
of fluorescent colors and can be ?read? by flow cytometry. One advantage of this
technology is that the detection limit is ?one ìtracer,? whereas traditionally
used tracers require substantially higher quantities for reliable detection.
Also, the ìtracer size is similar to that of microorganisms and, thus, serves as
a good proxy for many microbial pathogens. This project builds on recent
research at Cornell, which has successfully manufactured ìtracers, fabricated
and successfully ?read? nanobarcodes, and experimented with ìtracers in a
variety of small-scale laboratory experiments. This proposed project will move
this novel technology to the field.

In addition to the real potential to help target and mediate nonpoint pollution
sources that impact receiving water quality, this project fosters a unique
collaboration between traditionally disparate disciplines; bionanotechnology,
which has largely evolved in the biomedical area, and hydrological engineering.
The PI has proposed a variety of ways of presenting the promises, risks, and
myths of environmental bionanotechnology to students, environmental
professionals, and the general public. Venues include university classrooms,
local watershed organizations, the local science center, and middle and high
schools. In addition to peer-reviewed publications, The PI will maintain a
website with latest findings, presentations, and general info. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will participate.



