* 0853033
* Assistive Technology:  Designs by Engineering Seniors to Improve the Quality of Life for Disabled Persons
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Donn Clark, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2014
* USD 122,285.00

0853033&lt;br/&gt;Clark &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The object of this project is to
apply technology to the problems of individuals with disabilities. The
resolution of these problems is accomplished by Seniors in Engineering and
Computer Science at UMASS-Lowell. Such projects serve as a source of motivation
for our students, enhancing the learning process and thereby improving the
competency level of our graduating engineers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is
requested that funding be granted to make possible Senior level projects
involving the application of computer and electronic technologies to resolve
specific individual problems and thereby improving the quality of life for those
clients we serve. The individual projects involve one to four Senior students
from the Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer Science, and Mechanical
Engineering programs. The program is based in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department. In the process of completing the project, students are
required to visit and communicate with their client, and thereby determine the
specific needs of the client and define the design objectives of the project.
Students are required to determine design schedules, project costs and review
progress with design supervisors and their client. If the project is successful,
the outcome is delivered to the client at no cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Senior design projects are coordinated through the Assistive Technology Program
within the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. The AT Program was
founded in 1992 and during those sixteen years it has supported work on over
one-thousand Senior projects of which hundreds have been delivered to clients or
their care providing agency. Funding of this proposal will guarantee that the AT
Program will be able to continue supporting the Senior design projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;It is extremely critical to
the future of the country and to the future of all that we educate young people
in the sciences and engineering. The challenges of educating and producing
engineers in today's society are many. The process of educating generally
includes both a teacher and a student. Failure by either impedes the process.
Motivation is an absolutely necessary ingredient on the student side of this
process. Projects in service learning, including assistive technology, provide
the students with a source of motivation to learn and therefore become better
educated engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS &lt;br/&gt;The
projects for which funding is being requested benefit the University, the client
and the student. The students interact with people with disabilities who they
might otherwise be sheltered from for the rest of their lives. This exposure
increases an awareness of the society in which they live and the impact that
their acquired technology might have on that society. The clients are exposed to
young engineers who become their friends and often acquire a successful project
which improves their quality of life. The University, through the AT Program, is
able to provide a service to the community and is rewarded by enhanced public
opinion, public relations, and the ability to attract new students.