* 0853537
* Simulation of Molding of Long Fiber Thermoplastic Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Peter Wapperom, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2013
* USD 414,846.00

The goal of this award is to simulate the molding of polymeric fluids containing
long fibers with the emphasis on predicting fiber orientation, fiber
configuration and stresses generated during flow. Novel experimental rheological
techniques will be developed which will allow one to assess the theories for
predicting long fiber configuration and orientation under well-defined flow
conditions and to determine model parameters which are needed for the numerical
simulations. Predictions for fiber orientation and configuration from a
numerical simulation of molding operations will be compared against
experimentally determined values taken from molded parts. This work is an
extension of our previous effort on short fiber suspensions but requires the
development of improved rheological techniques, extension and modification of
theories for long flexible fiber configuration and modification of techniques
for measuring fiber orientation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead to an improved understanding of the relation
between flow and fiber configuration and orientation for concentrated long fiber
suspensions. From this understanding, theories for polymeric fluids containing
concentrated levels of long fibers in which stress and particle orientation are
directly related will be modified and improved. A numerical scheme for
simulating the orientation of long flexible fibers in complex flows based on
input from basic flow behavior will arise from this research. Information from
the basic flow experiments will then be incorporated into a simulation package
modeling molding operations, which will be made available to various companies
(e.g. automotive, aerospace, etc.) and agencies for predicting mold design for
obtaining parts with optimum performance. Graduate students will learn about the
modeling, experiments, and numerical simulations of polymeric suspensions
containing high aspect ratio particles. Undergraduate students will be
integrated into the research efforts where they will learn the importance of
process design for delivering parts with optimum performance. &lt;br/&gt;