* 0853423
* IRES: U.S.-Czech Research Experience for Students:  Structure and Function of Novel Flavoprotein (WrbA)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 74,478.00

OISE 0853423&lt;br/&gt;Carey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award for International
Research Experience for Students (IRES) links Jannette Carey from Princeton
University with Czech counterparts from the Institute of Physical Biology at the
University of South Bohemia, in Nove Hrady. In the Czech Republic, the IRES
program will be headed by Ivana Smatanova and Rudiger Ettrich, with the
University's Department of Structure and Function of Proteins. These U.S. and
Czech mentors share the goal of contributing to our understanding of the
biochemical properties of the E. coli flavoprotein WrbA while providing the
undergraduate students they mentor with early career research experience through
directed study of the function of the novel WrbA and related proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of the collaborative IRES, the US-Czech
team's research plans will engage student participants by providing first hand
research experience with growth studies of wild-type and mutant strains,
metabolic profiling, enzyme kinetics, x-ray crystallography, and molecular
modeling. If successful, the combined efforts of researchers and students are
expected to better define the WrbA mechanism and physiological roles, allowing
for a detailed picture of structure-function relationships to emerge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary IRES program in biomolecular
science fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge and
engaging students by enabling experts in the United States and Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. Broader impacts include early career introduction of
U.S. undergraduate students to international expertise and teamwork to better
prepare them for the global workforce. By working with the relatively simple
organism, E. coli, the results of this U.S.-Czech effort may help explain how
membranes detoxify in other organisms. If successful, knowledge of the enzyme
WrbA may influence other research in biochemistry, particularly work with the
interesting soluble diaphorase enzymes.