* 0853000
* International Research Fellowship Program:   Secant Varieties and Applications to Signal Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Luke Oeding, Oeding                  Luke           A
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2011
* USD 166,848.00

0853000 Oeding

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Luke
Oeding to work with Dr. Girogio Ottaviani at Universita degli Studi di Firenze
in Italy.

The primary goal of this project is to provide fundamental information to
engineers in signal processing and to researchers in other disciplines that use
varieties occurring in spaces of tensors in their work such as statistics (the
study of dependence relations), computational complexity theory (bounding the
complexity of algorithms via ranks of tensors) and physics (quantum information
theory and measures of entanglement). The research is focused on solving
questions about the decomposition of tensors and symmetric tensors posed by P.
Comon (U. Nice at Sophia-Antipolis, electrical engineering) and questions about
block decomposition of tensors posed by L. De Lathauwer (K.U.Leuven, electrical
engineering). This fundamental information will be found via analyzing classical
geometric objects known as secant varieties. Restated in geometric language, the
goal of this project is to find new equations of secant varieties of Segre-
Veronese varieties and secant varieties of subspace varieties. By studying these
questions from the standpoint of classical algebraic geometry and representation
theory, many classical and recent techniques can be used. The proposed research
will combine theoretical and computational techniques for studying G-varieties
used and developed in the PI's dissertation with the host scientist's expertise
in classical algebraic geometry to solve questions in signal processing and
further the PI's research in geometry and representation theory.

This project will impact society by fostering international and cross-
disciplinary collaboration between engineers and mathematicians. The findings of
this research will also benefit areas such as statistics, computational
complexity, and physics.