* 0853658
* Advancing Audio-visual Documentation of Passamaquoddy (SIL Code PQM) Group Discourse with Archive Access via the Web as an  Integrated Video and Dictionary Database
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Leavitt, Northeast Historic Film
* Continuing Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 07/31/2013
* USD 324,854.00

Abstract This project, "The Language Keepers" (NSF grant BCS-05533791,
2006-2008), addresses a central dilemma in documenting endangered languages: the
decline and loss of public group discourse. The documenting of public group
discourse provides linguists and Native-language teachers and students with a
necessary research and learning resource. The work continues a successful
Native-language documentation methodology in the Passamaquoddy communities of
Maine, demonstrating the feasibility of stimulating renewed group conversation
and filming natural, spontaneously spoken Passamaquoddy, especially in time-
critical and culturally significant areas.

There are two components: First, the project uses the video documentation itself
as feedback to participants to stimulate reflection and further discourse,
creating a revived community dialogue in Passamaquoddy. Next, the existing
conversational video corpus of transcribed, translated and subtitled "whole
conversations," plus new conversations to be filmed, will be re-conceptualized
as a non-linear, web-accessed, video database archive. This video database will
be linked to the existing on-line dictionary data base. Viewers will then be
able to create clusters of video and dictionary entries that contextualize the
meaning of an item, conveying deeper cultural and linguistic understanding. This
resource, which can be found online at www.languagekeepers.org, makes the
linguistic complexity of Passamaquoddy more accessible and enables the
development of innovative materials for teacher training, language learning, and
research.