* 0853005
* An integrated approach to modeling and simulations of complex fluids of microstructures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/20/2008,08/31/2010
* Qi Wang, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 137,458.00

Wang&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0605029&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator combines
multiscale modeling, analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;computation to study a variety of
polymeric liquids of&lt;br/&gt;anisotropic microstructures. The microstructure
of these&lt;br/&gt;polymeric liquids consists of anisotropic polymers
and&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles whose configuration,
conformation,&lt;br/&gt;rigidity/flexibility, and chemical properties interact
with the&lt;br/&gt;other constituents in the materials as well as the
macroscopic&lt;br/&gt;flow field to effect molecular scale or nanoscale
alignment that&lt;br/&gt;controls the ultimate performance properties of the
materials. &lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of the project is to study how the
macroscopic&lt;br/&gt;flow field interacts with the micro-structure of the
complex&lt;br/&gt;fluids, leading to novel mesoscale morphology, and
ultimately&lt;br/&gt;influences the rheological as well as the material
properties at&lt;br/&gt;the macroscopic level. Other goals include studying how
various&lt;br/&gt;molecular geometries affect macroscopic material and
rheological&lt;br/&gt;properties, phase transitions, and mesoscopic
structure&lt;br/&gt;formation, wave propagation in biaxial liquid
crystalline&lt;br/&gt;polymers, and external field assisted flow processing
of&lt;br/&gt;polymeric materials and nanocomposites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
investigator develops state-of-the-art multiscale&lt;br/&gt;theories and models
to study material and rheological properties&lt;br/&gt;of liquid crystalline
polymers and polymer-nanoparticle&lt;br/&gt;composites and their fluid dynamics
in various processing&lt;br/&gt;conditions. The project is motivated by new
discoveries and&lt;br/&gt;emerging applications in nanomaterials and
nanotechnologies. A&lt;br/&gt;good understanding of the new materials and new
processing&lt;br/&gt;methods not only advances science, but also has
implications for&lt;br/&gt;industrial applications in materials and
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;