* 0853733
* Modeling L-selectin mediated attachment strength during embryo implantation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michele Marcolongo, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 306,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

0853733 Marcolongo

Intellectual Merit: One of the critical challenges of modern reproductive
biology is to develop viable clinical approaches to treat infertility. Embryo
implantation represents a crucial step of the reproductive process and its
success relies on the culmination of a well-orchestrated series of spatially and
temporally controlled events. The attachment of the blastocyst to the
endometrium is mediated, at least in part, by the L-selectin adhesion system.
Interactions between L-selectin expressed on the peripheral cells of the human
blastocyst, the trophoblasts, and its oligosaccharide ligands on the surface of
the human endometrium are thought to provide a "braking" mechanism for the
embryo as it enters the endometrial cavity, similar to its role in other
biological systems. While the L-selectin mediated interaction is likely not
strong enough to sustain attachment (which is further enhanced by secondary
integrin-ligand interactions), it is thought to provide strength adequate to
allow the blastocyst to be initially captured by the uterine luminal epithelium.
However, there is a lack of understanding of the attachment mechanisms
associated with primary and secondary adhesion. A principle cause of the 30%
failure rates of in vitro fertilization is associated with a defect in the
attachment process during implantation; without further understanding of the
embryo attachment mechanisms, little can be done to address this critical
clinical issue.

There are two objectives of this application: 1) to utilize model cell lines for
trophoblasts (Jeg-3) and uterine epithelial cells (Ishikawa) and cell mechanics
techniques to examine the dependence of molecular expression (controlled by
environmental factors: hormonal stimulation and fluid flow) on primary and
secondary attachment strength of the blastocyst/uterine epithelium interactions
and 2) to develop and characterize a 3D Jeg-3 trophosphere to better mimic the
architecture of the blastocyst and examine biochemical and mechanical
interactions of the trophosphere with a 3D tissue engineered structure of human
endometrial epithelial cells obtained from biopsies (IRB 15822) to more fully
mimic the in vivo environment. The central hypothesis is that the expression and
retention of a critical level of L-selectin and L-selectin ligands are necessary
to facilitate adequate initial attachment of the blastocyst to the uterine
epithelium and similarly the expression of molecules in the integrin-mediated
attachment will control the strength of attachment for secondary bonding. The
preliminary work has shown that the research team can manipulate L-selectin and
L-selectin ligand expression with hormonal conditioning in trophoblast and
endometrial epithelial cell models, respectively. For the first time, the
attachment strength of a model L-selectin mediated implantation system has been
quantified using a parallel plate flow chamber customized with a quartz crystal
microbalance (QCM) sensor and functional attachment dependence based on
L-selectin expression has been demonstrated. Further, the secondary attachment
strength of the model integrin/ligand system has been quantified using a
spinning disc apparatus. In addition to our supportive preliminary data, we are
particularly poised to undertake this research because an inter-disciplinary
team of bioengineers, biochemists and cell biologists and a fertility clinician
with the range of skills necessary to answer these critical questions has been
assembled. This project is innovative because it will be the first time that the
primary and secondary attachment strengths for blastocyst implantation have been
investigated. An additional innovation comes in the use of the 3D trophosphere
model to examine the spatial effects that may contribute to the attachment
mechanisms. This work also realizes an engineering approach toward challenges of
maternal fetal medicine and therefore serves as a milestone at the intersection
of these disciplines.

Broader Impacts: Development of the model blastocyst/uterine endometrial
epithelial cell system to examine the effect of microenvironment (hormonal and
physical) on the primary and secondary attachment mechanisms will allow further
research to examine the effects of endogenous factors and possible clinically
relevant treatments on the functional behavior of the cells. The 3D models of
the trophosphere and the hEEC enable the advancement of the understanding of the
effect of the spatial distribution of molecules on attachment. These insights
may inspire new treatments for implantation-related fertility, one of the
greatest impediments to successful reproductive outcomes in IVF, where, despite
fertilization rates of up to 60%, pregnancy rates per transfer of embryos to the
uterus are only 42.5%. This program lays the groundwork for exploration of
further questions related to infertility that could greatly benefit from an
engineering approach. These methods and discoveries will be disseminated to the
scientific community through publications and presentations at conferences. The
proposed research at the intersection of disciplines will offer excellent
training opportunities to students as they study this clinically relevant and
important problem.

