* 0853673
* Direct numerical simulations of elastic filament suspensions and multi-scale modeling of soft-particle suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Yuan-Nan Young, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 159,793.00

0853673 &lt;br/&gt;Young&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspensions of soft particles (such as viscous drops or
elastic filaments) are ubiquitous in micro-, nano- and bio-fluidic applications.
Quantification of their dynamical response to simple flows and external forcing
(such as gravity or electric field) is the key to transformative advancement in
micro- and nano-fluidic engineering and sciences. Despite extensive research,
however, investigations to date fall short of the desirable predictability of
the relations between dynamical macroscopic fluid properties and the
microstructural dynamics. The PI plans a synergistic theoretical, numerical and
experimental study to investigate the fundamental relations between macroscopic
fluid properties and microstructural particle dynamics. Efficient numerical
capabilities will be developed to directly simulate suspension of elastic fibers
(both inextensible and finitely extensible). Focus will be placed on
quantitative correlation between dynamics of interacting filaments and the
macroscopic dynamics and properties of the suspension flow. A representative
reduced model for an elastic filament will deduced, and will be utilized for
developing a continuum model for semi-flexible filament flow. Direct comparison
against numerical simulations and experiments will be conducted to validate the
modeling approaches. These interdisciplinary research tasks will be integrated
with educational efforts at the undergraduate and graduate levels through
courses and recruitment of under-represented minority students.