* 0853573
* SGER: Flash Conversion of Graphite Oxide to Graphene
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Jiaxing Huang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2010
* USD 77,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research award supports fundamental research of
a rapid flash conversion process that can reduce graphite oxide to graphene by
simply exposing it to a pulsed light source such as a camera flash. Graphite
oxide is the most promising precursor for bulk production of graphene and has
caught wide interest in both academic and industrial researches in the past few
years. Conversion of graphite oxide to graphene has relied on either chemical
treatments that often requires highly toxic reagents such as hydrazine, or high
temperature annealing under controlled atmospheres. This brings many processing
disadvantages and limits the applications of graphene materials. A rapid light
based process should have great advantage because it is chemical free, energy
efficient, and allows site specific ?photo surgery? to modify local areas on the
material using a photo-mask. Deliverables include demonstration of rapid flash
conversion of graphite oxide to graphene, documentation of material
characterization results, and proof of concept demonstration of using flash
conversion to pattern graphene materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results from this research will advance the knowledge and understanding, and
create enabling techniques for the manufacturing and processing of the graphite
oxide/graphene materials. It can catalyze advances in many areas including
electronics, polymer composite, sensors and actuators. Results from the proposed
research will be disseminated for teaching and outreach activities, too. When
cutting edge research discoveries are made using a consumer camera flash, it
should naturally catch wide public interest. It will be used to raise public
awareness of science and engineering, and engage students, especially women
those from underrepresented groups. New science projects and demonstrations
based on the results will be designed for the middle schools in the Chicago area
through the already established outreach channels. &lt;br/&gt;