* 0853285
* Collaborative Research: The Kawapanan Project: Building Flexible Data for the Documentation of Shiwilu (jeb) and Shawi (cbt)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Pilar Valenzuela, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2012
* USD 89,812.00

This award supports the documentation of the only two extant members of the
Kawapanan group from Peruvian Amazonia: Shiwilu (JEB) and Shawi (CBT).
Documentary work is especially urgent for Shiwilu, since it is in immediate
danger of complete disappearance with only a few elderly fluent speakers
remaining. The award also supports the development of reusable software to aid
in the production of scientific materials for the linguists and pedagogical
materials for community members. The goals of the project include compiling and
digitizing existing wordlists and grammar information, as well as the collection
of primary data in the field through digital audio/video recording of
consultants. The materials include: spontaneous texts, questionnaires,
elicitation, and wordlists. The resulting corpus will be transcribed, translated
into Spanish and English, analyzed and processed in order to produce databases,
dictionaries, grammars, and text collections. Four workshops for community
members are being held to raise sociolinguistic awareness, to encourage
community involvement in the documentation, and to promote literacy in the
native languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will capture a permanent
record of Kawapanan and Amazonian cultural knowledge that will likely disappear
in as little as one generation. A study of Shiwilu and Shawi may have a high
scientific impact on the field as there is little systematic descriptive work on
Kawapanan as a whole. It contributes to linguistic typology through the
description of specific features such as a set of consonants unusual for the
Amazon, classifier systems, highly complex verbs, and pragmatic ergative
marking. Also, the project contributes to the reconstruction of Kawapanan, which
will help to shed light on its possible inclusion in a larger family or stock.
Furthermore, the project includes the use of state-of-the-art digital
audio/video recording, and the development of open, reusable annotated data in
Unicode/XML. All data will be preserved in a lasting archive for posterity. On
the technical side, the main intellectual merit is data re-purposing: the
production of flexible data to serve the descriptive, computational, or
theoretical linguist as well as the anthropologist, the language learner or
educator. The project responds to the demands of the Kawapanan communities, who
are striving to preserve their languages. The resulting linguistic descriptions,
workshops, and learner-oriented resources will be crucial to revitalization
efforts. Finally, the project contributes to the training of two linguistic
students.