* 0853572
* IRES:  U.S.-China Collaboration on Fluid and Thermal Transport in Fuel Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Xia Wang, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 09/30/2012
* USD 149,290.00

0853572&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: IRES: U.S.-China
Collaboration on Fluid and Thermal Transport in Fuel
Cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This International Research Experiences for Students
(IRES) project is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 (Public Law 111-5). The award is made to Professor Xia Wang in the
Department of Mechanical Engineering at Oakland University in Rochester,
Michigan. The participating U.S. graduate and undergraduate students will
collaborate with researchers in the Department of Power Engineering at Beijing
Jiaotong University in China which has built a state-of-the-art fuel cell
testing facility to study the dynamic behavior of fuel cells. Their foreign
collaborator at the University is Professor Li Jia. The students? research will
focus on fuel cell-related problems that have a direct impact on U.S. energy
consumption and related national security issues. Their particular emphasis will
be on the critical issues of the thermal and water management of fuel cells.
Students will be introduced to current problems, potential solutions, modern
numerical and experimental methods, and will be given the opportunities to
explore under a close-coupled mentorship. They will also receive Chinese
language and culture training. Visiting industrial and historic sites are also
part of the planned activities. The students will have expectations and
opportunities to contribute to on-going research programs. Results of their
projects will provide a fundamental understanding of the thermal and fluid
transport in fuel cells and contribute positively to current energy and
environmental issues. These results will be disseminated in conferences and
through peer-reviewed journal articles. The program activities will be placed on
dedicated websites and made available to the community at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major emphasis of the project is to engage U.S. students
in meaningful projects with international students and faculty. Students will
work closely with researchers with different scientific backgrounds and will
learn field and laboratory techniques that will enhance their research skills.
Altogether, these experiences will increase the networking and international
competitiveness of the student participants. By intentionally creating
opportunities for first-generation, minority, and female students, the research
program will have broad impacts on geological education and research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;