* 0853798
* Rationally Designed Plasmonic Nanostructures for Rapid Bacteria Detection and Identification
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 05/31/2013
* USD 356,412.00

0853798&lt;br/&gt;Reinhard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (SERS) is a field enhanced vibrational spectroscopy that shows
great promise for the rapid spectroscopic identification of pathogenic
microorganisms. To realize its full potential, SERS substrates are required that
generate large and reproducible electromagnetic field enhancements. In this
project fabrication technologies are developed that provide control over the
complex electromagnetic response of two-dimensional plasmonic structures. To
achieve this aim chemical assembly procedures and lithographic nanofabrication
approaches will be combined to generate nanoscale noble metal structures at
defined locations over micron length scales. Reliable fabrication methods for
locations of giant electromagnetic field enhancement - so called "hot spots" -
will allow a rational fabrication of optimized SERS substrates which combine
large field enhancement and high reproducibility. The intellectual merit of the
effort is that it will improve our understanding of the complex electromagnetic
interactions in periodic and aperiodic plasmonic structures with multiple length
scales. The broader impact of the project is that the optimized SERS substrates
will allow a rapid and reliable identification of bacterial pathogens through
SERS. This is highly relevant, for instance, in the clinical setting where it
could enable more effective treatment strategies of acute infections. SERS
substrates with improved reliability and reproducibility will also lead to
entirely new applications of SERS in challenging biological and biomedical
sensing applications. In addition to the scientific impact of this proposal,
there are clear educational and outreach impacts. The project will offer
students and junior researchers the opportunity to participate in a
collaborative research and education program. Because both the topic and
technique are of great interest to the general population, this effort will
enable a substantial outreach program. One important component will be the
Boston University Nanocamp, organized by the PI in collaboration with the Boston
University's learning network resource (LERNet). The nanocamp will attract and
familiarize students from inner-city high schools - which typically have a
higher fraction of underrepresented groups - to the research outlined in this
proposal.