* 0853785
* Fundamental Study of Nucleate Boiling on Nanostructured Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Yoav Peles, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

0853785&lt;br/&gt;Peles&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Boiling of fluids on heat transfer
surfaces requires nucleation sites in the form of micro- or nanoscale cavities
to promote bubble growth. Heat transfer surfaces, rich in effective nucleation
sites, can be formed by depositing nanorods on the surfaces. This can
significantly improve the heat transfer process. Specifically, it has been
recently shown that nanorods can reduce the surface temperature at the onset of
nucleate boiling, reduce the surface temperature following boiling inception
(that is, increase the two-phase heat transfer coefficient), and increase the
maximum allowable heat transfer rate. However, so far there is no clear
understanding regarding why the deposited nanorods affect the nucleate boiling
process. &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of
why nanorod surfaces improve nucleate boiling heat transfer by completing the
following tasks. (1) perform an experimental study of nucleate boiling of a
nanorod film without microscale surface defects. Such a film is comprised of
only an interconnected network of nanopores formed between the nanorod
interstices, and does not contain microscale surface cavities. This control
experiment will determine whether or not bubbles can nucleate at low superheats
from nanopores when they are uncoupled from microscale cavities. (2) Perform
experimental studies of surfaces with isolated micro cavities. This will allow
us to determine whether or not the micro cavities can generate stable bubble
nucleation at low superheats when they are uncoupled from the nanopore network.
(3) Investigate the role of the wettability of the nanopores, nanorod size and
spacing and the density/size of micro-defects on the bubble ebullition process.
We will also perform high-speed, microscopic flow visualization to observe
bubble growth, as well as measure the bubble release frequency and departure
diameters under various operating conditions. &lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual merit
of the research is based on the fact that very limited nucleate boiling heat
transfer data are available for well defined and engineered nanostructured
cavities on heated surfaces. The data to be gathered will reveal the mechanisms
that control bubble nucleation and heat transfer improvement on surfaces with
morphologies of diminishing length scales. It will also aid the development of
new heat transfer surfaces, and provide engineers with superior methods for
improving thermal performance, perhaps significantly. &lt;br/&gt;The Broader
impacts of this research are based on the fact that a growing number of
industries (microelectronics, aerospace, chemical, cryogenics, energy) are in
pressing need of techniques to increase heat transfer in various high heat flux
devices. The results of this study will greatly extend the body of scientific
knowledge of nucleate boiling over nano- and microscale cavities, and enable the
development of innovative heat transfer surfaces that could have practical
applications in a variety of processes that involve boiling. To integrate
research and teaching, specially-designed virtual labs will be developed.
Outreach includes demonstrations to high school students; this will help to
attract a diverse cadre of young students to careers in science and engineering.