* 0853407
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Inferring Changes in Ice-Sheet Flow and Accumulation
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Michelle Koutnik, Koutnik                 Michelle       R
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 10/31/2012
* USD 140,700.00

0853407 Koutnik

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Michelle
R. Koutnik to work with Dr. Dorthe Dahl-Jensen at the University of Copenhagen?s
Centre for Ice and Climate Studies in Denmark.

The spatial and temporal histories of ice-sheet flow and accumulation are
necessary to recreate past ice-volume and sea-level histories, and to predict
the response of ice sheets to future climate changes. Some details of these
valuable histories can be recovered from ice cores, but ice cores represent
conditions at only a single point. Since it is resource intensive to recover a
deep ice core, it is impractical to reconstruct the important spatial dimension
from ice cores alone. A solution is to use available ice-penetrating radar data
to infer this information. Ice-penetrating-radar profiles are windows to the
interior of glaciers and ice sheets. These views inside the ice show internal
layers that have been shaped by spatial and temporal changes in ice flow, in ice
thickness, and in accumulation. The deepest visible layers have been
significantly affected by spatial and temporal gradients in ice flow and
accumulation. Therefore, deep layers are highly valuable, but they are also more
complicated to interpret. The PI uses an inverse-theory approach to properly
extract this valuable information. Radar-imaged internal layers may be the only
accessible surviving archive that contains a record of past spatial and temporal
variations in ice flow and accumulation over broad areas of the ice sheets and
ice caps, and reaching far into the past. In collaboration with host scientist,
Dr. Dorthe Dahl-Jensen, and the team of researchers at the Center for Ice and
Climate Studies at the University of Copenhagen, the PI is addressing important
questions about the relationship between climate changes and ice-sheet evolution
for parts of the Greenland Ice Sheet and Arctic Ice Caps.