* 0853707
* Nanoparticle Transport to Oocytes and Toxicological Consequences in Fathead Minnows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Nancy Denslow, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 339,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0853707 Denslow

Growing evidence suggests that many nanomaterials are taken up into fish species
through the gills or digestive track. Once internalized, there is a potential
for nanomaterials to cross into the blood stream, where they could pose a risk
to internal organs including the ovary. Emerging literature and preliminary
evidence in the current application suggest that nanomaterials may be capable of
entering oocytes, potentially impacting embryonic development. There is a need
to understand fundamental mechanisms that enable nanomaterial transport to
oocytes, and the subsequent alterations of natural biological processes.

It is currently understood that the physiological behavior of nanomaterials is
largely impacted by adsorbed proteinaceous layers, which form upon seconds of
exposure to biological media. Female fish that are actively reproducing have
high serum levels (up to 20 mg/ml) of the egg yolk precursor protein,
vitellogenin. This protein is a large phospholipoglycoprotein that has the
capacity to bind to nanomaterials through various conduits, including areas of
high negative charge and areas of high hydrophobicity. Vitellogenin is naturally
targeted to developing oocytes and is imported into these oocytes via a
vitellogenin-specific receptor. The overall hypothesis of this project is that
vitellogenin-bound nanomaterials will be imported into yolk granules in
developing oocytes and eventually merge with lysosomes. Furthermore, upon
reaching this compartment certain nanomaterials could dissolve and leach into
the cell causing toxicity for developing embryos. To address these hypotheses,
the researchers have 3 specific aims: (1) Determine the effect of surface
modification on uptake, cellular distribution and retention of nanomaterials in
fish ovarian cultures. (2) Characterize the protein surface coating of
nanomaterials exposed to male and female fathead minnow plasma. (3) Determine
the distribution and reproductive toxicity of nanoparticles in vivo. To achieve
these aims they will use model luminescent nanoparticulates, namely dye doped
silica and quantum dots of carefully chosen size distributions and surface
properties that will enable detailed analysis of the movement of these materials
in vitro and in vivo. The proposed research will provide critical insights into
the role of nanoparticulate properties on their translocation to oocytes. This
information is anticipated to be highly important in the development of
predictive models for nanotoxicity in fish species, and methods to mitigate
potentially adverse outcomes of nanomaterial exposure to the environment.

Cross-disciplinary training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
at the interface between particle science and engineering and biology will be an
essential part of the research program. The Southeast Alliance for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (SEAGEP), related Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) programs, and established minority fellowship programs at
the University of Florida will be leveraged to ensure diversity in the research
program. Research results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
disseminated at national and international meetings. The investigators also plan
to collaborate with national nanotechnology resources such as the Center for
Nanotechnology in Society at Arizona State University and ICON at Rice to
disseminate research results to the scientific and educational communities, and
to society at large. The students will also participate in public outreach
programs (e.g., UF's Engineering Fair)providing a conduit for them to engage the
general public about the excitement of nanoscience and the importance of
environmental stewardship. UF's Graham Center for Public Policy will be engaged
to ensure that research findings are appropriately communicated to policy
makers. The proposed research will provide fundamental knowledge of factors that
mediate nanoparticle transport to oocytes, and offer insights on mechanisms that
may lead to alterations in fish embryos.