* 0853114
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Evolution of Language Systems:  A Comparative Study of Grammatical Change in English and Icelandic
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Joel Wallenberg, Wallenberg              Joel           C
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2011
* USD 85,550.00

0853114 Wallenberg

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Joel C.
Wallenberg to work with Dr. Hoskuldur Thrainsson at the University of Iceland.

This collaboration continues an in-depth study of a number of intricate
grammatical constructions in modern Icelandic, as well as a detailed comparison
of the grammar of Icelandic and English throughout their written histories. The
18 month project has the following three primary goals: to conduct a series of
experiments with speakers of Icelandic focusing on a selection of scientifically
important grammatical constructions, the collection and syntactic annotation of
a database (?corpus?) of modern and historical Icelandic texts, and a detailed
qualitative and quantitative analysis of the experimental and written data. The
project investigates central questions of natural language syntax and language
evolution through a study of modern and historical English and Icelandic. These
two languages are similar enough to allow for a detailed comparison, but yet
differ in important and interesting ways. While the project includes a broad
comparison of historical Icelandic and English, it focuses primarily on
phenomena of modern Icelandic that have already been shown to exist in
historical English as well, particularly ?object shift? or ?scrambling?
(Wallenberg 2007, 2008) and ?quantifier movement? (Light & Wallenberg 2008).
Both of these phenomena show a degree of optionality for speakers in both
languages, as well as limits on this optionality due to general grammatical
constraints. Both phenomena have also followed different historical trajectories
in the two languages under investigation.

The construction of a diachronic corpus of Icelandic creates a permanent,
public resource for quantitative and replicable studies of language variation
and change over time. The investigation of internal and external factors in
language stability and language change sheds light on how children acquire
language, how the human language faculty processes statistical inputs from the
population of speakers, and brings more data to bear on the relationship between
the dynamics of language evolution and the dynamics of biological evolution (cf.
e.g. Nowak 2006: Chapt. 13). Furthermore, experimentation in the computational
methods necessary to annotate such a corpus could further advance general
research in natural language processing (cf. part-of-speech-tagging Icelandic in
Dredze & Wallenberg 2008a, 2008b). Finally, in addition to potential scientific
gains, the profound language contact between English and the Scandinavian
languages in England, Ireland, and Scotland during the medieval period points to
a shared cultural history between American English and modern Icelandic, the
details of which will be much better understood after a thorough comparison of
the early English and Icelandic grammatical systems.