* 0853866
* Assessing environmental sustainability using FLAG: A case study of a novel semiconductor material critical to emerging energy technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Harold Hemond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2013
* USD 271,124.00

0853866 Hemond

Indium, an important metal, will be assessed by implementing an approach termed
FLAG (Framework for Life-Cycle Assessment Using Geochemistry). The FLAG approach
expands on Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) by assessing industrial life cycles in
the context of geochemical cycles. Features of FLAG are: 1) comparison of
anthropogenic and natural fluxes; 2) explicit study of global, regional, and
local scales; 3) characterization of physical and chemical forms; and 4)
recognition of a distinction between primarily mined metals and metals that are
byproducts. FLAG is proposed for use in product development as an 'early warning
system' that will allow potentially harmful elements to be flagged for priority
study when projected anthropogenic fluxes rival or exceed natural fluxes.
Indium, which is of particular importance in new families of high efficiency
photovoltaic devices, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and indium tin oxide (ITO)
electrical coatings, has been selected for study because its environmental
cycling is poorly understood, toxicity has been suggested, and its industrial
use is poised for exponential expansion. Natural and industrial fluxes of indium
will be determined at the global, regional, and local scales. Education and
outreach components of the project include: 1) involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in the research; 2) creation of a metal cycling exhibit
for the Cambridge, MA annual science festival and a five-session science unit
for 6th-8th graders in the Summerbridge Cambridge after-school program; and 3)
collaboration with individuals in the mining and semiconductor industries.

