* 0853294
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Particle-based Monte Carlo Simulations of Atmospheric Nucleation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Matthew McGrath, McGrath                 Matthew        J
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2011
* USD 103,360.00

0853294 McGrath

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Matthew J.
McGrath to work with Dr. Markku Kulmala at the University of Helsinki in
Finland.

Gazing up into puffy white clouds on a summer day often causes children to ask
their parents, ?How do clouds form?? This simple question has proven to be very
difficult for the world's scientists to answer. The general steps of the process
have been known for quite some time: individual molecules combine to form
thermodynamically stable clusters, which in turn activate to aerosols and
finally grow into cloud condensation nuclei. These nuclei are what gather in the
atmosphere to form clouds, or crowd together close to the earth's surface to
give fog. Regardless of their final destination, the formation process always
appears to go through these three steps. This means that the formation of
atmospheric aerosols, which have been demonstrated to negatively impact human
health in urban areas as well as lower temperatures in marine environments, must
involve the nucleation of individual molecules to form stable clusters as well.
Experimental observations have provided most of the current data on atmospheric
aerosols, recording the size and concentrations of clusters concurrently with
the concentrations of various atmospheric gases (such as sulphuric acid,
ammonia, and ozone). This has given important insights into the composition and
sizes of the critical clusters involved. The critical cluster is the size of
cluster that the process must form before stability is reached; knowledge of the
critical cluster is essential to determine the likelihood that a given process
is important to the formation of the larger nuclei. Unfortunately, experimental
apparatuses have only recently become sensitive enough to probe the time and
length scales present in atmospheric nucleation phenomena, which means there is
a current lack of understanding in these critical regimes. Furthermore, these
new advances only indicate that clusters are present of this size, not if they
are critical nuclei. Particle-based molecular simulation provides a tool to
ameliorate this problem. Particle-based molecular simulation is a technique that
employs computers to predict observable properties of systems by considering the
individual interactions between molecules. This method becomes an important
complement to experimental observation when the conditions of the experiment are
difficult (for example, high temperatures and pressures, or short time-scales)
or dangerous (toxic or explosive chemicals). The small and fast events occurring
in atmospheric nucleation therefore pose no problem for molecular simulation
techniques, and indeed several studies on the formation and composition of
atmospheric clusters have already been performed. The current challenge facing
the field is the computational accuracy and efficiency of these methods.

This proposal addresses the concern of simulation accuracy and efficiency by
combining multiple existing techniques to probe these systems. Experimental
observations suggest that the most important atmospheric aerosol system consists
not just of water but water, ammonia, and sulphuric acid together. The largest
problem with this is sulphuric acid which, due to its reactive nature, is
difficult to study via classical methods, while quantum mechanical methods are
still too computationally demanding. This proposal combines a proven simulation
method for reactive systems (the reactive ensemble method) with the standard
algorithms used in the study of nucleation phenomena (umbrella sampling with
histogram reweighting together with configurational-bias Monte Carlo), which
will permit the first complete mapping of the nucleation barrier and critical
cluster for the ternary water/ammonia/acid system. An additional step consisting
of using the reactive ensemble method to help determine the simulation
parameters for sulphuric acid could lead to the development of simpler reactive
force fields, thus facilitating the use of Monte Carlo simulation in the study
of reactive systems. The formation of atmospheric aerosols (and, by extension,
cloud condensation nuclei) is a process that is well understood in general terms
but poorly understood in details, despite the importance of these clusters in
climatic events and temperature regulation, as well as their impact on human
health. Particle-based molecular simulation provides a tool capable of providing
insight into this process on length and time-scales inaccessible to current
experimental techniques. Current simulation methods, however, lack the necessary
features to probe the complete atmospherically relevant system. This proposal
introduces a novel combination of existing techniques which, along with
appropriately determined simulation parameters, reveals the size and composition
of the critical nucleus, data that is integral to demonstrating exactly how this
process occurs.