* 0853956
* Collaborative Research: High Resolution Sensor Networks for Quantifying and Predicting Surface-Groundwater Mixing and Nutrient Delivery in the Santa Fe River, Florida.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Wendy Graham, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 456,782.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project proposes to test the
hypothesis that natural tracers measured at temporal resolution similar to water
fluxes (i.e., daily or sub-daily) can be used to predict coupling between
riverine hydrology, surface water-groundwater mixing, and biogeochemistry. The
hypothesis will be tested with high temporal resolution monitoring and
measurements of selected solutes. These results will inform and improve
conceptual and numerical models of hydrologic, hydrogeologic, and chemical
dynamics and fluxes. Hypothesis testing will address three specific science
questions: 1) What are the temporal and longitudinal dynamics of
surface/groundwater mixing, and how do these affect the delivery of ecologically
relevant solutes (nitrate, phosphate, H+, dissolved organic carbon)? 2) How does
assimilation of high resolution stream chemistry data into integrated, parallel
watershed models (e.g., PARFLOW) improve predictions of stream flow, groundwater
elevation, surface/groundwater mixing and solute transport? 3) How does the
incorporation of high resolution chemical measurements and mission agency data
into Bayesian network models improve real-time predictions of stream flow and
surface/groundwater mixing ratios? The work will be focus on the Santa Fe River
in North Florida. This river crosses the boundary of the confined and unconfined
karstic Floridan Aquifer, resulting in two chemically well-characterized source
water end-members: surface runoff and groundwater. These end members mix in
dynamic proportions depending on river discharge. The end members should be able
to be discriminated using in situ continuous sensors, primarily for specific
conductivity, and high resolution auto-sampling to allow complimentary
measurements of color, pH, nitrate, phosphate, and major ion
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will impact the
scientific community by contributing to the development of distributed
hydrologic sensing capabilities, which is the basis of the WATERS test-bed
sites. High resolution sampling techniques and modeling of hydrologic and
hydrogeologic dynamics will be tested across sites by interactions with the
Baltimore WATERS test-bed site. The sampling will be co-located with existing
flow infrastructure (e.g., USGS gaging stations) and results will be combined
with agency data to discern where river water comes from, how long it took to
get there, and what it carries. This information will be provided to cognizant
water management agencies and stakeholder groups to better inform management and
policy decisions. The data will be organized in the CUAHSI hydrologic
information system for data storage and retrieval, concatenation with mission
agency data, and to provide web-based access to archival data. The project will
support on-going graduate and undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;