* 0853379
* Collaborative Research:  Rationale Design of Enhanced Catalytic Nanomotors
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Jonathan Posner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2012
* USD 200,000.00

0853379/0853375&lt;br/&gt;Posner, J./Wang, J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic
nanoscale motors represent a major step towards the development of practical
nanomachines. Despite impressive progress, manmade nanomachines lack the
efficiency and versatility of their biological counterparts. Extending the scope
of synthetic nanomotors to diverse and realistic conditions requires deep
understanding of their fundamental physical mechanisms. This proposed
collaborative research aims at gaining such understanding of the underlying
physical mechanisms of catalytic nanowire motors. The intellectual merit of the
proposed work is to extend the fundamental understanding of the nanomotors
propulsion, through a parallel experimental and theoretical approach, to guide
the rationale design of powerful and versatile manmade nanomachines that can
perform demanding tasks. The three main aims of the proposed work are: (1)
understand physical mechanisms that govern the motion and performance of
nanomotors using novel experiments and theoretical models (2) Identify and
optimize nanowire properties (catalysts composition and morphology, wire shape,
and surface coatings) that yield order of magnitude faster and more powerful
nanomotors. (3) Fabricate nanomotors capable of operating in a wide range of
environments (pH, ionic strength) and fuels (e.g. glucose, ethanol), enabling
ranging operation in a variety of applications and demanding tasks such as
directed drug delivery, directed nanoscale self-assembly, chemotactic
environmental remediation, or microchip bioassays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is transformative in that the improved understanding of the fundamental
catalytic nanomotor physics will lead to powerful motors that are stable over
long periods for performing complex tasks in a wide variety of environments and
applications. To ensure success of the interdisciplinary research program, the
team is comprised of two co-PIs with complementary experience. The proposed
effort requires expertise in catalysis and electrochemistry (Wang), nanowire
fabrication (Wang), low Reynolds number hydrodynamics (Posner), microscale
diagnostics (Posner), electrokinetics and electrostatics (Posner). The PIs'
extensive preliminary data, broad and complementary experience and past
collaboration lay the groundwork for the success of the proposed activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will have broader impacts by
integrating research with training, education, mentoring, and social outcomes.
Particular emphasis will be given to the involvement of Hispanic students at the
undergraduate and graduate research levels. They leverage the uniqueness of
their locations by expanding undergraduate research opportunities for Hispanic
students which have relatively high enrollment at ASU and UCSD, but low
representation in engineering nationwide. This grant will provide distinctive
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students to appreciate and
participate in how their research on nanotechnology may transform society and to
examine science and technology policy. In particular, they will develop a
nanomachines course for a emerging nanotechnology curriculum in a new UCSD
department of Nanoengineering. In addition, at ASU they aim to increase
engineering graduate students' awareness of the societal and ethical
implications of nanoscience and technology. In collaboration with faculty in the
NSF Center for Nanotechnology in Society they will (1) develop a cross-listed,
co-taught graduate level course entitled Societal and Ethical Implications of
Scientific Research focusing on nanotechnologies; and (2) ASU and UCSD students
will participate in a two week workshop in Washington, DC entitled "Science
Outside the Lab: A Policy Dis-Orientation" which examines scientific policy and
culture.