* 0853408
* IRES: US-Ecuador-Peru-International:  Undergraduate Rainforest Expedition and Laboratory
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Scott Strobel, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2013
* USD 115,065.00

Abstract for Proposal: OISE-0853408 &lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Strobel, Scott;
Yale University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary of Proposal: This International
Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project, funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), will support
undergraduates in an intensive training program that includes an annual field
expedition to the upper Amazonian rainforest followed by an extensive summer
research experience. The goals of the research experience include culturing,
characterizing and assessing the biological activity of each endophyte. The
students will be prepared for this experience by enrolling in a full semester
course taught at Yale University. The first half of the course prepares students
for the expedition, and the second half prepares them for the subsequent
laboratory work. The curriculum includes developing an experimental plan in
collaboration with other faculty on campus. During the summer research
laboratory, the students will analyze the microbial and chemical diversity of
endophytes isolated from tropical plants collected during the expedition. The
students will work collaboratively in the field with students and faculty from
Catholic University (PUCE) in Quito Ecuador and will experience a complex
ecosystem, culture novel microorganisms and characterize a natural product for
its biological activity. Each student's project will be unique, original, and
open-ended. Students will become experts on the organism they culture, isolate,
characterize, and potentially name. In addition NSF?s support will be to
increase participation by students from underrepresented minority groups and by
women.&lt;br/&gt;