* 0853672
* Capstone Mechanical Engineering Senior Design Program at SUNY Stony Brook -- Aiding Children with Disabilities through Total Design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Qiaode Jeffrey Ge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 127,079.00

PI: Zhou, Yu; Ge, Qiaode Jeffrey; Muratori, Lisa M.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0853672&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to provide
undergraduate mechanical engineering students at the State University of New
York at Stony Brook (SUNYSB) with significant senior design experience to
develop assistive devices to aid people with disabilities. The proposed senior
design program builds on our existing NSF funded program, and has a new emphasis
on applying mechatronics technology to assistive devices. The proposal seeks
funding for 8-10 senior design projects per year for a period of five years. Our
students will work in teams to custom design assistive devices for disabled
children at the Premm Learning Center, New York, following the methodology of
Total Design. They will interact with those disabled children and their mentors,
and will be advised by faculty members in Mechanical Engineering and Physical
Therapy. Students are highly encouraged to file patent applications for their
innovative designs, and the best patentable projects will be awarded with free
filing of their patent applications by the Scully, Scott, Murphy &amp; Presser
PC law firm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed project
focuses on the undergraduate engineering design education. The two-semester
senior design course provides an integrative opportunity for students to
practice the knowledge and skills that they have developed in their four-year
undergraduate training through the significant design experience of assistive
devices. Our students will design assistive devices to aid disabled children at
the Premm Learning Center by following the Total Design methodology and with an
emphasis on applying mechatronics technology. Mechatronics is a combination of
mechanics, electronics and computing, and crosses multiple engineering
disciplines. It helps to generate more robust, intelligent and adaptive
assistive devices. Moreover, designing mechatronic devices stimulates students
to learn multiple skills. Total Design defines a systematic guideline for the
design activity. It guides students through market analysis, product design
specification, conceptual design, detail design and manufacture, and helps them
conduct the design activity efficiently. Our work will contribute to the
knowledge base of assistive technology by providing a series of innovative
designs and techniques. The proposed program will also help to prepare our
students to be competent in their engineering careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Besides delivering custom designed
assistive devices to aid disabled people, this program will spark general
interests in assistive technology, encourage the widest participation among
students, and train future assistive technology engineers. We will share our
techniques with the societies of engineering education and assistive technology
through various publications and conferences. Students will present their works
at the university Undergraduate Research and Creative Activities event and the
New York State Assembly Disability Awareness Day event. The top design projects
will be picked for the College of Engineering &amp; Applied Sciences (CEAS)
senior design competition and the International Student Capstone Design Fair.
Students will also be encouraged to participate in the design competitions
organized by professional societies such as ASME. A website will be dedicated to
present our student projects and related events. Publicizing our program will
help to improve the public awareness of our program and the significance of
assistive technology, and inspire the whole society to care disabled people.
Moreover, this program will be introduced to local high school students through
the presentations at the university Open House and Engineering Day events.
Motivated high school students will have the chance to participate in the design
of assistive devices through the CEAS Summer Research Institute. We also plan to
initiate an assistive device design competition among the local high school
system. This university-high school liaison will spark high school students'
interests in assistive technology and attract them to set their career goals in
engineering. Moreover, we will reach out to explore collaborations with various
agencies serving disabled people. Our work will provide seed techniques leading
to more industrial investment and new industrial initiatives in assistive
technology.