* 0853719
* US-Chile IRES:  Intraspecific variation in the social behavior of Chilean rodents - Ecology, mechanism, and fitness
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Loren Hayes, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,985.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project, funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5),
studies the potential links between ecological variation, endocrine and
neurobiological mechanisms, and reproductive consequences of social group
living. Graduate and undergraduate students from the University of Louisiana at
Monroe will collaborate with researchers from the Pontificia Universidad
Catolica de Chile, the Universidad Austral de Chile, and the Universidad de
Chile to study two widely distributed and social rodents (degus and corurus) in
their native habitats in Chile. Comparisons of ecological factors (such as the
availability of food), social behaviors (including group-living), and
reproductive success will be made in field sites characterized by different
ecological conditions. In addition, the researchers will collect samples for
hormonal and neurobiological analyses to determine if ecological variation and
sociality are linked to the expression of these systems. The results of this
study could lead to the development of a novel evolutionary-mechanistic model
for animal sociality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major emphasis of this project is
to engage U.S. students in meaningful projects with international students and
faculty. Students will work closely with researchers with different scientific
backgrounds and will learn field and laboratory techniques that will enhance
their research skills. Altogether, these experiences will increase the
networking and international competitiveness of the student participants. By
intentionally creating opportunities for first-generation, minority, and female
students, the research program will have broad impacts on biology education and
research in northeast Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;