* 0853396
* Collaborative Research: Fuel Droplet Disruption under Locally Supersonic Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Gretar Tryggvason, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853817/0853396&lt;br/&gt;Hermanson/Tryggvas
on&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This preliminary experimental and computational research
program will study the physical mechanisms of disruption and vaporization of
liquid droplets in supersonic flow. These mechanisms include the deformation of
the droplet due to aerodynamic forces, the inertial instability associated with
droplet acceleration, and shear instability due to the high-speed flow across
the droplet surface. An additional instability can result from the rapid
evaporation that can result from the droplet fluid becoming superheated due to
the low static pressure in the test section. The action of these mechanisms will
be systematically studied by varying both the flow and thermal boundary
conditions, including the Mach number relative to the droplet and the liquid
composition. The possible existence of optimum combinations of parameters, such
as droplet size, vapor pressure, and compressible free-stream conditions for the
most rapid droplet disruption and vaporization will be explored. The original
and potentially transformative aspects of this research stem from the
combination of locally supersonic conditions with potential liquid superheating,
which explores a practically important regime of droplet disruption that has not
been examined in depth or in a systematic fashion to date. Droplets will be
injected into supersonic flow using small-scale supersonic wind tunnels at the
University of Washington (UW). A droplet-on-demand generator will produce
monodisperse droplets sufficiently small that the droplets will not disrupt too
quickly, but sufficiently large so that the droplets will "lag" the supersonic
airflow to create compressible conditions relative to the droplet. Different
test section geometries will produce droplets with both subsonic and supersonic
Mach numbers relative to the surrounding flow. Diagnostic techniques will
include planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF), spark schlieren/shadowgraph
imaging, double-pulsed laser velocity measurement, and direct photography. These
techniques will provide detailed knowledge of the droplet
deformation/disruption, the dispersion of the expelled vapor, the droplet
acceleration, the compressible flow field near the droplet, and the features of
the interfacial instabilities. The computational modeling at Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI) will employ a finite volume/front-tracking method
capable of simulating droplet deformation and explosive evaporation under
compressible flow conditions. The simulations will be conducted synergistically
with the experiments, using flow information from the experiments to guide the
development and implementation of the numerical modeling. In turn, the numerical
simulations will serve both to guide the conduct of the experiments as well as
to help interpret the experimental results by providing key information not
readily accessible by the experiments, such as the pressure variation in the
vicinity of the droplets and the rate of vaporization. This research topic has
applications to a number of practically important problems involving the
injection of liquids in high-speed flows, including supersonic combustion
ramjets (scramjets), pulsed detonation engines, re-entry body cooling, and
surface erosion in high-speed flows. Such applications are impacted critically
by the nature of droplet disruption and vaporization mechanisms of the liquid
fuel droplets to be studied. This research will also directly impact education.
The planar laser induced fluorescence and pulsed-laser droplet/particle velocity
measurement techniques introduced into the undergraduate curriculum through
existing experimental methods courses at the UW. Similarly, the numerical work
will lead to examples that will be utilized as classroom examples at WPI.
Undergraduate students will also participate directly in carrying out the
research. The graduate students will actively participate in the undergraduate
component of the program by serving, under faculty supervision, in the role of
"grant monitor" for the undergraduate component of the research. Lastly, the co-
PIs will recruit qualified and interested members of under-represented groups to
conduct research at the University of Washington and at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute.