* 0853877
* Documentation of Two Endangered Munda Languages of India: Turi [trd] and Remo [bfw]
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* David Harrison, Living Tongues Institute for Endangered Languages
* Standard Grant
* Keren Rice
* 05/31/2011
* USD 64,193.00

This project provides for one year of field documentation of two Munda languages
spoken in Orissa State, India, by a combined population of fewer than 3,000
people. The new field recordings will complement a collection of legacy
materials already held by the PI. They will also be entered into an existing
comparative lexical database of Munda. These data will support a variety of
research goals such as the reconstruction of proto-Munda, typological studies in
various domains, (e.g., theoretical models of incorporation and complex
predicates). The goals are both micro-level (careful transcription and data-
driven analysis of recorded speech data) and macro-level (large typological
generalizations which may shed light on the evolution of the Austroasiatic
language family and theories of morphosyntax).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will raise awareness of these languages and the communities that speak them. The
project will be hosted by the Department of Tribal and Regional Languages,
Ranchi University, India It will bring foreign linguists and Indian scholars
together to build capacity through training, enhancing the prestige of these
endangered languages, and having a positive effect on language revitalization
efforts, should the community choose to pursue these. The project contributes to
both local institutions and the native communities in the form of resources,
archiving, and knowledge transfer. &lt;br/&gt;