* 0853117
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Disentangling the Factors Mediating Marine Trophic Cascades Over a Latitudinal Gradient in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Elizabeth Madin, Madin                   Elizabeth      P
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2013
* USD 258,906.00

0853117 Madin

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Elizabeth
M. P. Madin to work with Dr. David Booth at the University of Technology, Sydney
and Dr. Philip Munday at James Cook University in Australia.

It has long been noted that trophic cascades, where removal of top predators
alternately drives increases and decreases in abundances of lower trophic
levels, are more commonly observed in temperate than tropical marine systems.
Many factors have been hypothesized to affect the occurrence and magnitude of
cascades, but only a subset likely vary over latitudinal gradients. This project
quantitatively explores this issue by addressing the question: What factors are
responsible for the apparent disparity in trophic cascade occurrence and
magnitude in temperate versus tropical ocean ecosystems? As part of this project
the first standardized, comparable data is being collected for these mediating
factors over a large-scale gradient of different ecosystem types at seven
locations along the east coast of Australia to determine which, if any, may be
responsible for the latitudinal patterns observed globally. From this
information, a predictive model of factors mediating marine trophic cascades is
being developed that should provide valuable guidance towards preventing human-
induced cascades. Australia?s east coast offers an unparalleled opportunity to
explore latitudinal gradients in ecosystem function. The local project
collaborators and their laboratories have critical expertise in the ecology of
tropical and temperate marine systems, respectively. Dr. David Booth?s lab
focuses largely on the temperate systems of southeastern Australia and he has a
highly interactive lab group working on similarly large-scale ecological
questions. Dr. Philip Munday?s research focuses heavily on fish-habitat
associations, the key ecological interaction in marine trophic cascades, and
climate change effects on these associations. Importantly, unlike most marine
ecologists, both Drs. Booth and Munday have experience in the role of prey
behavior in mediating interspecific interactions, a key component of this study.

This research will greatly increase our understanding of the system
characteristics mediating top-down effects in marine ecosystems. This knowledge
is critical because in order to understand how marine ecosystems are likely to
change in the future we must first understand the factors that regulate them.
The projected continued increase in the global demand for seafood means that
fisheries stocks will likely exhibit increasingly unstable population dynamics
leading to increased likelihood of trophic cascades.