* 0853639
* Collaborative Research: Towards a General Design Approach to Arrest Non-Native Aggregation of Multi-Domain Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Anne Robinson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2013
* USD 470,882.00

0853639&lt;br/&gt;Roberts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - Non-native
aggregation is a ubiquitous hurdle to successful over-expression and
purification of recombinant proteins throughout the biotechnology and
biopharmaceutical industries. This is particularly the case for multi-domain
proteins, such as natural and designed antibodies, as well as for other
predominantly-beta proteins. Fundamentally, rational design of these more
complex proteins is handicapped by limitations in the mechanistic understanding
of key features of sequence and structure that control aggregation of multi-
domain proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to lay a foundation
both to fill the gaps in fundamental understanding of the mechanism(s) of multi-
domain protein aggregation, and to provide first-generation design rules to
imbue aggregation resistance. Human gamma-D Crystallin (gamma D-Crys) will be
the model multidomain protein, chosen because it possesses a number of desirable
features: (1) it is a single chain, two domain protein; (2) it represents an
important set of all-beta proteins; (3) it has established aggregation and
folding behavior; (4) it has available, aggregation-prone mutants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - The proposed research will result in an
improved mechanistic understanding of aggregation and rational design of
aggregation resistance for multi-domain, all-beta Greek-key proteins, of which a
number of antibody constructs are a subclass of widespread biological and
biotechnological interest. The research will also provide a framework for the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the PIs'
laboratories, with a specific focus on cutting-edge experimental and modeling
tools. As in the past, the PIs will involve students drawn from underrepresented
groups in science and engineering. Finally, a set of examples and problems will
be developed to incorporate aspects of this research into the undergraduate
curricula, including computational and modeling activities. This module will be
disseminated to other faculty via a web-based repository of educational
materials developed at San Jose State University.