* 0853415
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Microscopic Role of Magnetism in High Temperature Superconductivity
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Jerald Kavich, Kavich                  Jerald         J
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 152,775.00

0853415 Kavich

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jerald J.
Kavich to work with Dr. Pietro Gambardella at the Institut Catala de
Nanotechnologia in Spain.

This project examines the local electronic and magnetic structure of
substitutional magnetic impurities in high-temperature superconducting
materials. Magnetism plays a non-trivial, but elusive role in unconventional
superconductivity. Previous impurity studies have concentrated on the
macroscopic properties of the superconductors, leaving the impurities themselves
an unexplored area and permitting their electronic structure and symmetries to
be oversimplified in theoretical models. To address these issues, focus is being
directed toward three key aspects related to a realistic description of the
impurity, including determination of the electronic ground state configuration,
spatial dependence of orbital occupancies, and anisotropy of the magnetic order
in all major phases exhibited by high-temperature superconducting materials,
i.e. the superconducting phase, the pseudo-gap phase, and the normal state. The
investigation of these advanced materials is being accomplished using variable
polarization soft x-ray spectroscopy, requiring state-of-the-art, ultra-bright
synchrotron facilities. Temperature and field dependent studies are being
conducted with both circularly and linearly polarized x-rays to map the
magnitude of the local impurity moment and to determine anisotropies in the
orbital occupancies and magnetism. In combination with experimental methods,
advanced calculations using multi-configurational multiplet techniques, are
being carried out to obtain a quantitative analysis of experimental data
allowing for correlations between micro- and macroscopic properties of high-
temperature superconductors and the impurity. The spectroscopic study of Mn, Fe,
Co, and Ni substitutional impurities in materials such as Bi2Sr2Ca1Cu2O8 is
expected to provide fundamental insight into their valence state and related
local moment, settling a long standing debate about the degree of hybridization
of the impurity states, and screening or coupling of their moment with the
environment. Also, for the first time, the behavior of the spin and orbital
impurity magnetization will be separately monitored across the superconducting
transition temperature of a doped superconductor, illuminating magnetic effects
on electron paring processes. Finally, by measuring the sample in different
fields, we plan to determine the impurity-selective magnetization curves. These
are normally masked below the transition temperature in superconductors by the
large diamagnetic signal measured in standard magnetometry experiments.

This proposal promises not only to advance superconductor physics, but also to
increase the fundamental knowledge of isolated magnetic atoms in a strongly
correlated environment. The development and incorporation of superconducting
materials into new and existing technologies is expected to have a profound
impact on global environmental, industrial, and economic factors. The benefits
are extensive, ranging from the improved reliability of the lossless
transportation and storage of electrical energy, to aspirations of quantum
computing with superconducting qubits. The fundamental research in this proposal
is consistent with core aspects of long-term scientific research goals in the
U.S.