* 0853098
* International  Research Fellowship Program:  Energetics of Coral Calcification:  Effects of Fixed Carbon
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Michael Holcomb, Holcomb                 Michael
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 164,900.00

0853098 Holcomb

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Michael
Holcomb to work with Dr. Denis Allemand at the Centre Scientifique de Monaco in
Monaco.

Coral reefs represent one of the most diverse ecosystems on earth. Reefs are
home to numerous species and serve as an important resource for humans as well.
In many tropical regions, reefs provide a source of food, revenue from tourism,
and erosion protection for coastal regions. Coral reefs are built from the
skeletons of corals. Corals are animals which often host algae within their
tissue. The algae within the coral help the coral to grow faster by utilizing
energy from the sun to carry out photosynthesis. Some of the products of
photosynthesis, such as sugars, are then given to the coral thus providing an
energy source for the coral. The work being done by Michael Holcomb and
colleagues at the Centre Scientifique de Monaco focuses on understanding what
role the products of photosynthesis play in tropical corals and how
photosynthesis is linked to faster skeleton formation. These researchers are
determining what types of sugars are provided to the coral by the algae and how
different sugars affect skeleton formation and coral metabolism. If they find
the right combination of photosynthetic products to duplicate the effect of the
algae, it may then be possible provide these compounds to corals which have lost
their algae and help improve coral survival. This is particularly important as
ocean temperatures rise, leading to more frequent and severe coral bleaching
(the loss of algae from the coral) events. Once bleached, a coral tends to
either die, or reacquire algae. If the period of time which a coral can live
without algae can be extended, it may increase the chances of the coral
reacquiring algae and ultimately surviving bleaching events.

