* 0853350
* Thermal Characterization of Nanoengineered Chalcogenide Materials for Phase-Change Memory
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Kenneth Goodson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2012
* USD 325,000.00

0853350&lt;br/&gt;Goodson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chalcogenide Phase Change (PC) materials are of
interest due to their widespread application in high density PC optical
recording and random access memory (PCRAM) devices. The operation of these
devices involves a complex interaction of temperature and electrical potential
distributions, which are strongly coupled to the PC crystallization kinetics.
This research will substantially improve the depth of understanding of nanoscale
heat (and charge) transport in PC nanoengineered materials. The project includes
experimental measurements of the crystallization kinetics parameters and
transport properties such as thermal conductivity, electrical resistivity,
Seebeck coefficient, melting point, heat capacity, and latent heat. The
experimental structures will be integrated into a novel MicroThermal Stage that
is capable of real time monitoring of the full cycle crystallization process
using electrical resistance and optical reflectivity measurements and equipped
with provisions for conventional, or in situ Transmission Electron Microscopy
(TEM) studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Answers are sought to
questions such as but not limited to: How are the transport properties and
crystallization parameters affected over millions of full cycle crystallization
processes? Is it possible to increase the Seebeck coefficient without adversely
affecting the electrical conductivity? How are the melting temperature and
latent heat affected by the PC nanoparticle size distribution? Novel micro-
instruments will enable study of ultrafast (over 10 million K/s) crystallization
kinetics processes. A nanocalorimeter will allow investigation of melting
temperatures and latent heats of PC materials with a resolution in excess of 1
nJ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research increases understanding
of the origins of the threshold switching, drift in threshold voltage and reset
resistance, and failure mechanisms in PCRAMs devices. Hence, the research may
lead to identification of nanoengineered PC materials with substantially
enhanced thermoelectric properties. In addition to involving undergraduate and
graduate student researchers, heat transfer visualization tools previously
limited to use in advanced laboratories, will be brought to the realm of the
undergraduate class. The existing, mainly theoretical heat transfer (HT) course
will be converted to a hands-on interactive experience. HT demonstration
educational videos that illustrate the basic concepts of heat transfer will be
prepared, with an emphasis on heat transfer visualization. They will be posted
on YouTube, and we will solicit feedback from viewers. Subsequently, we will
improve the early YouTube postings by compiling the most relevant contents in
the form of 4 lectures video series, 15 minutes each, working with the producers
of the award winning Silicon Run series.