* 0853723
* Near-field thermal radiative transfer between spherical objects
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Arvind Narayanaswamy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2012
* USD 279,223.00

0853723&lt;br/&gt;Narayanaswamy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiative energy transfer
between closely spaced objects (spacing much smaller than the nominal wavelength
of thermal radiation, about 10 microns at 300 K) can exceed the predictions of
Planck's theory of blackbody radiation due to tunneling of electromagnetic waves
from one object to another. Thermal radiative transfer is due to the transport
of energy via electromagnetic waves generated by the temperature induced
fluctuations of electric charges. The relation between the temperature and the
fluctuations of electric charges is given by the fluctuation dissipation
theorem. The propagation of the resultant electric and magnetic fields is
determined by the dyadic Green's function of the vector Helmholtz equation.
Thus, radiative transfer between two objects, including near field effects, can
be determined using the fluctuation dissipation theorem and the dyadic Green's
function. The fluctuations of the electromagnetic field also give rise to the
phenomenon of dispersion forces between objects, such as van der Waals or
Casimir forces. While dispersion forces as well as near field radiation transfer
phenomena have similar origins, and dispersion forces are relatively well
understood, the same cannot be said of near field radiative transfer, where
experimental research has not kept pace with theoretical progress. To bridge the
gap between experimental and theoretical progress, this project aims to
theoretically and experimentally investigate near field effects on thermal
radiative transfer in two relevant geometries, namely 1) between two spheres,
and 2) between a sphere and a flat surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The scarcity of reliable experimental data involving near field radiative
transfer is due to the difficulty of performing experiments in the two
configurations which have been analyzed theoretically; between two parallel
surfaces and between a flat surface and a sphere that is small enough that it
can be approximated as a point dipole. The theoretical work in this research
will focus on determining near field radiative transfer between two
microspheres, without making the assumption that the spheres are point dipoles.
In addition to yielding predictions associated with geometries that can be
considered experimentally, this will pave the way for proposing an asymptotic
theory for near field radiative transfer between a sphere and a flat surface. So
far, this has not been possible with out making ad hoc assumptions.
Complementing the theoretical work, we propose a novel and ultrasensitive
technique of measuring heat transfer between a sphere and a flat surface, and
between two spheres using a bimaterial cantilever as a temperature sensor.
Similar configurations are commonly used in force spectroscopy, but they have
never been used for the measurement of near field radiative transfer. These
configurations will, for the first time, allow for a quantitative comparison
between experimental and theoretical results. Hence, this research will bring
together both theory and experiment in near field radiative transfer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Direct conversion of waste heat into
useful electricity is possible by thermophotovoltaic energy conversion, where
photons from a thermal source are converted to electron hole pairs in a
photovoltaic cell. Understanding nanoscale effects on thermal radiation is
important for increasing the power density and efficiency of thermophotovoltaic
conversion. Also, measurement of near field radiative transfer has applications
for another related area; measurement of dispersion forces. This project
presents an opportunity to introduce undergraduate and K12 students, especially
underrepresented minorities and women, to cutting edge research through multiple
avenues within Columbia University, such as Summer REU programs through Columbia
MRSEC and NSEC, K12 programs through Columbia University Center for Technology,
Innovation, and Community Engagement (CTICE) and the Double Discovery Center.
The goal for the outreach effort is to ensure that the K12 and summer REU
students gain from involvement with this project an appreciation and passion for
research in engineering and mathematical and physical sciences. The experiments
will provide undergraduate students who are acquainted with heat transfer an
opportunity to not only investigate some of the novel features of nanoscale
thermal transport, but also to engage in numerical simulations necessary to
explain some of the experimental results.