* 0853021
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Probabilistic Models for Reasoning in Natural Language Dialog
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Luke Zettlemoyer, Zettlemoyer             Luke
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 09/30/2011
* USD 153,900.00

0853021 Zettlemoyer

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Luke
Zettlemoyer to work with Dr. Mark Steedman at the University of Edinburgh in the
UK.

The PI is developing probabilistic models for pragmatic reasoning, the type of
context-dependent reasoning that is required for automated systems to
participate in natural language conversations. They are investigating whether
these new methods will improve performance when used in dialog systems. The
focus is on two specific questions. (1) Can we develop methods for learning to
recover the context-dependent meanings of a sequence of natural language
statements? For each sentence, we want to be able to automatically construct a
rich, logical representation of its underlying meaning. In general, later
statements can elaborate on, correct, or refer to parts of previous statements,
leading to a challenging context-dependent reasoning problem. (2) Can we use
probabilistic, game-theoretic models of multi-agent interaction to build
effective dialog systems? Such an approach will explicitly model dialog
participants jointly interacting in an uncertain world where each conversant has
independent beliefs and desires that influence the conversational flow.

Building automated systems that participate effectively in natural language
conversations is one of the classic goals of research in artificial
intelligence. Such dialog systems have the potential to revolutionize the way we
interact with computers. Although probabilistic techniques have been used
successfully in a wide range of natural language processing problems,
researchers have only recently started to develop them for modeling
conversation. The methods we are developing should enable deployed systems to
participate in significantly more complex conversations.

