* 0853089
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Vulnerability and Resilience of Sponge Populations and their Bacterial Symbionts to Climate Change and Anthropogenic Disturbances
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Patrick Erwin, Erwin                   Patrick        M
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,812.00

0853089 Erwin

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Patrick
M. Erwin to work with Dr. Xavier Turon at the Centre of Advanced Studies of
Blanes and at the Spanish Research Council in Blanes, Spain.

The short-term vulnerability and long-term resilience of marine organisms to
anthropogenic stressors will dictate the future of aquatic ecosystems and will,
in turn, have a large impact on humankind's interactions with the sea. The
negative consequences of human activities affect nearly all marine organisms;
however, sessile, filter-feeding invertebrates inhabiting coastal environments
are especially susceptible, due to adult immobility, concentrated exposure to
waterborne pollutants and proximity to dense human populations. Sponges are
ancient, filter-feeding organisms that thrive in a variety of marine
environments and are essential to the healthy functioning of marine ecosystems.
Sponge-microbial associations represent unique symbioses between a basal and
primitive multi-cellular animal group and ancient bacterial lineages that appear
to have co-evolved and endured a wide range of environmental conditions. Changes
in the composition of microbial symbionts are an early signal of the disruption
of the relationships within the sponge holobiont, with the loss of beneficial
bacteria and proliferation of infectious and parasitic microbes. The critical
importance of associated microbial communities to host sponge health offers an
ideal system to study the impact of natural and anthropogenic stressors on host-
symbiont stability and the consequences of disrupting bacterial symbiont
communities on host sponge fitness. Assessing the vulnerability and resilience
of individual organisms and entire ecosystems to increasing pollution and
climate shifts involves monitoring the effects of both lethal and sub-lethal
levels. The effects of lethal pollution are studied at the community and species
level, documenting shifts in community composition and tracking bioindicator
species. These responses are ultimate and are evidenced only after prolonged
exposure. In contrast, sub-lethal responses to pollution and climate change are
studied at the cellular and molecular level because small doses of pollutants or
temperature changes may affect the physiological functions and behavior of
organisms without killing them. Thus, changes at the molecular level occur
before those that can be detected by classical monitoring and bioassays so that
molecular biomarkers can be considered as early warning systems for sub-lethal
effects of contamination and stress. The current study is a multi-scale research
project examining the ecological (growth and survival), physiological (host-
symbiont interactions) and cellular (gene expression) responses of Mediterranean
sponges and their symbiotic microflora to natural and anthropogenic stressors.
The field component of the study involves monitoring undisturbed and
experimentally shaded sponges (Ircinia fasciculata and I. variabilis) over 1.5
years to assess seasonal variability in gene expression of the hsp70 stress
protein, symbiont photosynthetic activity and symbiont diversity and to
determine the role of autotrophic nutrition from symbionts in host sponge growth
and stress status. The laboratory component of the study involves exposing the
same sponge species to heavy metals, pesticides and increased seawater
temperatures under controlled aquaria conditions to assess the potential effects
of pollutants and climate change on the community structure of microbial
symbionts and the cellular stress responses of host sponges. In the face of
increasing human populations and unprecedented environmental conditions
resulting from global climate change, addressing the vulnerability and
resilience of organisms to new disturbance regimes is critical to the
preservation of current ecosystems and the forecasting of future anthropogenic
impacts on natural systems.