* 0853996
* Dual growth factor delivery to achieve therapeutic neovascularization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Laura Suggs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 05/31/2012
* USD 299,993.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853996&lt;br/&gt;Suggs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the PI is to make a significant contribution in cardiovascular tissue
engineering though research, education, and the transformation of stem cell
engineering. In this context, stem cell engineering includes the design of cell
and drug delivery constructs for regenerative medicine and the elucidation of
fundamental scientific principles underlying cell-mediated repair. The objective
of this proposal is to create a cell-free, dual growth factor delivery system to
recruit endogenous progenitors and promote their long-term survival as well as
to test the efficacy of this combination strategy in promoting
neovascularization and improving cardiac function. The success of this proposal
would enable the PI to establish a program in the area of cardiac engineering
with a particular focus on designing cell and drug delivery systems. Cardiac
stem cell therapy has demonstrated limited efficacy in clinical trials, but will
only become a reality through robust cell engineering processes. This approach
has the potential to transform stem cell therapy through harnessing the body's
own stem cells. Furthermore, the PI's engineering approach will be used as a
platform around which a series of educational and outreach goals will be
met.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Progress in engineering novel
techniques for scaffold synthesis and processing may allow for entry into the
new phase of cardiac therapy. Natural and synthetic matrices have shown promise
as tools to deliver growth factors and cells; however, to date none of these
constructs have exhibited the necessary temporal and spatial control. The
combination of delivering multiple growth factors to provide mobilization and
survival of resident stem cells in a precisely organized presentation provides a
realistic solution to the challenge of cardiac therapy. The PI will investigate
whether the system can deliver multiple growth factors with controlled release
kinetics. The efficacy of a combination strategy (synergistic stem cell
recruitment and sustained cell viability) will be evaluated, and the underlying
mechanisms will be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The promise
of cardiac regeneration can only be realized through solutions engineered on a
molecular and cellular level. It is a goal of the current project to serve two
functions: (1) to design a unique delivery platform from which stem cell
organization can be controlled and (2) to elucidate fundamental mechanisms
underlying cell-mediated cardiac repair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
and outreach goals are tightly linked via the ideological concept of engineering
design. As a junior faculty, the PI has conceived of and implemented the entire
BME senior design sequence at UT Austin. She has a strong and continuing passion
for design and its instruction and proposes that design should be integrated at
all educational levels. The outreach activities described in this proposal
extend from pre-college through the level of the undergraduate student. Specific
tools will be developed including teaching modules, online course resources, as
well as instructional tools for use by existing pre-college outreach programs.