* 0853759
* Understanding the Interactions between Carbon Nanotubes and Cellular Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthias Nollert, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 380,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853759&lt;br/&gt;Striolo
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is now accepted as one of the greatest
areas for technological innovation and economical advancement. Its worldwide
societal impact has been quantified in 2 million workers who will produce
nanotechnology-based products worth $1 trillion per year by 2015. Some of these
products are already entering our everyday life. This pervasive influence is
however raising some concerns, primarily because the health and safety effects
of nanomaterials have not been satisfactorily assessed. The House of
Representatives responded to these concerns, and in June passed the 'National
Nanotechnology Initiative Amendments Act of 2008', with the intent of refocusing
nanotechnology research on assessing environmental, health, and safety (EHS)
aspects of nanomaterials. This proposal stems as a response to this request. At
the School of Chemical, Biological and Materials Engineering of the University
of Oklahoma a large group of researchers is currently investigating possible
applications of carbon nanotubes, the material that, more than any other, gave
impulse to the nanotechnological revolution. Thus this project focuses on carbon
nanotubes, with the goal of assessing possible interactions between carbon
nanotubes and cellular membranes. The researchers propose to investigate through
a synergistic theoretical (by molecular dynamics simulations) and experimental
approach the permeation of phospholipid membranes by pristine and functionalized
carbon nanotubes. They will investigate fundamental phenomena such as the
adsorption of nanotubes on the membrane surface. They will estimate the role of
adsorption in the membrane penetration mechanism and investigate how to prevent
it. At the same time, they will study potential forms of utilizing the
adsorption of nanotubes for drug delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful
completion of the present project will allow an understanding of why carbon
nanotubes can, in some cases, penetrate very effectively cellular membranes, and
therefore learn how to employ this novel material in a number of biomedical
applications including gene therapy, while preventing side effects. In addition,
because their experiments require stable carbon nanotubes in aqueous media, they
will contribute to better understand and quantify the effect of functional
groups on carbon nanotubes aggregation. This remains one of the primary hurdles
that prevent the wide applicability of carbon nanotubes in a number of
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The State of Oklahoma, through the Oklahoma
Nanotechnology Initiative, is heavily investing in nanotechnology by supporting
local companies and by conducting extensive education among the broad public.
Taking advantage of this widespread awareness, the present project will attract
local high school students to STEM careers. They have established connections
with Norman High School where they will deliver presentations. They have also
established connections with local colleges (Cameron University and Northeastern
State University) that serve large Native American student populations, one of
the most underrepresented minority groups in STEM disciplines. They will offer
summer internship programs to students from those colleges.