* 0853316
* Collaborative Research:  Development of Innovative, Replaceable Coupling Beam Systems for Damage Mitigation in Coupled Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Patrick Fortney, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 10/31/2009
* USD 25,596.00

Coupled walls (CWs) are complex yet attractive lateral force resisting systems
that combine extraordinary lateral stiffness with architectural practicality.
Despite being an increasingly common system for high rise structures, research
on coupled walls is lagging significantly behind that on other structural
systems, and the relatively scant body of knowledge for coupled walls cannot
adequately address their complex behavior. This research will involve a multi-
institutional group of researchers, educators, and practitioners who will
synergistically collaborate to build on new and promising innovations for
formulating the next generation of earthquake resistant, damage-tolerant
coupling beams. The resulting system will balance lateral stiffness, ductility,
and superior energy dissipation characteristics; will have replaceable energy
dissipating components to reduce the level of damage that is predictable yet
repairable with minimal intrusion; will be more architecturally and structurally
versatile than current systems; and will exhibit the best overall seismic
performance through the use of innovative structural systems designed using
performance-based design (PBD) methodologies incorporating sound performance
objectives. A closely integrated experimental program and model-based
simulations will be used to accomplish these goals. Comprehensive simulations in
conjunction with component and substructure testing of sixteen approximately
3/4-scale specimens will generate the fundamental data for development and
evaluation of a number of innovative details, and will permit in situ assessment
of post-event reparability of coupled walls with innovative coupling beam
systems. Hybrid testing of two additional 3/4-scale substructures, using a
comprehensive analytical engine, will further examine the performance and post-
event reparability of damage-tolerant, replaceable coupling beams subjected to
realistic loading histories and boundary conditions. Moreover, hybrid testing
will allow an in-depth evaluation of higher mode effects, wall pier-coupling
beam interaction, and outrigger action of out-of-plane members as well as other
3-D effects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful project will have immediate and
widespread tangible impact on the earthquake engineering community that
continues to face major challenges with design of cost effective coupled walls
with desirable performance characteristics. The research deliverables will
result in more structurally and economically efficient designs and will mitigate
post-event damage through the use of innovative energy dissipating coupling
beams developed based on PBD methodologies. The multi-faceted dissemination,
education, and outreach plan will allow practitioners, researchers, and policy
makers to expand and implement the research results for adoption of innovative,
damage-tolerant structural systems. The research team has a strong background in
design and analysis of coupled walls, development of innovative systems for
coupled walls, advanced computational and modeling techniques, testing of
complex structural systems, innovative educational and outreach programs, and
advancement of state-of-practice through dissemination of research embodied in
building codes. Innovative energy dissipating systems combined with PBD concepts
will become effective and rational strategies to reduce earthquake impacts on
coupled walls. The experimental data, models, simulation tools, methodologies,
and systems developed and made available as part of this research will produce
new knowledge and advance the state-of-the-art and practice in earthquake
engineering, increasing the competitiveness of U.S. firms in the global economy.
Additionally, the research deliverables will be broadly applicable to a variety
of structural systems, pave the way for additional innovations in damage
tolerant structural systems, and serve as a steppingstone for future projects
and the development of new concepts for high-rise structures. The research will
not only help today's practitioners to more effectively deal with seismic hazard
mitigation for a large class of structures but will also educate the next
generation of engineers who will work in a rapidly changing technological world
where traditional curricula will not be sufficient. This research also impacts
training and development of underrepresented groups through outreach activities
and involvement of students from inner city high schools.