* 0853202
* Studies in Charm Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Edward Thorndike, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 05/31/2013
* USD 1,136,000.00

The Standard Model (SM) has been successful at describing all relevant
experimental phenomena and, thus, has been generally accepted as the fundamental
theory of elementary particle physics. Despite its success, the SM leaves many
unanswered questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These can be classified into two main
categories: one for subjects related to possible new physics at unexplored
energy scales and the other for physics mostly related to Quantum Chromodynamics
(QCD), the fundamental theory of the strong
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SM describes particle physics up to
energies of around 100 GeV (Giga electron Volts). It is expected that new
particles and new interactions will appear at some higher energy scale, say 1
TeV (Tera electron Volts) . Those new particles and new interactions are
presumably needed to solve some inconsistencies within the SM and for the
ultimate unification of all interactions. Such physics issues all belong to the
first category, and will be addressed by experiments at the LHC, which will
start operation in 2008. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second category of unanswered
questions includes those requiring QCD. QCD, as the fundamental theory of the
strong interactions, is well tested at short distances, but at long distances
so-called nonperturbative effects become important and these are not well
understood. These effects are very basic to the field of particle physics and
include e.g., the structure of hadrons (particles with strong interactions) and
the spectrum of hadronic states. Lower energy facilities with high luminosity
can address these questions. Among these, the Beijing Electron Positron Collider
II (BEPCII), which will operate in the 2 GeV to 4.6 GeV energy range, will be an
important contributor. This is because it spans the energy range where both
short-distance and long-distance effects can be probed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BES
III is a general-purpose detector based at the BEPCII e+e- collider in China.
BEPCII has a 100x improvement in its luminosity over its
predecessor,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has also recently been a renewal of
interest in the subjects of hadron spectroscopy and charm quark physics. This
renaissance has been&lt;br/&gt;driven in part by experimental reports of charm
particle mixing and the discovery of additional narrow-width charm states, plus
a plethora of charmonium-like states at the B meson factories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the same time, a computer intensive technique called
lattice Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is now coming of age, and we are entering a
new era when precise, quantitative predictions from lattice QCD can be tested
against experimental measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BES-III experiment
at the BEPCII collider in Beijing, which started operation in summer 2008, will
accumulate huge data samples relating to these topics. Coupled with currently
available results from the (closing) CLEO-c experiment, BES-III will make it
possible to study in detail, and with unprecedented high precision, light hadron
spectroscopy in the decays of charmonium states and charmed mesons. Many high
precision measurements will be accomplished. BES-III analyses are likely to be
essential in deciding if recently observed signs of charm mixing are actually
due to new physics or not. And precision lattice QCD calculations provide the
opportunity to probe the charged Higgs sector in some mass ranges that will be
inaccessible to the LHC.