* 0853746
* Collaborative Research: New medium for DNA separation of microbial communities
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* DeEtta Mills, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 06/30/2012
* USD 94,321.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Chemical and
Biological Separations program supports work by Professors Linda B. McGown and
DeEtta K. Mills at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) and Florida
International University (FIU), respectively, to improve the ability of DNA
profiling methods to reveal the true diversity of microbial communities. The
growing recognition of the importance of complex microbial communities and
biofilms in engineered systems for environmental, industrial, medicinal,
agricultural and municipal applications has created a demand for new approaches
and techniques for the characterization of these complex living systems. The
ability to quantify the number and types of microorganisms within a community
and its response to environmental stressors is fundamental to the understanding
of the structure and function of any natural or engineered ecosystem containing
microbial communities. Because microbial populations operate at spatio-temporal
scales far removed from typical human perception, it has been difficult in the
past to investigate their role in complex system behavior. This has emerged as a
challenge at the forefront of analytical chemistry and bioseparation. One of the
most powerful approaches for profiling microbial communities and understanding
their dynamic interactions and responses to environmental stimuli is through
examination of their DNA profiles, or ?metagenomes?. However, the effectiveness
of community DNA profiling with existing methods is limited because
taxonomically unrelated organisms may produce the same length DNA, resulting in
an underestimation of the true diversity of the community. Same length DNA must
then be sequenced in order to reveal the hidden diversity within the profiles
and obtain the true diversity of the sampled community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a new gel medium that is formed
by self-association of guanosine compounds to resolve same length DNA with
different sequences. Combining the new gel with conventional sieving gels in
capillary gel electrophoresis will lead to unprecedented resolution in length
and sequence of community DNA that will reveal previously masked community
diversity without having to sequence the entire metagenome of the microbial
community, thereby greatly reducing the time and expense compared to current
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research at RPI will be conducted by a
graduate student, an undergraduate student and two high school students who will
be recruited each year through the Science Technology Entry Program (STEP) at
RPI. STEP engages underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students in
area middle and high schools in activities designed to develop problem-solving
skills and a broad knowledge base prior to entry into post-secondary schools.
The research at FIU, a minority institution, will be conducted by two
undergraduate students. There will be an internship/laboratory exchange of the
students from both institutions during the summer semesters of the project. FIU
students will spend 4-6 weeks at RPI learning separation techniques and the
McGown students will travel to FIU where they will learn molecular techniques
such as PCR, qPCR and DNA extractions. This exchange will greatly enhance the
breath and depth of knowledge for these student groups. The coalescence,
synthesis and dissemination of all data will be a combined effort of the PI, co-
PI and their students. These interdisciplinary efforts will result in greater
dissemination of information across scientific fields and crossover into
critical fields of engineering. The merging of molecular biology and separation
sciences evolves as a natural progression of the current work of the McGown and
Mills laboratories. By providing support for knowledge development and mentoring
of minority graduate and undergraduates, this research experience will
strengthen and broaden their knowledge base by the laboratory interactions and
student exchange between the two institutions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;