* 0853403
* Collaborative Research:  Investigation of Fundamental Aerodynamics and Power Electronics Issues of Rooftop Wind Panel Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Hamid Rahai, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 08/31/2012
* USD 120,178.00

COLLABORATIVE PROPOSALS ECCS-0853402 and 0853403

The objective of this research is to investigate fundamental aerodynamic and
power electronic issues of residential wind-power systems based on rooftop wind
panels with horizontal rotors. The approach is airflow simulations and wind-
tunnel experiments. Analysis of wind interactions within individual components
of the panel and between the panel and the roof will be performed. Various
configurations of these structures will be studied and conditions for maximum
energy extraction from the wind will be determined. The intellectual merit of
the project lies in the focus on fundamental aspects of residential wind-power
systems, the barriers accounting for their meager popularity, and aerodynamic
phenomena in horizontal sets of wind-turbine rotors. The research will: (a)
advance the knowledge of aerodynamic properties of rooftop wind panels, (b)
develop new designs of those panels, (c) determine the best schemes of power
electronic interfaces for low-power wind-energy systems, and (e) produce new
simulation models for future research endeavors. The broader impacts of the
project include increased extent of wind energy in residential systems,
mitigation of the acoustic and electromagnetic noise, and the resultant growth
of renewable energy sources in households and small businesses. The project will
thus impact the national renewable energy infrastructure, whose development is a
vital part of the US energy policy. The project will strengthen research
resources of the involved universities, including enhanced skills of graduate
students, whose recruitment will focus on underrepresented groups. Results of
the project will be disseminated in recognized journals, professional meetings,
seminars, and public presentations.