* 0853685
* GOALI: A Quantum Mechanics Based Method for Properties Predictions and Product Improvements Using Molecular Design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stanley Sandler, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 354,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposal is supported in
part through the funds from the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) program for cooperative research between the research group of
Professor Stanley I. Sandler of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the
University of Delaware and Drs. Steven Lustig and Michael Crawford at the
Experimental Station of the DuPont Company in Wilmington Delaware. The project
will have long term energy and environmental impact. It involves
simulation/modeling and comparisons with
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thermodynamics research will focus on
improvements to the recent quantum mechanics based physical and chemical
properties prediction method, COSMO-SAC, developed at the University of
Delaware, and its combination with a molecular design methodology developed by
Steven Lustig at DuPont to areas of both scientific and industrial interest.
There are three specific, but related areas of research in this proposal are
improvement of the basic COSMO-SAC model to better represent London dispersion
interactions, and then reparameterization of the model using databases available
at the University of Delaware and at the DuPont Company; an experimental test of
a fundamental assumption of the COSMO-SAC and related models of the independence
of the solute molecular conformation on the solvent in which it is located using
Raman spectroscopy at the DuPont Company; and combination of the proposed
refinements with the COSMOdesign methodology to develop a self contained tool
that can be used to design molecules to achieve certain performance goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three
features of this proposal of original and distinct intellectual merit. The first
is the combination of a quantum mechanics based approach to predicting the
thermodynamic properties in a novel manner with an artificial intelligence based
method to choose fluids and mixtures to meet specifications for the optimal
design of a product or process. Second is the further development of this
quantum based method by a significant improvement in the way dispersion and
hydrogen bonding energies are treated based on better physiochemical theory and
descriptions. Finally, while the solution effects on conformations of molecules
is known to be important, for example, in the coiling and uncoiling or polymers
and folding and unfolding (denaturation) of proteins, this effect is largely
ignored in the description of smaller molecules. The PIs will examine the
importance of changes in molecular conformation experimentally in this research,
and then incorporate this information into thermodynamic properties model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important
impact of the research proposed is the development of a publically-available,
completely new design tool for chemists and engineers to use in reverse
engineering of a product or solvent, and especially those with environmentally
acceptability. That is, once a desired set of properties for a product or
solvent have been specified, the result of the proposed research will allow pure
fluids or mixtures to be identified that have these properties, even if there
are no experimental data or the substance(s)has not yet even been synthesized.
One such example is ionic liquids, of which there are many possible based on
different choices of anion and cation, while only a few have been synthesized.
Another would be in choosing a new refrigerant or refrigerant to meet energy
efficient or environmental standards. Still other applications of the method
include using the quantum mechanical based theory to selective binding of
substances to electronic and biological substrates; estimating toxicity; and to
the design of pharmaceutical and other biologics with desired drug formulation
and/or delivery properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scientific
and engineering impact of the research, at least one Ph.D. and one postdoctoral
associate will receive training under the proposed grant, thereby increasing the
U.S. pool of trained professionals. Also, through the RISE program of the
University of Delaware, we will involve undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities in the research.