* 0853820
* Identifying design principles for engineered ecosystems: denitrifying biofilters for sustainable agriculture
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Julie Zilles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2013
* USD 401,080.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0853820 Zilles

The objectives of this research are to gain both a fundamental understanding of
the microbial ecology of denitrifying biofilters and to create improved
techniques to characterize the reliability of, and also the design of, this and
other engineered ecosystems. The dynamics of the physical, chemical, and
biological parameters of the biofilter system will be determined, and approaches
derived from reliability engineering and ecology will be used to identify key
interactions and develop ways to predict and manipulate outcomes. Three
hypotheses will be tested in this research: (1) A small number of state
variables will exhibit the most influence on biofilter performance, (2)
diversity will lead to functional redundancy, and conditions resulting in the
most functional redundancy will be most stable in performance, and (3) Rate,
range, regularity, and rapidity of change will provide measures of
sustainability of biofilter performance. These denitrifying biofilters have the
potential to bring about substantial reductions in nitrate pollution and thereby
improve water quality throughout the Midwestern US and the Gulf of Mexico. The
education component of this project include the development of an inquiry-based
course for undergraduates and interdisciplinary training for engineering
graduate students.

