* 0853777
* Exploring plasma mechanism of synthesis of the ultra-long single wall carbon nanotubes in arc discharge plasma
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Keidar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 105,000.00

0853777&lt;br/&gt;Keidar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
study the plasma mechanism for synthesizing ultra-long single-wall carbon
nanotubes (SWNT) in an arc discharge. Their combination of stiffness and
toughness makes SWNTs the strongest known fibers. Ultra-long SWNTs (lengths more
than 10,000 times larger than their diameters) are expected to enable micro-
electric motors and can act as useful nanoscale cables for conducting
electricity or heat. Mass production and use will depend on understanding the
science behind their synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A possible manufacturing
route has been inspired by the recent finding that length might be controlled by
a magnetic field in arc-discharge synthesis. The present research studies plasma
parameters and the resulting nanotube length distribution, aiming both to
understand the effect of the magnetic field and to find the best conditions for
synthesis of ultra-long nanotubes. The main distinguishing factor of this study
is that the problem of the SWNT synthesis will be approached from the basic
analysis of synthesis and rather than by trial and error. A state-of-the-art
Langmuir probe technique will significantly expand the limited data on plasma
parameters during atmospheric arc discharge. The arc discharge and the plasma
interactions with carbon nanotubes will be modeled using previously developed
fluid codes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project has both
fundamental and technological significance. The fundamental significance is that
understanding of the arc discharge and SWNT formation mechanism will be greatly
expanded. The technological significance lies in exploring the possibility of
controlling SWNT synthesis, enhancing SWNT yield, and ultimately paving the way
for mass production and industrial utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the
fundamental and technological significance, this work will serve as an excellent
vehicle for undergraduate and graduate education in the field of nanotechnology
and plasma science. To involve women and under-represented minorities, the PIs
will work closely with student organizations at George Washington like the
Society of Women Engineers. In addition, undergraduate students will be engaged
in the research.