* 0853049
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Direct Electrospinning of Multi-Layered Materials for Energy-Based Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Vasana Maneeratana, Maneeratana             Vasana
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 01/31/2011
* USD 74,750.00

0853049 Maneeratana

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Vasana
Maneeratana to work with Dr. Markus Antonietti at Max Planck Institute in
Germany and with Dr. Clement Sanchez at Universite Pierre et Marie Curie in
France.

Currently, the interests in energy and renewable resources are at the forefront
of the attention of researchers, industry and media in both the United States
and the rest of the world. It is an exciting movement for the field of materials
science to bridge more ideas into conception to provide solutions to new energy
resources. This allows for interdisciplinary synergy to provide real-time
solutions, while contributing to the fabric of science. Unique work permeates
through each country concurrently with concern for depleting resources in fossil
fuels and coal-dependence. As an example, in the United States, there has been a
rapid surge to find solutions to the dependence on foreign oil, thereby
expanding knowledge of fuel cells, batteries and alternative forms of harvesting
energy. Solar cells and hydrogen fuel cells are just a few examples of areas of
vast research. Work in designing renewable resources to produce devices for
energy has matured alongside the concept of green and sustainable principles.
Building new devices from materials for sustainable energy applications should
also incorporate sustainable design thereby including green chemistry
principles, to thus produce low waste, be less hazardous, and have the ability
to break down into innocuous materials. This fellowship proposes to design and
produce photocatalytic efficient devices to address the use of solar energy
while incorporating sustainable design principles. Thereby using the process of
electrospinning, a bottom-up approach to producing both nano and micronmeter
scaled fiber mats can be fabricated. This fabrication development also creates
new production pathways for materials for fuel cells and other energy-based
devices. Direct electrospinning, as developed by the Principal Investigator
(PI), is an approach, which minimizes processing time and steps in producing the
designed and desired product. The overall goal of the PI is to utilize direct
electrospinning as a method to incorporate chemical designed precursors to
produce high-surface area, multi-layered materials for energy-based
applications. It is proposed to form an interdisciplinary collaboration with
both Professors Antonietti and Sanchez to combine their history of research, as
individuals and together, of nano-scaled materials with structural hierarchy and
green chemistry. Specifically, this is a 1-year project to direct electrospin a
photocatalytic bilayer composite of anatase-TiO2 and TiOxNy. Studies will be
performed to analyze the relationship between the precursor synthesis with
direct electrospinning parameters, structural analysis of fiber formation,
microstructure, composition, thermal properties and crystallization kinetics.