* 0853847
* Enhancing Entrepreneurship through Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Chao You, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 124,910.00

PI: Schroeder, Mark; Glower, Jacob S.; Green, Roger A.; You,
Chao&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0853847&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
involves the development of products to help people with disabilities while
simultaneously exposing students to entrepreneurial activities. Eight design
groups consisting of three electrical and computer engineering students and one
business student will be formed each year. Mechanical engineering students will
join teams for projects that necessitate mechanical design and fabrication. In
addition to building a product, each design team will develop a business plan,
submit an invention disclosure, and enter a design or business competition.
Collaborations have been established with the College of Business at NDSU and
the Strom Center for Entrepreneurship &amp; Innovation at Dickinson State
University to facilitate the entrepreneurial activities. Engineering students
will be required to attend functions to enhance their knowledge in the areas of
business, innovation, and entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional
plans include forming a group of students to solicit client feedback and provide
technical support. Plans have also been established to evolve the program into a
self-sustaining endeavor. This consists of judiciously selecting projects with
overlapping themes and market potential and using the entrepreneurial activities
to help nurture those projects into startup companies. The startup companies,
client organizations, and external investors are all potential sources of
revenue to help transition the program to self-sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The described plan has
intellectual merit in that it proposes a novel method to achieve the key
objectives of helping people with disabilities while simultaneously enhancing
the engineering and entrepreneurial skills of students. Additionally, methods
are in place to evolve the activities into a self-sustaining program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
project is in the contribution to society through the development of products to
aid persons with disabilities. Additionally, entrepreneurial partnerships will
be developed between colleges and universities that could ultimately result in
the mass production of these products and the formation of new companies and
jobs that would enhance the state's economy.