* 0853586
* U.S.-Thailand Workshop:   Near-Roadway and On-road Exposures to Air Pollution:    Risk Communication and Decision Making
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Sumeet Saksena, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 11/30/2009
* USD 27,625.00

&lt;br/&gt;0853586&lt;br/&gt;Saksena&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Thailand
Workshop on Near-roadway and On-road Exposure to Air Pollution: Risk
Communication and Decision Making&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American researchers, and graduate students in a U.S. -
Thailand workshop to be held in Bangkok, Thailand in November 2008. The co-
organizers are Professor Sumeet Saksena at the East-West Center?s (EWC) Cultural
and Technology Interchange in Honolulu, Hawaii and Professors Kim Oanh and
Nguyen Thi in the Department of Environmental Engineering and Management at the
Asian Institute of Technology in Pathumthani, Thailand. It will also include
researchers from Vietnam, The Philippines, India, China and Indonesia. The
cross-cultural workshop will add to the fundamental knowledge base of several
interdisciplinary fields, including decision science, environmental science,
anthropology, public policy and urban planning. The workshop aims to identify
key research questions, the multi-disciplinary research capacity in Asian
cities, potential partners, and specific project protocols. Consequently, the
workshop outputs will enhance the capabilities of researchers to examine
stakeholder decision and communication processes about the risk of air pollution
near and on roadways in Asia. Participants in the workshop, almost half of whom
are women, will form a unique research partnership spanning two continents, a
variety of physical and social sciences, and would consist of members of the
academia, private and government organizations. By assessing capacity,
identifying regional partners, and delineating specific project parameters, it
is expected that subsequent research will inform real-world risk
communication/management policies that meet the needs of specific Asian cities
and the needs of researchers and policy makers in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests between the East-
West Center and the Asian Institute of Technology to indicate that they can
successfully pursue the activities proposed and that the interaction will
benefit both sides. In the long run, reduction of urban air pollution in Asian
cities can prove to be beneficial outside the region as well. Recent research
has shown that trans-continental transport of pollutants is occurring. Also,
many efforts in Asia to reduce urban air pollution have the co-benefit of
reducing greenhouse gases that influence worldwide climate change. This workshop
will provide the participating U.S. graduate students an excellent opportunity
to receive a global research experience. It is anticipated that they will
maintain contacts and collaborations with the Asian researchers and students
throughout their careers. Information about the workshop and its findings will
be made available via the EWC website. NSF?s Division of Social and Economic
Sciences and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems are both co-funding this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;