* 0853957
* Self-Organization in Network Glasses-Beyond Selenides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

Technical abstract

Covalent network glasses are usually composed of the group IV and/or V
selenides, and exist in three basic types of elastic phases- flexible,
intermediate and stressed-rigid. Flexible phases are made up of weakly cross-
linked structures and possess "floppy" modes, while stressed-rigid phases
consist of heavily cross-linked structures that have stress creating "redundant"
bonds. Intermediate phases (IPs) are optimally cross-linked structures that are
marginally rigid but stress-free features that lead to unforeseen
functionalities, such as thermal reversibility of the glass transition, absence
of aging, liquid-like configurational entropies, and network adaptability to
expel stress and lower their free energies. This individual investigator award
supports a project to extend investigations of IPs from selenides to sulfides
and oxides. Modulated DSC, Raman, IR reflectance and Molar volume measurements
will be undertaken as a function of glass composition to establish IPs. These
measurements will permit elucidating the role of chemical bonding and structure
on IPs as fractional ionicity of bonding increases. Possible applications
include optimization of thin-film gate dielectrics in 3-terminal devices, flat
panel displays, programmable cell metallization memory devices, protein folding
and drug design. Research on amorphous semiconductors and insulators has proven
to be an outstanding training ground for young physicists and electrical
engineers seeking jobs in industry and academia.

Non-Technical abstract Advances in synthesis, purification of starting materials
and detailed compositional studies have led to the recognition that physical
properties of amorphous semiconductors including glasses can change abruptly
with chemical composition. These developments have permitted probing the
rigidity transition (between flexible and intermediate phase glasses) and the
stress transition (between intermediate and stressed-rigid phases) in network
glasses. This individual investigator award supports a project to investigate
Intermediate phases (IPs) in select sulfides and oxides, extending present
results of IPs from selenides to systems that are more ionic. Thermal, optical,
mechanical and electrical measurements will be undertaken to establish IPs and
their aging behavior. The goal of the project is to establish IPs of these
technologically important materials and to understand them in terms of glass
sub-structure. These findings will also serve as bounds for numerical
simulations of these phases using first principles methods that are currently
ongoing in the US and Europe. Students will be trained in state-of the art
techniques and semiconducting materials growth, which will open jobs in Science
and Engineering infrastructure of the US.