* 0853565
* Galaxy Wars: Star Formation and Stellar Populations in Interacting Galaxies Conference
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Donald Luttermoser, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/28/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This July 2009 workshop to be held at East Tennessee State University (ETSU)
highlights the physics of galaxy interactions. Strongly interacting galaxies are
in a short-lived but important stage of evolution, characterized by tidal tails,
bridges, and other morphological peculiarities, along with enhanced star
formation and luminous young star clusters. Recent hydrodynamical models of
interactions are able to reproduce the morphology and star formation history of
individual systems in some detail, while space-and ground-based telescopes have
provided much new information about star and star-cluster formation. The meeting
will bring together star formation experts, aficionados of stellar population
synthesis, numerical modelers, and experts in observations at different
wavelengths, working towards a more complete picture of these encounters. The
organizers expect about 60 participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will
bring world-class researchers to an underserved region of the country. Both the
list of possible speakers and the scientific organizing committee are roughly
50% women. To attract a diverse group of attendees, the meeting will be
advertised by mailings to faculty at local historically-black colleges and
universities, and to astronomers on the American Astronomical Society's list of
minority speakers who have research interests related to the meeting topics.
Local undergraduate students, high-school teachers and amateur astronomers will
be invited to attend without paying a registration fee. NSF support will allow
graduate students and researchers from smaller colleges to participate.