* 0853674
* The Wall Pressure Field Of High Reynolds Number Rough-Wall Turbulent Boundary Layers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Devenport, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,999.00

CBET -0853674 &lt;br/&gt;Devenport, William J. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research program aims to reveal and better understand the fluctuating surface
pressure field produced by high Reynolds number rough-wall boundary layers. This
pressure field is a source of vibration and noise in many applications. It also
provides a measure of the turbulence structure of the boundary layer weighted in
favor of the near-wall dynamics. However, there have been remarkably few prior
studies of rough-wall boundary-layer pressure fluctuations. Studies have
included only a limited set of rough surfaces and there has been little
systematic examination of the effects of roughness type or sparseness. Most
importantly, there have been almost no measurements of boundary layers with
Reynolds number and boundary-layer-to-roughness scale ratios large enough to be
free of transitional effects, where universal scalings and behaviors are likely
to be observed and are of the most practical and scientific value. The
objectives of this study are as follows: to extend the existing database of
fluctuating pressure measurements for rough wall boundary layers into the high
Reynolds number regime; to extend the database to include stochastic and
deterministic surfaces with fully defined geometry and a significant range of
sizes and sparseness values; to use these data to establish the low and high-
frequency scaling of the rough wall pressure spectrum and the behavior of the
convection velocities and the spatial pressure coherence functions; and to
provide a cutting-edge research education to a diverse group of students
including graduate, undergraduate and high-school students. The PI's
experimental approach centers on the new aeroacoustic capabilities provided by
the Virginia Tech Stability Wind Tunnel. This facility is both large and
acoustically quiet and thus is uniquely suited to pressure fluctuation
measurements and the growth of thick, fully developed, high-Reynolds number
turbulent boundary layers with smooth or rough walls. A complete program of
experiments on high Reynolds number flows over stochastic and deterministic
rough surfaces will be performed to directly address the deficiencies in current
knowledge. In many situations, such as with wind turbines or aircraft, the noise
and vibration are a direct consequence of the fluctuating pressure field of a
rough wall turbulent boundary layer. The improved understanding generated by
this research will have a direct impact on the accuracy of noise source
predictions. This is critical to advancing the environmental acceptability and
economic viability of these devices. The Virginia Tech Stability Tunnel is a
multi-user facility that draws a wide variety of users including research
groups, commercial testing and a range of undergraduate classes. The planned
work includes two specific sub-projects to be conducted by groups of
undergraduate and high school students. These groups will be mentored by the
graduate students involved in the project under the guidance of the PI. This
continues a long history of undergraduate involvement in the PI's research
group. High school students will be recruited through existing programs with the
Southwest Virginia Governor?s School for Science, Mathematics and Technology.