* 0853760
* International Research Experience for Students (IRES)  in Experimental Nuclear Physics in Germany at MAMI and Sweden at MAX-lab
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* William Briscoe, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES award provides students
associated with George Washington University, Montgomery College in Maryland,
and the University of Massachusetts at Dartmouth with the opportunity to
participate in an international collaboration in experimental nuclear physics
through spending 8 weeks at the Mainzer Mikrotron (MAMI) at the Johannes
Gutenberg Universit√§t in Mainz, Germany and/or the MAX-lab research facility at
the Lund University in Lund, Sweden. This project provides support for 4 to 6
undergraduate students and up to 2 beginning graduate students each year for
three years. The PI, co-PIs, and Senior Investigators will reside in Lund and
Mainz while the U.S. students are present to supervise, mentor, and to monitor
their progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student researchers are involved with
all aspects of the experiments being performed at the two laboratories. These
experiments are designed to investigate the dynamics responsible for the
internal structure of the nucleon and its excitations through the study of meson
photoproduction off the proton and neutron. The high-quality research program
being carried out at both MAMI and MAX-lab will enhance the current studies of
the quark structure of baryons and mesons. These measurements make use of the
Crystal Ball and TAPS detectors at MAMI, and the xSAL, CATS, DIANA, and BUNI
detectors at MAX-lab. These experiments are being performed by the A2
Collaboration at MAMI and&lt;br/&gt;the PIONS@MAXLAB Collaboration at MAX-lab.
The members of these international collaborations have volunteered to contribute
to the training and mentoring of our students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
provides a group of students with international research experiences that
prepares them to operate successfully in a global environment. The connections
created by their visits and efforts will support lasting international
connections. The PI and co-PIs have shown continual success and dedication in
mentoring women students, a group under-represented in experimental nuclear
physics, and they are committed to involving women students and other under-
represented student groups in this project's research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Physics.