* 0853381
* Collective Memory, Knowledge and Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Howard Schuman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2012
* USD 149,871.00

SES- 0853381&lt;br/&gt;Howard Schuman&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collective memory--defined here as shared memories
and knowledge about the past--lies at the intersection of personal and national
history. For this research, a national survey will replicate in 2009 open-ended
questions asked in 1985 and 2000-2001 in order to identify events and changes
from the past 75 years that Americans recall as especially important. In
addition, support for the research will allow the investigators to draw also on
a different and unusually large data set (2,750 cases in 2000-2001) to develop
further an interpretive analysis of respondents? reasons for naming particular
events as important, pursuing the hypothesis that even when different cohorts
share memories of what is ostensibly the same event, answers to an inquiry into
the meaning of the event can reveal quite different perspectives and
interpretations. Both approaches build on earlier work, which demonstrated the
significance of the adolescent and early adult ?critical years? for creating
lasting memories of national and world events. The critical years hypothesis is
particularly important to test with regard to the 9/11/01 attack: unlike past
cohort effects discovered after the fact, data in 2001 led to a clear prediction
of a specific curvilinear effect for the traumatic 9/11 attack, which should be
visible in 2009. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two new additions will consider "implicit
memories" (e.g., price levels referenced on the basis of each cohort's early
experience) and the complexity of misremembering (e.g., inversion of past
associations, as with Joe McCarthy recalled as a "Communist Senator"). The prior
research also pointed to similarities and differences between spontaneously
generated memories of events deemed important by respondents and memories in the
form of knowledge elicited by asking respondents for accounts of terms related
to specific events. The new research will connect these two types of evidence,
previously studied only in separate contexts. Associated attitudes will be
investigated as well, with the possibility of plausible conclusions about causal
direction between collective memories and attitudes. The investigators plan also
to conduct a meta-analysis of other empirical studies of collective memory,
identifying major currents, methods, and conclusions, and relating them to
survey-based research on shared memories across samples of individuals. By
documenting and reflecting on the diversity of approaches, the investigators
seek not to demonstrate that one source of evidence is better than another, but
to contribute to the goal of using different sources in order to reach
conclusions that none might support alone. In addition, use of cross-national
replications, already carried out, will add to this attempt to link different
levels of analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new data will further understanding of the
social, cultural, and psychological mechanisms that produce and sustain both
collective memory (e.g., of the 9/11/01 attack) and collective forgetting (e.g.,
of the once familiar ?Cold War?). The research will be not only develop past
research using sample surveys, but also show that different approaches to
studying collective memory can be seen as complementary rather than competing.
The results are intended for publication in social science journals that have
some cross-disciplinary reach, and it is hoped in a broadly accessible book as
well. In addition, the original data will be archived in a form and location
widely available to others for further analysis, as well as for use in research-
related teaching.