* 0853706
* Kinetics of Radical-Radical Reactions in Combustion Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Vadim Knyazev, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 301,220.00

0853706 Knyazev

The research is directed at determination of the kinetics of radical-radical
reactions important in the oxidation and pyrolysis of hydrocarbons. These
reactions usually serve as chain termination and molecular-mass growth pathways.
Certain members of this class of reactions have been linked to formation of
aromatic rings and polyaromatic hydrocarbons, which leads, in turn, to
production of soot in combustion systems. In spite of the importance of radical-
radical reactions for understanding the chemistry of a wide variety of
combustion and pyrolysis processes, experimental information on them is rather
sparse and, in many cases, controversial. The main objective of the work is the
establishment of a reliable database of accurately determined experimental data
on a benchmark set of reactions. The project covers several types of radical-
radical reactions, including self-reactions and cross reactions of alkyl,
cycloalkyl, and delocalized and aromatic radicals. Temperature dependences of
the rate constants are being determined in direct experiments under conditions
where radicals are created in known concentrations and the reactions under study
are isolated from side influences. Radical concentration decays and formation of
products are monitored in real-time using Laser Photolysis / Photoionization
Mass Spectrometry technique. Reaction-product studies are performed by online
mass spectrometry as well as GC/MS of final products. Results of the study will
be of fundamental importance for modeling the combustion of hydrocarbon fuels,
forming an experimental basis for further advancement of high-level theories of
reaction rates and semi-empirical computational tools. Benefits to society will
be advanced by improving our understanding of commercial technologies such as
energy generation through combustion, including the safety and environmental
aspects of these processes. Other broader impacts of the proposed work will come
from integration of education and research and contributions to training and
education of undergraduate and graduate students. Broad dissemination of the
results will be advanced via publications, presentations in multi-disciplinary
conferences and workshops, web presentation of the findings, and contributing to
cyberinfrastructure projects.