* 0853389
* Theory and Simulation of Membrane Deformations Orchestrated by Intracellular Molecular Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ravi Radhakrishnan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0853389 Radhakrishnan

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Cell membranes and membrane based organelles actively mediate several
intracellular signaling and trafficking decisions. A growing number of
applications rely on cooperative interactions between molecular assemblies and
membranes. Yet, the studies of membrane based and membrane mediated signaling
are not considered core aspects of systems biology. While a coherent and
complete description of cell membrane mediated signaling is not always possible
by experimental methods, multiscale modeling and simulation approaches can
provide valuable insights at nano/microscopic and mesoscopic scales. This
project strives to develop a theoretical and computational platform for
quantitatively describing how cell membrane topologies are actively mediated and
manipulated by intracellular protein assemblies. Specifically, the proposal
describes an integrated research and outreach program, involving a multiscale
modeling study of Intracellular Endocytotic trafficking mechanisms, i.e., active
transport mechanisms characterized by vesicle nucleation and budding of the cell
membrane orchestrated by protein interaction networks.

Intellectual Merit: The kinetic Monte Carlo time dependent Ginzburg Landau (KMC-
TDGL) algorithm developed under the PIs previous research program represents a
methodological advance because of its unique and innovative in its ability to
combine two disparate phenomenological formalisms (Kinetic Monte Carlo and Time
Dependent Ginzburg Landau) in order to obtain a unified picture of how curvature
inducing proteins mediate cell membrane deformations under low membrane
curvature. In this project, two new simulation approaches will be developed,
which can predict protein induced membrane deformations in the high curvature
limit. In Aim 1, the surface evolution method will be developed to predict
minimum energy conformations of highly curved axis symmetric membrane structures
relevant to the internalization of cell surface receptors through the process of
clathrin mediated endocytosis. In Aim 2, a new method referred to as the local
coordinate TDGL will be developed in order to extend the results of Aim 1 by
computing finite temperature properties of arbitrarily (no imposed symmetry)
curved membranes including the free energies of the system. In Aim 3, specific
biological hypothesis governing the quantitative bioenergetics of clathrin
mediated endocytosis will be explored. The proposed simulation framework will
enable the development of a quantitative link between molecular driving forces
and emergent functionality in endocytotic trafficking/transport networks. The
proposed simulations will also provide rigorous foundations for differentiating
intracellular trafficking fates on the basis of differences in molecular
interactions due to homologous receptors or receptor mutations, which often gain
prominence in dysfunctional trafficking pathways.

Broader Impact: The proposed theory and modeling approaches are expected to
create avenues for many novel applications in systems biology, pharmacology, and
nanobiotechnology. The particular application to endocytosis explored here will
provide a direct route to discern pathological cellular trafficking fates
implicated in a variety of biomedical conditions such as cancer and
schizophrenia. Complementing the interdisciplinary research program, the
educational and outreach programs are constituted by rigorous and visionary
research training for undergraduate students in engineering and biology. To
achieve broader impact in complementing the undergraduate research experience, a
three dimensional stereo environment for visualizing biomolecular structure and
animations is established and utilized for the instruction of molecular modeling
and simulation techniques at the undergraduate and graduate students.