* 0853835
* Complete Reductive Dechlorination of Trichloroethylene (TCE) by non-Dehalococcoides Microorganisms
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Kevin Finneran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 12/31/2010
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT

CBET-0853835 Finneran, Kevin T University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Complete Reductive Dechlorination of Trichloroethylene (TCE) by non-
Dehalococcoides Microorganisms

The objectives of the proposed work are to: 1) demonstrate that organisms
outside of the genus Dehalococcoides can completely reduce TCE to ethene, 2) use
the enrichment cultures developed to characterize the metabolism, geochemistry,
and chlorinated solvent biodegradation kinetics of non-Dehalococcoides
microorganisms, 3) verify that the dominant non-Dehalococcoides microorganism(s)
are most closely related to organisms within the genus Desulfosporosinus, 4)
characterize the pathway for acetate oxidation and utilization during complete
dechlorination to determine if it is directly oxidized as the sole electron
donor (by Dehalococcoides or non-Dehalococcoides liquid enrichment cultures) or
to define the mechanisms by which it may generate hydrogen under the same
conditions, 5) demonstrate that electron donors (acetate or H2) added at
stoichiometric concentrations relative to the electron acceptors present
promotes faster TCE reduction to ethene when compared to excess electron donor
addition, and 6) quantify the specific conditions in which Fe(III) reduction and
complete dechlorination are promoted simultaneously.

This is the first research to address the probability of non-Dehalococcoides
complete dechlorination. This will change fundamental and applied science and
engineering with respect to halorespiration as a metabolic process, and
chlorinated solvent bioremediation as a practiced technology. In addition, the
work will characterize several poorly understood environmental processes
including the overlap of Fe(III) reduction and complete dechlorination, and
acetate as a direct electron donor for halorespiration. The proposal has been
constructed in a manner that all hypotheses are relevant and independent, and
the data generated will benefit the broader scientific community studying basic
halorespiration science or those investigating applied bioremediation of TCE.

The proposed outreach plan incorporates both students who are members of
underrepresented groups in environmental engineering, and practitioners who will
ultimately benefit from the data. The students will be both graduate level and
undergraduate level, and will be recruited specially from programs for minority
and female students. The practitioner aspect will culminate in direct contact
with one group who has already expressed interest in the work and with others
via conferences and individual presentations to small groups at their regional
offices. Entire research staff including the proposed postdoctoral scholar will
interact with all practitioners such that they become accustom to the lab to
field transition for research, and how the pragmatic aspects of environmental
engineering practice can influence fundamental research science.