* 0853127
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Photocatalytic Water Oxidation by Photosensitization of Nocera's Cobalt Phosphate Catalyst with Modified Ru\(II)\(bpy\) 3 Dyes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Stanley Tilley, Tilley                  Stanley        D
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 08/31/2011
* USD 143,100.00

0853127 Tilley

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Stanley
David Tilley to work with Dr. Michael Graetzel at the Ecole Polytechnique
Federale de Lausanne in Switzerland.

The proposed research project focuses on the oxidation half of the water
splitting reaction (2H2O ?¨ 2H2 + O2) in which electrons are removed from water
and an oxygen-oxygen bond is forged. In the reduction half reaction, these
electrons are used to reduce protons to hydrogen. Using energy from the sun to
drive the process allows for the storage of sunlight in the form of chemical
bonds for use as fuels. The mastery of the photosensitized water oxidation
reaction is critical to the long-term goal of generating hydrogen fuel from
water using sunlight as the energy input.

The recently discovered Nocera catalyst, which is based on the abundant and
readily available transition metal cobalt, is capable of splitting water at
neutral pH with an applied potential of 1.29V to generate oxygen. The proposed
research seeks to eliminate the need for an applied voltage by anchoring a
photosensitizing dye to the cobalt catalyst. The inorganic dye Ru(bpy)32+ was
chosen as the photosensitizer as the Ru3+ form has been successfully used as a
chemical oxidant for water oxidation. An appropriately functionalized Ru(bpy)32+
dye derivative will adsorb to the catalyst surface and function as a
photosensitizer. It is expected that tethering an electron acceptor to the dye
will improve charge separation and efficiency of electron extraction from the
water oxidation catalyst. The electrons will then be captured by a soluble
electron acceptor in solution. The long-term goal of this system is to pass the
electrons into a hydrogen-generating system, although the current proposal is
aimed only at laying the foundation of efficient photocatalyzed electron
extraction from water and so uses a sacrificial electron acceptor.