* 0853031
* ARS Synthetica - A Multimedia Forum Exploring the Artful Design of Living Things
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Paul Rabinow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 07/31/2011
* USD 74,902.00

The Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (SynBERC) at the University of
California-Berkeley is designing an interactive web portal and public forum, Ars
Synthetica, to communicate SynBERC's research on synthetic biology, an emerging
field that builds on advances in molecular, cell, and systems biology. Synthetic
biologists will soon design and fabricate biological entities to accomplish
particular tasks. Biological materials properties (gene sequences, protein
properties, natural genetic circuit design) must be formulated into a set of
design rules that can be used to engineer new biological entities. These design
issues raise ethical concerns among the public and will form the core focus of
Ars Synthetica. The forum will use Omeka, an open source software platform that
will afford research scientists and the public with the ability to engage in
community-wide discussions and debates, and will be customized to utilize a
variety of media, such as articles, photo essays, and video vignettes addressing
key questions surrounding synthetic biology. The forum will provide numerous
links to research articles, data, and relevant websites, including SynBERC's
synthetic biology website and the Anthropology of the Contemporary websites.
Video webcasts will include guest lecturers with diverse perspectives on
synthetic biology aimed at both scientists and the public, which will be
disseminated on social networks, such as YouTube, Flickr, and WordPress blogs.
The forum has the potential to make a significant impact on public discourse on
science, as well as provide an important new exemplar for public engagement in
research that can be replicated in other fields of science and informal science
education.