* 0853539
* Biomolecular Simulations as an Integral Research and Educational Tool for Molecular Systems Biology: Application to ErbB
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Ravi Radhakrishnan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 03/31/2013
* USD 313,032.00

0853539 Radhakrishnan

Intellectual Merit - In this post-genomic era, systems biology has provided a
rational and quantitative approach to unify complex cellular interactions and
comprehend modular outcomes that determine different cell fates. However, subtle
differences in the molecular context of the intracellular environment (e.g.,
differences in phosphorylation states, between homologous proteins, isoforms, or
mutants) nevertheless translate into crucial differences in the manifestations
of the emergent signaling response, thereby representing a huge challenge in
formulating quantitative systems-level models that truly capture such variations
across distinctive cell-lines. In the context of ErbB family receptor-mediated
signaling, the molecular context shapes the finer controls exercised by the cell
and a quantitative description of this level of control has been a challenge.
This project on molecular systems biology is based on utilizing standard and
established biomolecular simulations (molecular dynamics and free energy
computations) of the ErbB family receptors by leveraging the anchors (crystal
structures) provided by recent progress in structural biology and introducing
molecular resolution to the systems biology of ErbB-mediated signaling. The
expected outcome of this project is to quantitatively and predictively describe
how differences in the molecular architecture of ErbB family receptor-mediated
interactions influence early signaling events and verify key predictions through
collaborative cell-biology experiments performed in the laboratory. The results
from this work will directly complement prior efforts in modeling differential
signaling in the ErbB pathway, and together, one can expect to gain an
integrated multiscale understanding of the Molecular Systems Biology of ErbB
signaling.

Broader Impact - This project is expected to benefit many novel applications of
multiscale systems biology and nanobiotechnology. In particular, the study of
ErbB signaling at the level of receptor activation will provide a direct route
to discern signaling triggered by molecular perturbations which can impact our
understanding of the link between cellular proliferative signals and higher
order functions such as tissue-growth homeostasis, cardiac and neuronal
development. Complementing the interdisciplinary research program, the
educational and outreach programs are constituted by rigorous and visionary
research training for undergraduate students in engineering and biology. To
achieve broader impact in complementing the undergraduate research experience, a
three dimensional stereo environment for visualizing biomolecular structure and
animations is established and utilized for the instruction of molecular modeling
and simulation techniques at the undergraduate and graduate levels.