* 0853593
* Membership, Prototypicality, and Influence in Small Groups
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Christopher Barnum, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2012
* USD 168,662.00

SES-0853593&lt;br/&gt;Barry Markovsky&lt;br/&gt;Christopher
Barnum&lt;br/&gt;University of South Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
studies the joint effects of status and group membership in collective task
settings. In these settings, people come together to solve common problems--from
policy-setting committees in political parties to informal gatherings such as a
group of strangers working to free a stuck car from a snow bank. Frequently
there are complexities and ambiguities in the course of reaching collective
solutions, and so people in such settings look to one another for guidance. In
the absence of more explicit knowledge, it is common for participants in such
settings to make inferences about one another's abilities on the basis of
observable characteristics. Previous research demonstrates that people use
information on group memberships and status characteristics to form expectations
for one anothers' task performances. Self categorization theory has focused on
the effect that the cognitive aspects of group membership have on interaction,
and status characteristics theory has studied how attributes such as age, race,
gender and ability effect interaction. Although these theories share some common
areas of investigation, to date there has been little overlap between the two.
The investigators will conduct a set of experiments to test an integration of
the two theories to study the cognitive aspects of group membership and the
impact of social characteristics on members' evaluations of one another's task
contributions. The experiments will test predictions that influence is enhanced
by acting in accord with group prototypes or by being perceived as an in-group
member and, further, that such effects can be countervailed by introducing
information on certain other social characteristics such as education levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides stringent tests and crucial data for
evaluating the self categorization and status characteristics theories'
potential for subsequent applications and interventions. This work builds on a
nascent, integrative research program that expands the ranges of applicability
of two long-standing theories in sociological social psychology. The research
contributes to a new kind of status intervention, contributing to a body of
applied research in school settings that has transformed classroom interactions
--being an accepted member of a group is what counts most for increased
classroom participation and thus learning