* 0853329
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Site Reoccupation and Structure Reuse at the Maya site of San Bartolo, El Peten, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* E. Wyllys Andrews, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 14,998.00

Under the supervision of Dr E. Wyllys Andrews V, Diane Davies will conduct
archaeological investigations at the ancient Maya site of San Bartolo. San
Bartolo is located in the northeastern part of the Department of the Petén,
Guatemala and was occupied between 500 B.C.-A.D. 200 before it was abandoned.
The site was reoccupied around A.D. 600, and there is evidence that abandoned
structures and monuments were reused by these later settlers. The research
objective is to identify and investigate the nature of structure reuse through
excavations in a selected residential group.

The study of the phenomenon of reuse is of intellectual merit to the
archaeological community as it can reveal much about the practical
considerations that were involved in constructing buildings, such as energy
invested, the type of building materials used, and the engineering efforts in
remodeling and leveling earlier structures. In addition, studying the reuse of
architecture, associated features, and artifacts can reveal something of the
symbolic, ritual or political considerations of the people. Results of this
research will shed light on how the past through the medium of architecture and
artifacts was manipulated to express the needs and values of later peoples. This
will be of interest to historians investigating social memory. The comparison of
architectural features such as style, technique, material, and quality of
construction will also enable the broader study of defining and differentiating
Late Classic reuse at San Bartolo from its initial occupation. The investigation
then will be of interest to those undertaking settlement pattern studies or
household archaeology. Lastly, the proposed research will provide the first
substantial evidence concerning the timing and extent of occupation and the
social, economic, or political organization at San Bartolo.

The results of the investigation will be circulated in various ways including a
report to the Institute of Anthropology and History of Guatemala (IDAEH)
summarizing the archaeological excavations and subsequent conclusions. Findings
will be presented at national scientific meetings. In addition to its
contribution to basic knowledge this project has the broader impact of teaching
and training a variety of people including underrepresented groups.
Undergraduates from the University of San Carlos, Guatemala, will participate in
an archaeological program at the site and the co-principal investigator will
train a Guatemalan student in archaeological field methods. A Guatemalan
archaeologist and staff from local villages will assist in the research. Data
from the investigation will contribute to the doctoral dissertation research of
female American and British graduate students. In these ways the local,
national, and international community will be informed and allowed to engage
with the archaeological research at this important site.