* 0853409
* Collaborative Research: The role of sunlight in controlling fecal indicator bacteria and human virus concentrations in recreational waters
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Kristopher McNeill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 06/30/2011
* USD 79,586.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853988, 0853568, 0853409
&lt;br/&gt;Boehm, Nelson, McNeill &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current assessment of
microbial pollution in recreational waters involves measurement of fecal
indicator bacteria (FIB) as proxies for human pathogens. FIB concentrations
display diurnal variability such that the time the sample is collected
dramatically impacts the measured concentration, which could make the difference
between compliance and noncompliance with water quality standards. Also, it is
not known whether the concentrations of actual pathogens, and thus associated
health risk, also experience such fluctuations. Thus, it is critical to obtain
information on the processes that control these diurnal fluctuations for FIB and
human pathogens. Sunlight is believed to be the major cause of the diurnal
fluctuation in FIB. The goal of this project is to develop predictive tools for
assessing the sunlight-mediated inactivation of fecal indicator organisms and
human viruses under a range of environmental conditions prevalent in natural
waters. The specific research objectives involve a coordinated effort by a
multidisciplinary team to study sunlight-mediated inactivation in the field, the
laboratory, and via modeling. Field work will be conducted at one ocean beach in
California and a freshwater beach on Lake Superior. These sites, which differ in
salinity as well as the concentration of sensitizer molecules, will be compared
with data from a third site for which we already have completed the field work.
Field experiments will be used to develop empirical relationships between
environmental conditions and inactivation rates of FIB and human viruses.
Laboratory experiments will be used to develop a mechanistic understanding of
the processes that control inactivation, and to understand the nature of
observed differences between organisms and field sites. Field and laboratory
data will be combined to develop a model that predicts inactivation rates for
any water given easily obtainable environmental. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
dissemination of the results of this study will be accomplished through
publication of peer-reviewed research papers, participation in a conference
focused on beach water quality, and direct interaction with policy makers and
beach managers. Information gleaned from this study on natural waters will also
be extendable to understanding sunlight-mediated inactivation of organisms in
other engineered and natural systems, such as solar disinfection of drinking
water and waste stabilization ponds. This work will promote teaching, training
and learning, as the PIs will involve students in all aspects of the research
and will integrate the results obtained into their classroom instruction.
Graduate.