* 0853933
* Integrating Green Roofs and Photovoltaic Arrays for Energy Management and Optimization of Multiple Functionalities
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Carl Wamser, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2013
* USD 345,000.00

0853933&lt;br/&gt;Wamser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
provide data that will advance the ability to design integrated green roof -
photovoltaic array systems that can be optimized for multiple purposes on urban
roofs. The fundamental research question to be addressed is: Can green roof
design and/or management be altered to enhance both photovoltaic energy
production and green roof function in a combined technology system. The research
will use the Portland State University (PSU) Photovoltaic Test Facility, but the
concepts and results generated should be broadly applicable to other urban
systems, based on the project's modeling efforts. A suite of experimental green
roof microcosms will be established to test hypotheses examining the
relationship between green roof properties (species composition and
evapotranspiration) on photovoltaic energy production and roof carbon gain. In
addition, the impact of these technologies (separately and in combination) on
building energy consumption and the development of the urban heat island effect
will be investigated. Direct use and implementation of results will build upon
collaborations with the City of Portland Bureau of Environmental Services,
Portland General Electric, Oregon BEST (Built Environment and sustainable
Technology Center), Gerding Edlen Development, and GreenWorks, with planned
outreach components with the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry. The project
will provide interdisciplinary research training for 8 to 10 undergraduate
research assistants and three graduate students from PSU. Through development of
a senior capstone course, engineering students will participate in key design
aspects of the project. The research will support an emerging collaborative
relationship among faculty members in multiple departments at PSU, an important
aspect for research progress in environmental sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;