* 0853116
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Theoretical Investigations of Gravitational Systems at the Interface of the Classical and the Quantum
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Andrew Randono, Randono                 Andrew         C
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 08/31/2011
* USD 119,114.00

0853116&lt;br/&gt;Randono&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellowship Program
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of
research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,
and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four-
month research fellowship by Dr. Andrew C. Randono to work with Dr. Lee Smolin
at Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo,
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there have been significant
developments in our understanding of classical and quantum gravity, which have
evolved largely independently. Investigations at this interface are necessary in
order to push both fields to the next level. The study of quantum gravity often
reveals deep insights into the nature of classical gravity that lead to a richer
understanding of the current framework of classical gravity as well as
suggesting modifications to the established theory. In addition, history has
shown that new revolutions in quantum gravity often emerge from new perspectives
on and new formulations of classical gravity. The PI is conducting various
research projects involving explorations of gravitational physics at the
interface of classical and quantum gravity, with the ultimate goal enhancing our
understanding of both theories to push them to the next stage. Among the
projects being explored, the PI is investigating the nature of spin in classical
and quantum gravity, and the emergence of Einstein gravity from a theory with a
larger symmetry group. The first project entails a study of the nature of
intrinsic spin to geometry. From the classical perspective, in addition to the
well known spin-orbit coupling emerging from the gravitomagnetic analogy, there
is strong evidence that spinors themselves give rise to a frame-dragging effect
via their intrinsic spin, which could give rise to a gravitationally modulated
coupling of intrinsic spin to intrinsic spin. The PI is determining the gauge
independent properties of this interaction, and investigating the possible
astrophysical effects from a potential spin induced pair binding of neutral
particles such as astrophysical neutrinos and neutrons in a neutron star.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project described involves an exploration of
the consequences of the emergence of gravity from a more fundamental
gravitational theory with a larger symmetry group. There is strong evidence that
our current understanding of gravity based on the Lorentz group could be the
symmetry broken phase of a more fundamental theory based on the de Sitter group.
This evidence comes from the observationally from the existence of a small
positive cosmological constant, and theoretically from the possibility of
combining the spin connection and the tetrad into a single de Sitter connection.
The PI is investigating the nature of instanton solutions and their possible
significance in early universe cosmology. From the quantum perspective, the PI
is investigating whether a fundamental de Sitter symmetry could lead to insight
into the nature of the Immirzi parameter, a constant which appears to be
necessary in the construction of Loop Quantum Gravity, which plays a fundamental
role in the theory?s description of black hole entropy. The PI is investigating
if the appearance of the Immirzi parameter could the by-product of the breaking
of de Sitter symmetry to Lorentz symmetry, analogous to the emergence of the
QCD-theta parameter.