* 0853667
* Propagating Waves of Self-Assembly in Organosilane Monolayers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

0853667 Genzer

The principal goal of this project is to gain detailed understanding of the
assembly and dynamics of small organosilane (OS) precursors deposited from the
vapor phase in a directional manner onto flat solid silica substrates, which
results in the spontaneous frontal self-assembly of OS molecules into self-
assembled monolayers (SAM). The PIs have recently reported [Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA 104, 10324 (2007)] that these OS adlayers organize from the substrate
edge as propagating wave-fronts having well defined velocities and shapes. The
PIs propose to explore how molecular nature of the propagating wave-fronts
(i.e., molecular concentration and orientation, in-plane rearrangement,
including fluctuation effects) changes as a function of the degree of
confinement of the vapor phase and chemical nature of the OS molecules, as well
as how two counter propagating OS fronts interact. The PIs also plan to address
the molecular assembly of OS in the vapor phase and on the substrate before they
are incorporated into the SAM. Exploring this latter phenomenon in detail will
provide a better understanding of the nature of the non-linearity term governing
the class of reaction diffusion waves (pushed versus pulled) that develop in a
particular measurement.

Intellectual Merit: Wave fronts associated with reaction diffusion and self-
assembly processes are ubiquitous in the natural world. For instance,
propagating fronts arise in crystallization and diverse other thermodynamic
ordering processes. In biology, propagating fronts influence cell movement and
division, as well as in the competitive social interactions and population
dynamics of animals at much larger scales. While it is often claimed that self
sustaining or autocatalytic front propagation is well described by mean-field
reaction diffusion or phase field ordering models, recent simulations and
theoretical arguments show that fluctuation effects in lower spatial dimensions
can lead to appreciable deviations from the classical mean field theory of this
type of front propagation. While these observations have significant
implications for diverse types of ordering fronts that occur under confinement
conditions in biological or materials processing contexts, not much is known
about the molecular aspects of this process. The plan is to carry out a
comprehensive series of experiments aimed at providing some missing links to the
picture using a model system based on directional self-assembly of OS on
surfaces, thus offering valuable insights that may be applicable to any
autocatalytic front propagation process.

Broader Impact: Many molecular processes as well as the population dynamics of
humans and other organisms can be described in terms of fundamental entities
undergoing random local displacement events. These exhibit regular motion at
large scales and associated pattern formation as the participating entities
collectively move from some unstable situation to a relatively stable state of
greater energetic or competitive advantage. These pattern formation processes
are ubiquitous in the natural world and largely govern successive waves of
evolutionary development. Since the spreading of autocatalytic waves is a
pervasive phenomenon, modeling and analogies conceived to describe them can be
applied to other everyday invasive phenomena (e.g., the introduction of foreign
plant species into new environments, triggering waves of invasive growth in the
countryside,. the growth of urban sprawl, frontal polymerization, corrosion of
metallic films, polymer dissolution, and many others). Fluctuation effects tend
to make these fronts increasingly incoherent (diffuse) in time, and thus are
expected to greatly impact the interactions between frontal patterns under
conditions where species (or different types of ordering) compete for supremacy.
Indeed, the interaction of two counter propagating autocatalytic wave fronts is
one of the key areas we plan to study in this work. In addition to the
scientific aspect of the proposed activities in understand a host of related
natural phenomena.