* 0853347
* Rational Design of High-Purity Carbon Nanotube Dispersions Through Acute and Full Life-CycleToxicity Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jean-Claude Bonzongo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 350,001.00

Proposal Title: Rational Design of High-Purity Carbon Nanotube Dispersions
through Acute and Full Life-Cycle Toxicity Studies

Principal Investigator: Kirk Ziegler

Institution: University of Florida

Proposal No: CBET- 0853347

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The dramatic increase in production rates of single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWNTs) and the anticipated widespread use of SWNTs in commercial and industrial
applications suggest that these manufactured nanomaterials will inevitably enter
the environment including the biosphere. In addition, there is a growing concern
because of the currently unknown environmental and human health impacts of
SWNTs. Besides the toxicity issues common to all nanomaterials, the
environmental and human health implications of SWNTs are complicated by the
presence of impurities, such as the transition metal catalyst, and aggregation
state. These issues are also important problems to resolve in most SWNT
applications. Challenges still remain in purifying and dispersing SWNTs without
detrimentally affecting the unique size-related characteristics such as
strength, elasticity, high adsorption capacity, and controllable conductivity.
Future applications of nanotubes will be limited unless new approaches are
developed to overcome these issues without impacting the unique properties of
SWNTs. Their long term goal is to develop stable, high-purity, SWNT dispersions
based on large-scale processes that minimize the risks to the environment and
human health. They hypothesize that the environmental and human health impacts
of engineered SWNTs can be reduced or eliminated through intimate coupling of
toxicity testing and manufacturing during the production process.
Environmentally benign manufacturing is an important goal for the emerging
nanomaterial industries, ensuring that risks to human health and the environment
are minimal. Indeed, nanotube processing has a tremendous opportunity to evolve
as a "green" process, benefiting from the experience of previous industrial
enterprises. To test the hypothesis, engineering, chemistry, and toxicology will
be integrated into a preemptive experimental approach. If necessary, toxicity
assessments will dictate refinement of the SWNT purification and dispersion
processes to reduce their potential hazard. This novel feedback feature
intimately couples manufacturing with toxicity tests of produced SWNTs evaluated
after each of the following key production steps: (1) synthesis and dry powder
production (baseline toxicity); (2) purification; and (3) dispersion. This work
may provide a purification process which can achieve high purities and high
yields of SWNTs without causing damage to the tubular structures while
simultaneously minimizing risks to the environment. Aside from the benefits of
developing an environmental-friendly manufacturing process, this work will
enable and accelerate nanotube applications impacting energy technologies,
materials science, nanoelectronic, bionanotechnology, and medical fields.

A recent framework established by DuPont and Environmental Defense encourages
the evaluation of toxicity effects at the design stage of nanomaterials so new,
environmental-friendly processes can be developed. The successful completion of
this project will help identify the mechanisms by which SWNT dispersions affect
aquatic organisms. It is expected that this fundamental information will help
reduce/eliminate the potential negative impacts of SWNTs. An additional
objective of this project is to disseminate the lessons learned from this
research and develop an educational program targeting undergraduate students,
especially from underrepresented groups. Nanotechnology is a new frontier for
the scientists and engineers of the 21st century. NSF estimates that 2 million
workers will be needed to support future nanotechnology industry needs. However,
the decreasing enrollment of U.S. students in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) degrees make it challenging to prepare the needed
workforce. The PIs are currently developing modules for a sequence of two
undergraduate courses aimed at integrating nanotechnology and its environmental,
societal, and health implications into the current undergraduate curricula.
These courses will, therefore, be used as a vehicle to integrate their exciting
research findings into new educational materials.