* 0853949
* Optical imaging studies of ovarian epithelial cell migration and invasion using microfabricated models of the extracellular matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Paul Campagnola, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 11/30/2010
* USD 559,997.00

0853949&lt;br/&gt;Campagnola&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applicants will use
multiphoton excited (MPE) photochemistry to fabricate models of the ovarian
extracellular matrix (ECM) as platforms to study early stages of ovarian
carcinoma. The ECMs will consist of crosslinked basal lamina and stromal layers,
where each will be comprised of the respective predominant protein composition
in vivo. As these nano/microstructured models will simulate the crosslinked
fibrillar structure of the native ECM, they will be significantly more
biomimetic than those reported previously (e.g. culture coatings and flow
chambers), which are limited by the lack of concurrent appropriate topographic
and biochemical structure. These devices will allow the testing of pathway
activity not immediately possible in human subjects or even animal models. these
models will be used to investigate the cellular surface dynamics (Aim 1) and ECM
remodeling of the ovarian stroma (Aim 2) that both may occur in early
carcinogenesis and may underlie disease progression. To this end, they will
compare the functional response of ovarian tumor cells in terms of
differentiation, migration, adhesion strength, integrin expression,
proliferation as well as the ability to invade and remodel the ECM. They will
specifically modulate the expression of metalloproteinases (MMPs) implicated in
ECM remodeling and metastasis via stimulation with cytokines and growth factors.
These experiments will reveal the biochemical and morphological factors
operative in carcinogenesis and metastasis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;