* 0853603
* Towards Large-Scale Platelet Production from Adult Hematopoietic Stem and Progenitor Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Eleftherios Papoutsakis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2013
* USD 599,987.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853603&lt;br/&gt;W.
Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
several research groups have demonstrated the capability to produce small
quantities of functional platelets from megakaryocytic cells (Mks) in culture,
producing the 3-6 x 10-11 platelets required for a single transfusion dose using
current technology would require 250 million CD34+ hematopoietic (blood) stem
and progenitor cells. Since an umbilical cord blood harvest typically contains
less than 5 million CD34+ cells and peripheral blood harvested from donors
treated (or mobilized) with cytokines such as G-CSF (mPB) contains up to 200
million CD34+ cells, the platelet yield must be increased by several orders of
magnitude to be practical, The objective of this project is to enable the
production of one platelet transfusion dose from one million mPB CD34+ cells -
or 500,000 platelets per input CD34+
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Platelet transfusions are routinely used for a wide range of
thrombotic deficiencies, and several million units are transfused each year in
the USA and Europe. However, collecting enough platelets for a single
transfusion requires either expensive apheresis equipment or the pooling of
platelets from 4 to 8 different donors. There are also concerns with bacterial
contamination, blood-borne pathogens, and alloimmunization of recipients.
Production of autologous or fully matched platelets from Mks in culture using
Good Manufacturing Practices has the potential to alleviate all of these
problems, but many challenges remain to be addressed. Successful completion of
the proposed research would bring the large-scale production of culture-derived
platelets closer to fruition. This project will also contribute to the training
of highly qualified individuals. Graduate students and undergraduates working on
this project will be trained in an interdisciplinary environment that includes
having life science faculty members on graduate student thesis committees and
collaboration with faculty and graduate students in the medical school. Graduate
students will actively participate, together with students from other
engineering and life science departments, and present their work in the seminars
and journal club of Northwestern University's predoctoral Biotechnology Training
Program, which also provides interactions with scientists and engineers from
industry. Each graduate student will attend at least one scientific meeting per
year and will present their results and interact with other attendees at
engineering, hematology, and interdisciplinary meetings. The PIs will make a
concerted effort to recruit underrepresented minority and women graduate
students for the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering and this
project, and has supervised a large fraction of female and minority students.
The PI?s former doctoral students are employed by diverse pharmaceutical,
biotechnology, and engineering companies.