* 0853832
* Small Equipment: Infrared Thermography System for Temperature Measurements in Microchannel/Minichannel and Droplet
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Ranganathan Kumar, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

0853832&lt;br/&gt;Kumar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An infrared thermography system
will be procured that features a (3 to 5 micron) infrared camera, a 50 mm lens,
thermographic calibration from -10 C to 350 C, and a 4x microscope kit, capable
of imaging 50 to 100 micron objects. The equipment includes simultaneous analog
and digital video and synchronization capabilities, and a temperature
sensitivity and spot size of 0.02 C and 10 microns, respectively. The system
will be used to investigate transport phenomena in (a) fuel cells, (b) biofuel
droplet evaporation, and (c) flow boiling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The thermography system will be employed to spatially and temporally
resolve temperature distributions within microchannels and minichannels, and on
microdroplets. The equipment will be used in conjunction with existing velocity
measurement instrumentation (micro PIV) and species measurement instrumentation
(tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy and laser induced fluorescence).
The resulting experimental data will serve to unravel the complicated physical
mechanisms associated with these complex, two phase systems, and validate models
that are being developed worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Courses, curriculum and workshops will be developed to educate students and
professionals in the fields of IR thermography and laser diagnostics as applied
to areas such as fuel cells, biofuels and cooling of electronic packages.
Undergraduate students will be trained in the critical areas of experimental
design and advanced measurement strategies, both in senior design projects and
with research modules for an existing NSF REU program. New summer REU projects
will incorporate the IR camera. Through the Honors Thesis program, undergraduate
students will be exposed to laser diagnostics and IR thermography. These
activities will pique interest in engineering among current and prospective
students, including students from underrepresented groups.