* 0853929
* An Interactive Speech Atlas of Dene Speaking Communities in the Mackenzie Basin (693-3)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Sally Rice, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 09/30/2013
* USD 201,671.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Athapascan or, as speakers prefer,
Dene languages constitute the largest and most geographically widespread
language family of native North America. Five separate sub-groupings have been
identified: Alaskan, Northern Interior (BC/Yukon), Mackenzie Basin, and the non-
continuous Pacific Coastal and Apachean groups. All of the Dene speech
communities are endangered through the enormous economic and social pressures
that weight on tribal people throughout North America. Fluency is rapidly
disappearing. However, the Dene communities are aware of their fragility and
many are actively working with linguists to document their languages. This
proposal seeks funding for the development of a online interactive speech atlas
of the Dene speaking communities in the Mackenzie Basin by team of tribal and
academic linguists and educators. The Speech Atlas will have clickable links to
the Dene speaking communities listed on the map. The links to information about
the properties of speech that underlie structure of the sound system in that
community. These will include a list of the inventory of speech sounds for that
community, written in two orthographies, the International Phonetic Alphabet and
in the orthography developed for use in that community. Sound files of words
exemplifying the consonant and vowel speech sounds will be given. Information on
tone and prosody will be collected and presented. The Atlas will make available
baseline information on intonation patterns in questions and statements,
demonstrating basic discourse patterns. A desirable feature of this approach is
the ability to localize Dene language data to a specific community, reflecting
the way the Dene identify themselves (linguistic identity is strongly community-
based) and highlighting points of variation and stability across the languages
of the characteristically small and often isolated Dene communities in this
area. The Dene Speech Atlas project will foster integration of research and
education through the teams' ongoing associations to CILLDI (Canadian Indigenous
Language and Literacy Development Institute), held at University of Alberta,
Edmonton every summer. The Institute is devoted to training speakers of
indigenous languages in linguistic analysis and language documentation, drawing
speakers from indigenous communities all over northern
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dene Speech Atlas will serve the indigenous
Dene communities and others, who wish to compare sound patterns and orthographic
conventions across the sister languages. The map-based approach allows
linguistic material to be the organized in a new way highly suitable to the Dene
communities. The information will be geo-tagged, permitting it to be associated
to internet map systems such as Google Earth through KML links. It will also
allow other suitable types of material, such as lexicons and older texts, to be
associated to the community. The Atlas will allow speech phenomena such as
rhythm and meter, prosody and sound in these communities to be examined as
primary sources. Finally, the inherently oral nature of language, highlighted by
our increased ability to collect and build spoken word corpora, has led to an
enhanced awareness of the importance of understanding the systematic patterns
that underlie speech. Such phonetic documentation is exceptionally essential in
oral cultures, where the knowledge base of these communities necessarily lies in
oral performance and where such documentation is sparse, if it is found at all.