* 0853892
* Singularities in Oscillatory Integrals, Inverse Problems and Transformation Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Allan Greenleaf, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 391,614.00

This proposal deals with four distinct problems having the unifying theme of
controlling, estimating or reconstructing singularities that arise in
oscillatory and Fourier integral operators and inverse problems, as well as the
opposite goal of using singularities to obtain new designs in the emerging field
of transformation optics. The first problem concerns optimal decay estimates for
oscillatory integral operators in two dimensions. In the second, degenerate
versions of the Carleson-Sjolin estimates will be pursued. The third project
involves a linearized inverse problem for wave equations arising in seismic
imaging which leads to analysis and composition of degenerate Fourier integral
operators. Finally, analysis on singular spaces will be used to understand the
theoretical limits to cloaking and other transformation optics
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress on these problems will add to the
understanding of partial differential equations, the operators which are used to
solve them, and the behavior of their solutions. Many laws of nature are
expressed as partial differential equations, which govern physical quantities of
interest, such as electromagnetic field strength, pressure exerted by acoustic
waves or the quantum-mechanical probability that a particle will be found in a
particular place. The techniques to be developed in this project are applicable
to equations that govern various kinds of wave propagation and are based on a
geometric point of view in understanding and manipulating the singularities
which are present. In particular, the third project has the potential to
facilitate seismic exploration in situations where images are distorted by the
presence of multiple rays connecting seismic source to receiver. The fourth
project concerns theoretical underpinnings of the recently emergent field of
transformation optics, which has the potential to produce unusual effects on
various kinds of waves (e.g., electromagnetic, acoustic, quantum mechanical)
using artificially structured materials known as
metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;