* 0853097
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Characterization and Optimization of Compost Produced from Ecological Latrines in Three Geographical Settings in Bolivia
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,03/31/2012
* James McKinley, McKinley                James          W
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 03/31/2012
* USD 81,542.00

0853097 McKinley

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. James W.
McKinley to work with Dr. Alvaro Mercado at Centro de Aguas y Saneamiento
Ambiental, Universidad de Mayor de San Simon in Bolivia and with Dr. Robert
Siegrist at the Colorado School of Mines in the US.

Composting latrines are a cost-effective and increasingly popular sanitation
alternative used in developing countries. The compost that is produced from
these latrines can be used as fertilizer for local crops, which is an attractive
alternative to traditional latrines in communities with little or no sanitation
infrastructure. Bolivia has been using the composting latrine technology in
order to increase its population?s access to adequate sanitation. However,
previous research indicates that in some environments and communities, the
compost may not be completely mature, making it dangerous for human handling and
a poor fertilizer. In order to better understand the scientific processes that
lead to the safe treatment of human waste and to the formation of compost,
composting latrines in Bolivia are being studied over a two-year period.
Research is conducted in three geographically distinct regions in Bolivia: the
Altiplano (12,140-14,760ft), the steep-sided valleys of the south
(4,920-9,840ft), and the subtropical lowlands (1,310-1,640ft). Each region has a
distinct climate which is hypothesized to have a significant impact on the
operation of composting latrines. The analytical research consists of three
components: 1) Characterization of the compost and quantification of the
effectiveness of pathogen inactivation, 2) Manipulation of latrine operation to
produce optimal fertilizer for local crops, and 3) Investigation of the effect
of different composting latrine designs on composting effectiveness. Using the
results of the compost characterization and community survey work, ten
composting latrines are being constructed to study how to optimize composting in
various geographic and cultural areas. Design modifications include elevated
collection pits for better drainage and urine inclusion in arid environments.
These latrines are sampled and analyzed for the same suite of parameters
described above.

All research is conducted in conjunction with local governments, non-
governmental organizations, and the Environmental Engineering Master?s Program
at the Universidad Mayor de San Sim√ºn in Cochabamba, Bolivia. This collaboration
will ensure that the results are shared with the next generation of
environmental engineers in Bolivia. Active participation by students in the
grant research will be invaluable in promoting broader dissemination of the
results and improved design and use of composting latrines in the future.