* 0853989
* Bionanomaterial Uptake and Fate in Corbicula fluminea
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Peter Vikesland, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 06/30/2012
* USD 240,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;CBET-
0853989&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vikesland, Peter&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bionanomaterial Uptake and
Fate in Corbicula fluminea &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similar to what has
been observed with pharmaceuticals and personal care products, consumer use and
disposal of ?bionanomaterials? will inevitably result in their discharge to
municipal wastewater treatment systems and, ultimately, to aquatic ecosystems.
Accordingly, an improved understanding of the uptake and fate of
bionanomaterials in biological and environmental systems is critical. The
principal objective of this proposal is to determine how bionanomaterial affect
nanomaterial uptake and fate in a sentinel aquatic test organism, Corbicula
fluminea. The working hypothesis is that nanomaterial uptake into this organism
will primarily be affected by the type of biological carrier used to
functionalize the particle and to a lesser extent will depend on the size and
shape of the material. This hypothesis is to be tested by this project by using
gold nanoparticles functionalized with three different types of biological
carriers: polyethylene glycol, oligonucleotides, and peptides. A comprehensive
research plan to test this hypothesis consists of the following set of four
research tasks: (1) Production and functionalization of gold bionanomaterials,
(2) Quantification of bionanomaterial uptake and storage in Corbicula fluminea,
(3) Evaluation of bionanomaterial uptake by clam hemocytes, and (4)
Visualization of bionanomaterial uptake by clam hemocytes. Tangible products of
this research include: 1) The first detailed study examining nanomaterial uptake
and fate in bivalves, and 2) Detailed characterization of the effects of
particle size, shape, and surface functionalization on uptake by Corbicula and
by hemocytes extracted from Corbicula hemolymph (blood).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to better understanding of the
uptake, ccumulation, and partitioning of engineered nanomaterials in a sentinel
indicator species often used in environmental monitoring. Beyond a contribution
to pressing research needs in nanotechnology environmental health and safety,
the project will offer an educational outreach component. Members of the
Virginia Tech Environmental BioNanotechnology Laboratory research team will work
in partnership with the National Science Foundation sponsored EIGER Integrative
Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) Program at Virginia Tech and
the Western Virginia Public Education Consortium to establish a series of
extramurally-funded internships that enable middle school educators and students
to shadow the research team and learn about new methods for observing nanoscale
phenomena occurring at biological and environmental interfaces.