* 0853846
* U.S.-New Zealand DDEP:  Using a Chronosequence to Investigate Ecosystem Recovery Following Invasive Rat Eradication
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2010
* USD 0.00

0853846&lt;br/&gt;Schmitz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-New Zealand Doctoral
Dissertation Enhancement Project: Using a &lt;br/&gt;Chronosequence to
Investigate Ecosystem Recovery Following Invasive Rat
Eradication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a doctoral dissertation
enhancement project between Professor Oswald Schmitz and his graduate student
Holly Jones from Yale University, Professor Nicola Nelson at Victoria University
in Wellington, New Zealand and Dr. David Towns at the Department of Conservation
in Auckland, New Zealand. A key predication of restoration ecology is that
systems can be restored to a previous state following a disturbance. However,
the potential for systems to entrain into an unrestorable alternate state
following a disturbance is often overlooked. Motivated by a test for alternate
states, this study combines scientific experimentation with ongoing conversation
management actions on offshore islands in New Zealand to learn whether island
ecosystems can recover from rat invasion and eradication. Rat invasion and
predation on all members of island food webs, and seabirds in particular, can
have ecosystem-level consequences, usually mediated by a reduction in seabird-
derived nutrients. Seabirds are integral food web members on islands providing
nutrients to all members of island food webs and affecting ecosystem properties.
As a result, eradication of invasive rats from nonnative ecosystems is a common
tool used to restore systems to their preinvasion states. However, it remains
unclear whether ecosystems can recover their natural function following invasive
rat removal, or whether, without active seabird restoration, rat removal causes
ecosystems to jump to alternate, low nutrient states. The measurements the
researchers will take on the New Zealand Islands will serve as indicators of
recovery relative to currently invaded and never invaded
controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique study design will provide a rare
ecosystem-scale test of theory and will be effective at informing island
managers, due to its realistic scale. The study can accurately assess the
success of New Zealand?s island restoration efforts, and this will help in
advancing scientific theory and in helping managers to set realistic baselines
and recovery expectations for island ecosystems. Local Mori communities will
send representatives on island trips to learn more about conservation related
research. Scientists at New Zealand?s Landcare Research and at the New Zealand
Museum of Natural History will also be involved in the project. The project will
also provide the U.S. graduate student with a global research experience. It is
anticipated that the student will maintain scientific connections with her New
Zealand collaborators for many years after the project is
completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;