* 0853943
* Structural rearrangements and transport properties of cyclically sheared granular packings
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Arshad Kudrolli, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,112.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0853943 Kudrolli

Intellectual Merit

The PI proposes to apply a state of the art fluorescent index matching technique
to measure the three dimensional positions of particles in the bulk to
investigate the elastic and plastic response of a dense granular system
undergoing cyclic shear. The proposed research will be transformative because it
allows one to systematically examine the packing structure and transport
coefficients of the particles over a volume fraction ranging from random loose
packing to hexagonal close packings in a regime which is most common to
industrial applications. There is a need for such a study because athermal
granular matter lacks a sound hydrodynamic description in spite of their
preponderance in industrial processes leading to ad hoc solutions. The proposed
work builds on preliminary experiments where it is found that velocity auto
correlation function for sheared dense granular media show a fast decay, which
raises the possibility that hydrodynamic calculations can be extended to
significantly greater range of volume fractions compared with elastic hard
sphere liquids at equilibrium. A cyclic shear cell apparatus is developed, and a
broad shear zone is obtained in the bulk. Three dimensional particle tracking
allows one to measure nearest neighbor distribution, the icosahedral order
parameter, besides the Voronoi volume distribution as a function of volume
fraction and strain, much in the way this is being accomplished in colloidal
glasses with confocal microscopy, but here at a 100 times larger scale. Such
information can reveal fundamental assumptions about granular systems and
understanding of their properties in relation to other particulate matter such
as colloidal glasses and suspensions, besides help develop a computational
model. The cyclic and quasi static nature of the shear application, will allow
us to identify parameters over which one can experience an elastic response in
finite, rigid multi contact particulate systems. Furthermore, once plastic
deformation has occured, detect heterogenities, identify irrevisible shear
transformation zones and determine their topology. Then, the PI will investigate
the effect of polydispersity on granular packing and transport properties. It is
well know that particulates segregate even if minor differences between them
exist. In particular, we will examine the motion of an intruder particle in a
cyclically sheared system and study the competition between size, roughness,
density and gravity. The application of the fluctuation-dissipation principle to
their motion will be tested. The comparison with theoretical calculations will
be conducted in collaboration with Professor V. Kumaran of the Department of
Chemical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore. Further,
the PI proposes to build a database downloadable from the web, containing the
trajectories of all the particles as a function of shear cycle that other
members in the field can use to carry out their own analysis.

Broader Impact

The proposed work will have significant impact on undergraduate, graduate and
post doctoral student training, besides fostering international collaborations.
The involvement of underrepresented members in STEM careers will be positively
impacted because the graduate student working on the project is female, and the
post doctoral student has partial African heritage. The grant will enhance
summer research experience of undergraduate students and help accomplish their
honor thesis projects in the laboratory. Aspects of the research will be also
adapted into a course on mechanics currently being developed by the PI.