* 0853997
* Collaborative Research:  International Experience for Students:  U.S.-Ukraine Collaboration on Discrete and Nondifferentiable Optimization
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Oleg Prokopyev, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 05/31/2012
* USD 64,536.00

&lt;br/&gt;OISE 08-53804 OISE 08-53997&lt;br/&gt;Sergiy Butenko Oleg
Prokopyev&lt;br/&gt;Texas Engineering Experiment Station University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International Research Experience for Students:
U.S.-Ukraine Collaboration on Discrete and Nondifferentiable
Optimization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-Ukraine project provides US
undergraduate and graduate students opportunities to conduct research at the
Glushkov Institute of Cybernetics in Kyiv, Ukraine. The research activities are
focused in the areas of discrete and nondifferentiable optimization and their
applications. The principal investigators are Sergiy Butenko from the Texas
Engineering Experiment Station, Oleg Prokopyev from the University of Pittsburgh
and Ivan Sergienko from the Glushkov Institute of
Cybernetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US students spend three-week periods at
the Glushkov Institute where they work in teams involving US graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as Ukrainian students. The Ukrainian senior
researchers serve as mentors. Students are offered a variety of research project
ideas to choose from. They may also propose their own problems to work on. The
problems to be solved include some well-known ones, as well as novel
combinatorial optimization problems that have numerous applications. An example
of a project topic offered is developing metaheuristic approaches for solving
fractional 0-1 programming problems with application in biclustering of DNA
microarray data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fulfills the program
objectives of providing US students with a global perspective and opportunities
for professional growth through international cooperative research training,
networking and mentoring. This activity is continuation of a previous IRES
project supported by NSF award # 0553513.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;