* 0853483
* Microalgal-based Production of Biofuels and High Energy Combustion Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ioan Negulescu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,093.00

0853483&lt;br/&gt;Rusch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: This
proposal will investigate the factors that result in optimal production of high
energy lipids and biopolymers in the microalgal and cyanobacteria species of the
genera Botryococcus, Nannochloropsis, Synechocystis, and Nostoc. The overall
goal of this project is to develop a technical and economically feasible method
to obtain and extract high energy storage products from microalgae through
environmentally friendly processes. The large scale experimentation will be
performed using the Hydraulically Integrated Serial Turbidostat Algal Reactor
(HISTAR). HISTAR incorporates inoculums generation, biomass production and
harvesting in a series of reactors, allowing for a high local dilution rate to
mitigate contaminant introduction and low system dilution rate to increase
productivity. The design of the system has shown to have higher yields and
reduced problems commonly observed in closed bioreactors such as wall growth,
heat accumulation and poor gas exchange. The goal will be achieved by testing
the following hypothesis: 1) bench scale microalgae or cyanobacteria culture
results can be scaled to commercial levels within HISTAR; 2) lipids and PHA can
be co-produced in certain cyanobacteria species; 3) C:N ratio will impact the
lipid and PHA content of the algal cells; 4) lipid and PHA extraction efficiency
(and thus cost) will vary with the extraction method used; 5) the use of
nanostructured metals can enhance the extraction processes; and 6) a microalgal
productivity model can adequately predict lipid and PHA yields from intensive,
continuous microalgal cultures. These objectives will be tested in four phases:
1) production of biomass, lipid and PHA in batch systems; 2) culture of one
microalgae and one cyanobacteria species in the HISTAR system; 3) evaluation of
extraction methods for the lipids and PHA, as well as quantification of the
total energy content of the biomass produced, and 4) cost:benefit analysis of
each process pathway via modeling. The outcomes from this work will provide a
better scientific understanding of the processes dictating successful microalgal
culture for biofuels and foundation for a commercial approach to cultivating
microalgae with increased energy content (PHA) and/or lipids (oil extraction).
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This proposal topic lends itself to several
formal/informal educational activities, several of which will be disseminated
through the Louisiana Sea Grant College Program (Ocean Commotion), Cain Center
for Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Literacy (Teacher Prep),
Office of Diversity Programs in Engineering (REHAMS and XCITE) and American
Chemical Society (Super Science Saturday). The results of this work will be
disseminated through technical meetings, journal papers and through web based
documents. Society benefits expected from this project is the increase of
production of biomass based high energy products to reduce the consumption of
oil based fuels and polymers and thus reduces the dependency on foreign oil.