* 0853110
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Sediment Transport in Marine Environments:  Processes, Timescales, and Paleoclimatic Implications
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Victoria Lee, Lee                     Victoria       E
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2011
* USD 169,796.00

0853110 Lee

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Victoria
E. Lee to work with Dr. Gideon M. Henderson at Oxford University in the United
Kingdom.

The aim of this project is to determine the timescales and processes involved in
the formation and evolution of marine sediment deposits. This information is
necessary for accurate interpretation of the paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic
proxy records hosted in marine sediments. Of particular interest are proxy
records in deep-sea drift deposits. Lateral advection of fine-grained sediment
to drifts causes high sedimentation rates that are desirable for high-resolution
paleoclimate studies. However, this process can also cause spatial and temporal
decoupling of proxies associated with different grain sizes ? lateral advection
of fine-grained sediment by deep ocean currents can transport older proxies
recording non-local environmental conditions to a given depositional site.
Therefore, deciphering a given location?s paleoproxy record requires information
about the transport history of the fine-grained sediment fraction. The PI is
investigating the effects of glacial-interglacial sea level changes on the
transport history of the Bermuda Rise sediments, which comprise a deep-sea drift
site of paleoclimatic importance. This is being done by applying a suite of
relatively new geochemical tools, which are: the uranium-series comminution age
method, excess thorium-230 for determining sediment focusing factors, optically
stimulated luminescence dating, and compound-specific carbon-14 dating, as well
as conventional neodymium and strontium isotopes for provenance. The sum of the
information obtained by conducting these measurements will provide quantitative
marine sediment transport and storage timescales, insight into the related
drift-forming processes, and a better understanding of how to interpret
multiproxy paleoclimate records. This has direct relevance for understanding the
Earth?s climate system, which presently is of societal concern.