* 0853788
* Documenting Tlingit (TLI) conversations in Video and Time-Aligned Text
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Richard Dauenhauer, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 09/30/2013
* USD 449,852.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What Tlingit conversations
do birth speakers of Tlingit use to carry on their daily lives? What record of
daily functional language will learners and scientists look to in the future?
The Tlingit language is a branch of the Na-Dene language family indigenous to
Southeast Alaska, the interior of British Columbia and Yukon Territory, Canada.
Of the 45 languages in the Nuclear Na-Dene language family, there are two
branches; Tlingit is one; all the others arise from the other branch. There are
approximately 200 Tlingit birth-speakers, most in their 70s and older. During
the last two years, this group has suffered a 13% mortality rate, a rate which
will accelerate since the population of birth-speakers is aging. Recordings of
Tlingit common, everyday conversation, are scant but crucially important for
language documentation; everyday conversation is the means of functional
communication. We need a record of conversation for analysis, learning, and
preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, Drs. Alice Taff, Richard L. Dauenhauer and the project team of
Tlingit faculty and students at the University of Alaska Southeast will produce
a video record of spontaneous Tlingit conversation with bilingual, time-aligned
annotations, and make the results available to scientists and the language
learning community. A second result will be increased Tlingit language and
literacy skills, knowledge of linguistic concepts, and experience in language
documentation and archiving for members of the Tlingit language community,
highly active in its language revitalization efforts. To make recordings, birth
speakers will be videoed talking in groups of two or more while carrying out
common daily activities. Then teams of birth-speakers and students will
transcribe the conversations in Tlingit and broadly translate them into English.
The videos will be post-produced as QuickTime subtitled movies for use by the
regional and international Tlingit language-learning community. The team will
catalogue the recordings with their transcription/translations and archive them
for discovery and access for scientific analysis. Community and scientific
collaboration will inform the project at all stages of work so that as many
different people, dialects, topics of interest, and grammatical forms as
possible are documented. Advances in information technology will be exploited in
all phases of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;