* 0853411
* Epoxy-Acrylate Hybrid Resin Systems: Photopolymerizations Outside the (Controlled Atmosphere) Box
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Julie Jessop, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2014
* USD 377,392.00

0853411&lt;br/&gt;Jessop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Propagation
mechanisms that are driven by free-radical active centers are plagued by oxygen
inhibition. Cationic polymerization schemes suffer from moisture effects and
slower cure rates. To address the limitations of these mechanisms, hybrid resin
systems have been designed to photopolymerize using a combination of cationic
and free-radical mechanisms. (The advantages of using light to initiate
polymerization rather than heat include significant savings in energy costs,
processing space, and time; solvent-free systems; and increased control over the
production of initiating species.) These hybrid systems exhibit lower
sensitivity to oxygen and moisture and offer advantages such as increased cure
speed and improved film-forming properties. To date, most studies have focused
on the development of these systems; thus, there is a need for in-depth studies
in order to create a fundamental base of knowledge that allows the impact and
utility of these systems to be optimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will investigate hybrid resin systems based on formulations that contain both an
epoxide moiety, which undergoes cationic ring-opening photopolymerization, and
an acrylate moiety, which undergoes free-radical photopolymerization. The goal
of this research is to acquire a better understanding of how experimental
variables affect the atmospheric sensitivity of these systems (both hybrid
monomers and multi-monomer systems), which in turn will facilitate the optimal
incorporation of hybrid monomers or systems in practical formulations. This goal
will be accomplished by:&lt;br/&gt;- Determining the most influential factors in
altering the oxygen-diffusion-affected region in hybrid
monomers/systems.&lt;br/&gt;- Characterizing the interplay between
photoinitiator systems in hybrid monomers/systems and their effects on kinetics
and physical properties.&lt;br/&gt;- Clarifying the effect of water on the
kinetics and physical properties of hybrid polymers.&lt;br/&gt;- Evaluating
improvements made in acrylate and epoxide formulations by the incorporation of
hybrid monomers/systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conversion, rate of
polymerization, and composition will be obtained using Raman and near-infrared
spectroscopies and Raman confocal microscopy. Dynamic mechanical analysis and
surface hardness testing will be used to correlate polymer composition with
physical properties. Comparisons of this kinetic and physical information will
aid in reaction design for these polymers and will address important issues on
the interactions between the two photopolymerization systems. Results will
provide insight for tailoring resin formulations to specific end-use
applications, especially in films, coatings, and
adhesives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research could impact the
photopolymerization industries by decreasing costs associated with combating
oxygen inhibition, facilitating faster reactions, decreasing the dependence of
product quality upon humidity conditions, providing polymers with better surface
properties, and enabling the production of thin films at ambient conditions.
This characterization will also provide opportunities for growth of new
applications in the fields of biomedicine, telecommunications, and aerospace
engineering. The project will also have a direct impact on the educational
experience of students at various levels. Students in engineering and science
will benefit from a polymer science course series that will incorporate these
research results. Several undergraduate students and high-school teachers and/or
students will be invited to participate in portions of this research. Project
Lead the Way Iowa will introduce secondary students and teachers to engineering
concepts through a summer training program and academic-year classes.