* 0853293
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Permutation Groups and Model Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Paul Baginski, Baginski                Paul
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2011
* USD 136,072.00

0853293&lt;br/&gt;Baginski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellowship Program
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of
research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,
and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four-
month research fellowship by Dr. Paul Baginski to work with Dr. Tuna Altinel at
the University of Lyon in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permutation groups
provide the mathematical abstraction of the symmetries of a specified object.
While finite permutation groups have long been examined, the current project
uses model-theoretic methods to extend this mathematical theory to several
classes of infinite permutation groups with finitary properties. In particular,
the project focuses on the strong model-theoretic properties of finite Morley
rank (fMR) and countable categoricity. In the case of finite groups, many
insights about permutation groups occurred toward the end of the classification
program for finite simple groups. In the infinite case, model theorists have
pursued an analogous classification program for simple groups of finite Morley
rank for nearly thirty years. The current status of the classification prompted
two prominent researchers, Alexandre Borovik and Gregory Cherlin, to signal in
2007 that significant progress on infinite permutation groups of finite Morley
rank is imminent. The proposed project has begun by addressing one of Borovik
and Cherlin?s questions concerning the fundamental model theoretic interactions
between the permutation group and the set upon which it acts, equipped with a
relational ?footprint? of the group action. The investigation proceeds in the
fMR case toward analysis of primitive permutation groups, generic
n-transitivity, and other related problems. In parallel, the project considers
these same problems, but with countable categoricity in place of finite Morley
rank. Whereas groups of fMR generally resemble algebraic groups over
algebraically closed fields, countably categorical groups tend toward infinite-
dimensional vector spaces over finite fields. Taken together, groups with the
properties of finite Morley rank or countable categoricity encompass many
familiar examples of infinite permutation groups which appear across
mathematics. Advances in the fMR or countably categorical settings can be
expected to have broad applicability within model theory and other fields such
as number theory, algebraic graph theory and abstract geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project features international cooperation, with
involvement from researchers from the USA, France, the United Kingdom, Germany,
and elsewhere, and the results would have rapid and wide circulation.
Furthermore, implications of this research could easily reach beyond
mathematics, since permutation groups are used in the applied study of
symmetries of many objects, from crystals to the arithmetic curves that underlie
much of modern cryptography. Due to their size, some of these objects are
effectively ?infinite?. For example, the world-wide-web, when considered as a
set of points (webpages) connected by lines (hyperlinks), forms a nearly
impossible system for full-scale analysis. While computationally infinite, such
objects are naturally finite. In this case, it may be fruitful to analyze their
symmetries using infinite permutation groups with finitary properties, such as
the ones featured in this research.