* 0853993
* High-throughput and live monitoring of gene expression in stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Mattheos Koffas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2014
* USD 602,000.00

0853993&lt;br/&gt;Andreadis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work represents a significant step forward
from current methodologies that may enable a new level of understanding of the
genetic networks that may be important in stem cell differentiation or self-
renewal. Although this methodology will be initially applied to a subpopulation
of bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), the broader applicability
of this approach will likely impact other fields of biotechnology,
bioengineering and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A key outcome of the proposed work will be the development of a novel
high-throughput technology that can be used to study diverse biological systems.
Specifically, the proposed project will lead to the development of a genome-wide
lentivirus library and lentivirus microarrays that will be made available to the
scientific and engineering communities and that will be applicable to a wide
range of cell types and bioengineering problems. The same concept can be
expanded to libraries of antisense-RNA that can be used in loss-of-function
studies, and these will be similarly disseminated. It will also produce
quantitative kinetic data sets that will be available to the scientific
community via an internet database. It will allow engineers to take a leading
role in the growing field of functional genomics and encourage the application
of engineering approaches to understanding stem cell differentiation in a
quantitative manner. The PIs will make a concerted effort to recruit
underrepresented minority and women graduate students for the Department of
Chemical and Biological Engineering and this project, and has supervised a large
fraction of female and minority students. The PI's former doctoral students are
employed by diverse pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and engineering companies.