* 0853297
* Preparation of Ultra-Low Thermal Conductivity Coatings Via Suspension Plasma Spray Using a Defect Clustering Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Rodney Trice, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 316,990.00

The objective of this research award is to investigate a novel processing method
to produce ultra-low conductivity thermal barrier coatings that would overcome
the deficiencies of current yttria-stabilized zirconia coatings. Thermal barrier
coatings are used in gas turbine engines to thermally protect the superalloy
blades in the combustion area, affording hotter, more efficient operating
temperatures. Our approach for preparing next generation thermal barrier
coatings couples for the first time two newly developed techniques: suspension
plasma spray and defect clustering. In suspension plasma spray, nanosized
powders are dispersed in ethanol to form a colloidal suspension; the suspension
is then sprayed into a hot plasma plume to evaporate the solvent and melt the
powder. The second technique, defect clustering, involves doping yttria-
stabilized zirconia with paired rare-earth ions (such as ytterbium and
neodymium) to create immobile clusters in the plasma-sprayed coating. The
presence of these clusters in a thermal barrier coating scatters phonons,
reducing coating thermal conductivity by over one-half compared to current
yttria-stabilized zirconia-only coatings.

If successful, the results of this research will allow gas turbine engines to be
operated at higher, more fuel efficient temperatures, saving fuel and reducing
energy usage. New coating designs emerging from this research have the potential
to influence key industries that are concerned with finding the least expensive
method to transport people and goods and produce energy. In terms of educational
impact, the primary investigator for this grant is heavily involved in mentoring
at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels through prior NSF
support. This grant would continue these efforts for all three groups of
students by providing research opportunities.