* 0853598
* Athabascan Spoken Language Corpora: Ahtna (aht) and Navajo (nav)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2014
* Marianne Mithun, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2014
* USD 278,144.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The goal of this project is the documentation of spontaneous connected speech,
with a focus on conversation in natural settings, in two languages indigenous to
North America. The result will be two substantial corpora, complete with audio
and video recordings, transcription, and translation. The two languages, Ahtna
and Navajo, represent the two major branches of one of the largest language
families of North America. Ahtna, a Northern Athabascan language, is spoken in
Alaska. Navajo, a Southern Athabascan language, is spoken over a wide area of
the Southwest. Both are still actively used by older speakers at the moment, but
both are endangered: no children are learning Ahtna, and few are learning
Navajo. When one language is being replaced by another(English, in this case),
one of the first aspects of the heritage language to fade is traditional
patterns of expression. The result is that traditional ways of organizing
thought in speech, and of interacting linguistically, slip away nearly
unnoticed. Grammatical categories and patterns of expression that have evolved
over millennia can disappear with little trace.

The Athabascan languages have tremendous potential for contributing to our
understanding of language in general. The conceptual categories delimited by
their vocabulary, and the semantic distinctions encoded in their grammars are
strikingly and fundamentally different from those of the better-described
languages that have served as the foundation for linguistic theory. Speakers of
Athabascan languages say very different things when speaking than do English
speakers. Dictionaries and basic grammatical descriptions now exist for both
Ahtna and Navajo, but the missing piece is how the words and grammatical
structures are actually used. The documentation of spontaneous speech in natural
settings is a crucial step at this point in the history of these languages and
in the field of linguistics. The corpora will provide open-ended records of the
languages which will constitute a stable resource as theoretical concerns evolve
and new questions come to the fore. They will make it possible to observe the
larger contexts in which forms and constructions are used, relative frequencies
of speaker choices, the prosodic patterns accompanying structures, and styles of
interaction. The project also has major educational components. Doctoral
students (one of whom is himself Navajo) and community members will receive
cutting-edge training in language documentation, archiving, and analysis. The
corpora will serve not just as a resource for academic research, but also as the
basis for projects of central concern to the Athna and Navajo communities:
language teaching, language revitalization, and language appreciation.