* 0853560
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Quantum Cohomology, Quantized Algebraic Varieties, and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Andrei Okounkov, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 378,027.00

Recent results of the PI's and the co-PI's suggest a strong connection between
the following mathematical objects and constructions: localization theory in
representation theory in zero and positive characteristic; derived categories of
coherent sheaves on algebraic symplectic varieties; small equivariant quantum
cohomology; Casimir-type connections and their monodromy.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to gain a deeper and more detailed understanding of the links
between these objects and develop new methods for enumerative algebraic geometry
and representation theory based on those
links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representation theory is a branch of mathematics
based on the fact that surprisingly rich information about a mathematical or
physical object is often hidden in the structure of its symmetries. Throughout
some 100 years of its history, a major source of motivation and methods in
representation theory has been the interaction with neighboring fields, such as
the physics of elementary particles, number theory and geometry. The idea of the
present project comes from a new connection of this sort, this time with recent
constructions in algebraic geometry motivated by high energy physics. At present
this connection has only been observed in particular, though impressive,
examples. The aim of the project is to gain a better understanding of the nature
of this connection and use this understanding to develop new methods for
attacking current problems in several areas of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;