* 0853801
* Engineering the Unfolded Protein Response for Improved Protein Production
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Eric Shusta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2013
* USD 309,475.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0853801 Shusta

Intellectual merit

Protein therapeutics (biopharmaceuticals) are increasingly being used for the
treatment of a variety of diseases. Over 165 biopharmaceuticals are currently on
the market and hundreds more are in development, representing more than one-
third of the current pharmaceutical pipeline. One of the major hurdles in the
development of any protein biopharmaceutical is the production of high quality
recombinant protein at a level that can meet demand in an economically feasible
manner. Unfortunately, present methods for optimization of protein secretion
strains have not yielded significant improvements despite substantial effort and
innovation. In this project, a novel approach for yeast strain engineering that
takes advantage of the transcriptional control of the unfolded protein response
(UPR) is presented.

Broader impacts This project provides a new conceptual framework and toolkit for
the optimization of protein production strains. Reverse engineering in the form
of microarray analysis also has the potential to initiate new directions of
research based on the molecules and pathways that had been previously
unassociated with improved protein processing within the cell. Next, the project
is designed to train a graduate student and several undergraduate students in
the cross-disciplinary fields of bioprocessing and protein engineering to
prepare them for careers in industry and academia. The PI has trained 31
undergraduate and graduate students, several of whom are from underrepresented
backgrounds. Research results will be integrated into courses that the PI
regularly teaches as protein engineering modules in his "Design of Biological
Molecules" graduate course and as coupled transport-reaction problems in his
undergraduate mass transfer course. Finally, research results will also be
disseminated to high school students in the form of the Wisconsin High School
State Science Olympiad, through an "Applied Protein Modeling for Medical Uses"
symposium that the PI organizes and hosts.