* 0853662
* Collaborative Research:  Towards a Molecular-Scale Understanding of Flow-Induced Gelation in Thread-Like Micelle Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 272,000.00

0853662&lt;br/&gt;Larson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite substantial progress
achieved in understanding the microstructural basis of transport and rheology in
many classes of complex fluids, including polymers, colloids, glasses,
liquidcrystals and others, the flow behavior of one of the most important
classes of complex fluids, surfactant solutions, remains mysterious. In
particular, it has been known for at least two decades that translucent
solutions of thread/rod like surfactant micelles undergo a phase transition to
form viscoelastic gels under sufficiently strong shear or extensional flows.
Lacking an understanding even of what these structures are, they are simply
given the name Flow-Induced Structures, or FIS. While progress has been made
towards simulating thread/rod like(nanoscale) micelles at the molecular level,
and towards simulating the macroscopic consequences of the presence of FIS, such
as banded structures in the shear flow, there is an almost complete lack of
theoretical connection between molecular structures and the possibility and
conditions under which such nano structures might
manifest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This is a collaborative
investigation between two universities to help close gaps in understanding
through both experiments and a multi scale set of simulations encompassing
length and time scales ranging from atomic (and nano) to continuum. A set of
experiments exploring the regimes of transient and novel permanent flow-induced
structures, induced by extensional deformation in micro channels, will be
carried out. In parallel, the project proposes four different simulation
methods. 1) Atomistic Molecular Dynamic Simulations. These can capture the
structure and interactions of one or two thread like micelle fragments in a
periodic box roughly 10 nm on a side, at the atomic level on timescales of 10
nanoseconds. This is long enough and big enough to determine ionic effects on
micellar structure and intermicellar interactions. 2) Coarse Grained (CG)
Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Using the Marrink MARTINI model that lumps
around four heavy atoms into each bead, a 1000 fold speed up relative to
atomistic simulations is attained, reaching nearly to the millisecond time
scale, while preserving molecular scale properties through suitably chosen CG
potentials. The CG model will allow for the determination of micelle persistence
lengths and the stability of thread like micelles as a function of salt
concentration. 3) Brownian Dynamics Simulations using pearl necklace micelle
model. This model, pioneered by Ryckaert and coworkers, treats the wormlike
micelle as a string of beads that can break and fuse end-to-end, and is fast
enough to allow for the equilibration of micelle length distributions, with and
without flow. We will incorporate into this model the potential for micelle
junctions or cross links, and bundling, thereby allowing for the first time a
molecular scale simulation of flow induced gel formation. 4) Kinetic Model and
Constitutive Equation. We will attempt to draw from the simulations the
ingredients necessary to build a kinetic model and, if possible, a full
nonlinear constitutive equation for flow of thread like micelles. Through this
set of interlocking simulations, each aimed at different length and time scales,
complemented by experiments, the investigators have developed a roadmap to
bridge between molecular properties and macroscopic flow effects such as flow
induced gelation and shear banding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include
a collaboration with scientists at Proctor and Gamble, whose nterest is in
understanding, modeling, and controlling the properties of thread like micellar
solutions. They plan annual meetings between P&amp;G scientists and our team of
graduate and undergraduate students and faculty as well as month long student
interships at P&amp;G. This will lead to fruitful exchange of ideas, bringing
practical commercial concerns to the attention of students, and carrying novel
fundamental ideas and new modeling methods into the corporate world. They plan
to also recruit UG (REU) as well as school students including minority students
(through STARS program at Washington University) and involve them in developing
modules driven by fast GROMACS and MARTINI engines with coarse grained
potentials to help learn self assembly in surfactant solutions.