* 0853948
* GOALI: Industrial Implementation of Smart Biopolymers for Antibody Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Marylynn Yates, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 209,222.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853948/0853869&lt;br/&gt;Chen/Cramer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports
work by Professors Wilfred Chen and Steven M. Cramer at University of
California, Riverside and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, respectively, to
generate a new set of thermo-responsive elatin-like-protein (ELP)-IgG-binding
domain fusions as the capturing scaffolds for the direct purification and
recovery of antibodies. The tunable capturing scaffolds proposed here extends on
ideas from nature toward entirely new objectives. The tunable hydrophobic
interaction exhibited by the stimuli-responsive ELP is tailored specifically as
a non-covalent method to reversibly capture antibodies directly from a complex
mixture. The end result is a new integrated platform that will greatly simplify
the overall process of antibody purification by eliminating any chromatographic
step and improve the cost associated with down-stream purification. The
practical utility of these novel capturing scaffolds will be evaluated for
large-scale industrial antibody purification in partnership with Bristol-Myers
Squibb (BMS). This will enable the evaluation of these capturing scaffolds with
industrially relevant antibody feed stocks and will enable work to be carried
out that would not be possible without this academic/industrial collaboration.
BMS has agreed to provide the necessary training in the analytical methods and
scale-up and will allow the graduate students to carry out a portion of their
work in-house at BMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have a
significant impact on the state of the art of smart biopolymers for protein
purification and their implementation in an industrial setting. The development
of novel ELP fusions will enable significant increases in expression level while
also establishing desirable transition temperatures and salt conditions.
Further, these fusions will enable relatively gentle elution of antibodies with
high product quality. If successful, the developed method will enable efficient
and simple recovery of antibodies and will reduce the overall manufacturing
complexity and associated costs. Importantly, this unique collaboration between
academia and industry will serve as a proof of concept study for the industrial
implementation of this transformative technology for antibody purification.
Moreover, graduate students participating in this research will gain an
integrated perspective of the important interfaces and synergies connecting
biochemistry, modern genetics, and process engineering.