* 0853562
* Hydrogenation/dehydrogenation in novel Pd-coated Mg nanoblades:
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Shengbai Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

0853562 Wang

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Summary The goal of this research is to provide a scientific basis for the
development of a new class of materials for reversible and high capacity storage
at moderate temperature and pressure. Intellectual merit: The experimental and
theoretical work in this proposal will develop a key understanding at the
microscopic level of the mechanisms governing the storage and release of
hydrogen in nanostructured metal hydrides, namely, how smaller grain size
affects and lowers the desorption temperature to a technologically acceptable
level. The PIs have the capability to quantify the effect by using their unique
oblique angle deposition technique, which can tune the grain size of MgH2 in
tens nm range needed by the study. The first-principles density functional
calculations will guide the experiments to optimize the design of an effective
hydrogen storage material. The Mg nanoblades, formed by oblique angle
deposition, have several unique and significant features, making the proposed
research truly original and creative. Ex situ characterization tools will
include scanning electron microscopy for morphology and transmission electron
microscopy and x-ray diffraction for microstructures and phases, and nuclear
reaction analysis and Rutherford back scattering analysis for average H
concentration in Mg. First-principles calculations will be carried out by using
one of the largest university based supercomputing centers, CCNI (Computational
Center for Nanotechnology Innovations), at RPI. Broader impacts: The
complementary experimental and theoretical studies of this unique system will
not only provide fundamental understanding of the reactions, diffusion, and
kinetics of hydrogenation/dehydrogenation, they will also stimulate the
synthesis of a new class of integrated nanomaterials and nanocatalysts that can
be developed and scaled up using roll-to-roll coating technology into
potentially low-cost, lightweight, safe, and high-volume practical devices for
end users. These devices may serve as portable energy sources for sensors,
computer equipment, telecommunications, etc. Education and outreach: The team
members in this proposal have strong track records of integrating research,
education, and outreach activities. In addition to training graduate students,
they have created over 50 undergraduate research projects (with the
participation of many women and minority students) and have co-authored more
than 20 papers with undergraduates in the past 10 years through NSF REU and
Rensselaer-sponsored URP (Undergraduate Research Participation) programs. This
project, particularly the atomistic simulation of hydrogen reaction and
diffusion in three-dimensional nanocrystalline blades, can capture the
imagination of K-12 students. It is also particularly suitable for animation
presentation in the digital dome in the Troy Children's Museum of Science and
Technology, which is visited by more than 200,000 students annually.