* 0853104
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Investigation of Nanoscale Water Columns using a MEMS Force Sensor
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Corey Stambaugh, Stambaugh               Corey
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2011
* USD 153,600.00

0853104 Stambaugh

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Corey A.
Stambaugh to work with Dr. Jhe Wonho at Seoul National University in Korea and
with Dr. Ho Bun Chan at the University of Florida in the US.

Liquids play an important role in a variety of phenomena. Water, in particular,
is fundamental to life. Yet despite this, several of its properties and those of
liquids, in general, are still not well understood. This is especially true when
the liquid samples are confined to spaces whose spatial dimensions are on the
nanoscale. Here, water has been found to exhibit many interesting and novel
features including the manifestation of ice phases, not typically seen in bulk
samples and exhibition of solid-like orderedness. Thin nanometer layers of water
between two surfaces are responsible for every day experiences with friction and
are behind many of the phenomena seen in tribology. Nanoscale water also plays
an essential role in biological processes such as protein folding and enzyme
activation. Unfortunately, due to the short-range order of bulk water and
constant agitation of water molecules, these features prove difficult to
investigate under most circumstances. In recent years, advances in
nanotechnology have allowed for the fabrication and probing of systems on
increasingly smaller length scales. Such advances have provided the means to
study liquid samples on the nanoscale. Recent work by Prof. Wonho Jhe at Seoul
National University examined the formation of nanoscale water columns in small
spaces using an atomic force microscope. These studies have shown that nanoscale
water samples actually possess elastic properties; a feature obscured by the
viscous properties observed in bulk water samples. This research focuses on
experimentally probing the properties of nanoscale liquid columns, specifically
water. This is done by combining two experimental techniques to measure both the
force gradient and the force exerted by the nanoscale water columns. The first
technique involves measuring the force gradient operated via the small
amplitude-modulated method using an atomic force microscope. The second uses a
sensitive microelectromechanical (MEMS) force sensor to measure the forces
exerted by the columns.

The combination of the two techniques provides a novel scheme for studying
several features of the nanoscale water columns that are formed between the
atomic force microscope?s cantilever and the MEMS force sensor. The specific
features include the impact of humidity on the adhesive force, the elasticity
and viscosity of water, and the relaxation and nucleation time of capillary
condensation. These results will contribute to our understanding of the role
nanoscale water can play in biological processes and of the effect the adhesive
force has on the performance of scanning probe microscopy and MEMS.