* 0853950
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Advanced Solid-State NMR Characterization of  Non-Covalent Interactions of Organic Compounds in Soil and Sediment Organic Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jingdong Mao, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2013
* USD 225,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0853682 and 0853950
&lt;br/&gt;Pignatello and Mao &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sorption by the
soil/sediment organic matter (SOM) fraction of geosolids controls the fate of
nonionic organic compounds in the environment, and is an underlying process
affecting decision-making in analytical chemistry, risk assessment, and
remediation strategy for specific pollutants. While NMR spectroscopy is
potentially a powerful molecular-scale tool, it has so far provided limited
insight into the mechanisms of sorption by solid-state SOM due to poor
resolution. In the last few years, however, significant advances many by one of
the PIs have been made in acquisition and spectral editing techniques of solid
state NMR (1H, 13C, 129Xe and 2D analysis) that have yielded valuable new
information about the structure of SOM solids. The PIs will apply many of these
techniques, in combination with sorption experiments, to gain information about
the nature of the sorbed complex. Materials of focus will include humic acid
particles, whole soils and isolated SOM, black carbon standards, coal reference
standards, and polymer standards. The objectives are: a) to probe structural
changes of SOM taking place during sorption; b) to probe preferential sites of
sorption in SOM in regions chemically homogeneous on a scale large enough to
serve as separate sorption domains; and c) to quantify fused ring content and
size and their influence on sorption affinity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this work will influence the way research is designed and the way major
concepts are taught in environmental engineering and science. Society will
benefit broadly by changes in approaches to risk assessment and remediation
design that will result from an improved conceptual model of the sorption
process. The collaboration will significantly build research infrastructure
because it will open additional avenues that can be explored in environmental
engineering and science with NMR. The involvement of Native Americans through
connections to tribal colleges is a strong feature of the educational benefits
that can be derived from this work. Post-docs from the Pignatello research group
have secured faculty positions at institutions where they will likely increase
participation of under-represented populations to STEM disciplines. The
curriculum materials to be developed for on-line resources for science teachers
would allow effective dissemination of results to the K-12 level.