* 0853720
* Suspension Dynamics with Inertia: Combined Discrete-Particle Simulation and Constitutive Modeling Investigations
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Jeffrey Morris, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

0853720 Morris



This project addresses flow of suspensions of rigid particles with inertia at
the particle scale. Inertia on the particle scale is defined in terms of the
Reynolds number based on shear rate, particle radius and kinematic viscosity.
Significant particle-scale inertia implies Reynolds number greater than unity.
For small particles, this usually implies larger inertia at the macroscopic
scale. Consequently, inertial behavior on multiple scales must be considered.
Based on the PI's prior simulations verified against experiment and established
simulations, the focus of this study is on simulation of particle-laden flows at
finite Reynolds numbers, exploring motions of individual particles as well as
particle suspensions. The simulations use the PI's recent developments in the
lattice-Boltzmann technique, implemented in a parallel computational algorithm.
A number of basic flows will be simulated, including periodic simple shear and
pressure-driven flow in conduits, all under a range of finite-Reynolds number
conditions with varying particle volume fraction. Flow through conduits showing
migrations leading to pronounced accumulation at certain locations have been
previously observed. Determination of effective properties of suspensions and
modeling of their bulk flow is essential to engineering application of these
mixtures. Using statistical analysis of the stress and hydrodynamic diffusivity,
a continuum model for suspension flow will be developed. Model predictions will
be compared against more complex flows, both from simulations and from
experiments. The investigation of bulk suspensions is basic to a wide range of
applications involving such materials as inks, coatings and cement as well as
many naturally occurring flows. By developing discrete-particle understanding
which may be used by theorists and modelers, and developing a continuum
description directly from the results, this investigation provides guidance and
direction on two fronts. Suspension dynamics is a complex topic, involving
physics, mathematics and engineering and thus provides excellent training ground
for doctoral and undergraduate research students. The project is designed to
involve graduate and undergraduate researchers at one of the most diverse
research university settings in the world, the City College of New York. Through
collaborations with different universities, laboratories, and industries, young
researchers will gain exposure to disciplines from biomedical diagnostics (cell
sorting) to the delivery of ceramic precursors and cement. The research results
will aid in developing a module in an introductory course using hydrodynamic
effects for sorting in microfluidic devices.