* 0853894
* CAREER: Process Monitoring, Identification, and Diagnosis Using Image and Functional Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Myong Kee Jeong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 343,058.00

This CAREER project will build an education and research program in methodology
for process monitoring, fault identification, and fault diagnosis using high-
dimensional functional data or image sensor signals. Due to the massive amount
and high dimensionality of image and functional data, the analysis and
manipulation required to obtain timely synthesized information for quality
improvement becomes complicated and resource intensive. The proposed methods
will integrate wavelet-based signal-processing techniques and system-modeling
procedures oriented to data mining to develop an in-process (or in-situ) control
tool for manufacturing processes. The proposed methodology includes the
following: (1) an adaptive multi-scale monitoring model for functional data or
image sensor signals to overcome the problem of the low fault detection
probability present in existing techniques; (2) a kernel-based fault
identification index measure and a variable selection algorithm to identify
contributing process variables to improve diagnostic performance; (3) a
nonlinear fault diagnosis model to determine an assignable cause for a fault and
to effectively handle ill-posed autocorrelated functional data or image sensor
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will provide
manufacturers with new tools for handling high-dimensional functional data or
image sensor signals for quality improvement of their manufacturing processes.
The strength of the proposed methodology is that it is generic and can be
adapted to other research and application areas, such as in the monitoring of
nonlinear profiles, the problem of large-scale sensor failure detection, and
variable selection problems of spectrum data, or in the development of new
research issues related to nonlinear multivariate SPC in bioprocesses,
semiconductor and automobile manufacturing, and other manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;