* 0853766
* Multiple Tiered Methodology for Micro- to Macro-Scale Assessment of Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles (M4-PHEVs)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* H. Christopher Frey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 470,036.00

0853766&lt;br/&gt;Frey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to develop M4-PHEV, a
new Multiple-tiered Methodology for Micro- to Macro-scale assessment of Plug-In
Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) direct and indirect energy use and emissions
(EU&amp;E). This framework will enable accurate assessment of the energy use and
emissions of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) at high spatial and
temporal resolution, as well as at regional and national scales, using
consistent data and coordinated approaches. The EU&amp;E impacts will account
for consumption of fossil fuels (gasoline, diesel), biofuels (ethanol,
biodiesel), and electricity. The main objectives are to: (1) develop and
demonstrate a new methodological framework for multi-scale modeling that links
sensor data to micro-scale models, and micro-scale outputs to energy system
model inputs; (2) create micro-scale models of PHEV energy use and emissions at
high spatial and temporal resolution with explicit consideration of four vehicle
fuels: gasoline, diesel, ethanol, and biodiesel; and (3) use the MARKAL energy
systems model to provide a robust, quantitative characterization of PHEV energy
use and emissions under U.S. market penetration scenarios. They will develop a
new methodology for real-world field data collection and analysis of second-by-
second activity, energy use, and emissions of PHEVs using portable emission
measurement systems (PEMS). They will quantify how vehicle energy consumption
fluctuates between the engine and battery systems as a function of externally-
observable factors such as roadway type, speed, acceleration, road grade, and
ambient conditions. Detailed models of PHEV fuel and electricity use will be
derived. The models will allocate energy use and tailpipe emissions in time and
space. We will account for charge depleting and charge sustaining modes. We will
build upon our recent work, using PEMS to quantify the effect of biodiesel
versus petroleum diesel, as well as ethanol versus gasoline, to assess
biofueled-PHEVs. The microscale models will enable comparison of PHEVs with
previously developed microscale models for conventional vehicles in order to
quantify the marginal impact of PHEVs under specific real-world conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The macro-scale approach will feature the use of a MARKet
ALlocation (MARKAL) energy systems model with a 9-region representation of the
U.S. in order to assess how the demand for electricity and fuels by PHEVs
affects choices among vehicle and power generation technologies, end-use
electricity demand across the economy, resource utilization, and regional
emissions. They will share results of this work, via a 5-point dissemination
plan, with students, the public, practitioners, decision-makers, international
collaborators, and researchers to enable realization of the broader impacts of
this work. The key hypotheses of this work are: (a) quantitatively accounting
for vehicle-specific micro-scale impacts of PHEVs enables development of energy
use and emissions models with improved accuracy and precision; (b) such models
can be aggregated to develop accurate and precise estimates of EU&amp;E for
vehicle fleets and longer time scales; and (c) a modeling framework at multiple
scales enables quantification of not only the marginal effects of one PHEV in
place of one conventional vehicle, but the system-wide implications for resource
utilization and secondary shifts in energy mix, including the impacts of PHEV
use of biofuels versus fossil fuels. PHEVs will use energy differently and emit
tailpipe emissions intermittently compared to conventional vehicles. Their wide-
scale deployment will lead to the complex coupling of the transportation and
power generation energy sectors. In addition, the timing and location of direct
and indirect emissions from PHEVs is critical to the accurate quantification of
localized air quality impacts. This project will provide new methods and data
for: (a) more precise estimates of micro-scale vehicle-specific EU&amp;E to
support improved emission inventory development; (b) development of a consistent
framework for estimating EU&amp;E at different temporal and spatial scales; (c)
enabling an improved basis for evaluation of transportation improvement programs
(TIPs) and (d) an improved basis for real-time estimation and management of
EU&amp;E. This work will impact undergraduate and graduate students who
participate in the research, and will be shared with the public, practitioners,
and others via a detailed dissemination plan.