* 0853665
* EPSCOR: Plains Indian Sign Language: Fieldwork and Digital Archive Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Jeffrey Davis, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Keren Rice
* 12/31/2011
* USD 120,210.00

Plains Indian Sign Language: Fieldwork and Digital Archive
Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plains Indian Sign Language (PISL) historically
served various social and discourse functions within and between numerous
American Indian communities of the Great Plains and cultural groups bordering
this geographic area. Classified in the Sign Language family, PISL (also called
sign talk) is distinct from American Sign Language (ASL) that is used in Deaf
communities of the US and Canada. The use of PISL has dramatically declined from
its widespread use as a lingua franca in previous times, due in part to its
replacement by English, and ASL in some cases. Although PISL is an endangered
language, and the extant number of varieties and users is unknown, it has not
vanished; it is still used within some native groups in traditional
storytelling, rituals, and conversational narratives by both deaf and hearing
American Indians (e.g., Blackfeet, Crow, Mandan-Hidatsa, Nakota/Gros Ventre, and
Northern Cheyenne, among others). There is an urgent need to document and
provide linguistic descriptions of contemporary PISL varieties, and for sign
language linguists to collaborate with deaf and hearing members of American
Indian signing communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support of the National
Science Foundation, sign language linguists Dr. Jeffrey Davis (University of
Tennessee) and Melanie McKay-Cody (Chickamauga Cherokee/Choctaw; William Woods
University, Fulton, MO) will collect contemporary sign language narratives of
American Indians who know and use the PISL variety. The research team will
provide comparative linguistic analyses, and integrate these new findings into
the digital archive of American Indian sign language documentary materials
previously collected in collaboration with the Smithsonian's National
Anthropological Archives (with support of a 2006-2007 DEL NSF/NEH fellowship
awarded to Davis). The one-year fieldwork and digital project will document the
current sociolinguistic status of PISL; illuminate its linguistic nature and
structure; produce an inventory of previously unknown materials; provide
annotations and captions of various documentary materials and films; contribute
to the revitalization of PISL in native communities where it once thrived; and
make accessible to broader audiences this important yet often overlooked part of
American Indian linguistic and cultural heritage.