* 0853086
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Adapting Madagascar's Marine Protected Areas to Threats from Climate Change
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Kirsten Oleson, Oleson                  Kirsten        L
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2012
* USD 191,683.00

0853086 Oleson

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Kirsten
L. Oleson to work with Dr. Pieter van Beukering, Vrije University in the
Netherlands and with Dr. Harifidy Ralison at the World Wildlife Fund in
Madagascar.

In its 5-year National Action Plan, Madagascar includes a goal of increasing
conservation-oriented marine protected areas (MPSs). In Madagascar, MPAs seek to
mitigate threats from local activities, including destructive fishing and
tourism. But climate change is projected to cause significant declines in coral
health and ecosystem services. Oleson?s research focuses on ensuring that
Madagascar?s strategy for protecting its marine resources adequately considers
climate change?s various projected impacts, human adaptive capabilities, and
ethical concerns arising from differential consequences. The work supports the
strategic targeting of conservation efforts by investigating the question: What
are the economic costs, benefits, and equity implications of alternate coastal
zone management policies in the face of global climate change (GCC)? To address
this, she asks four sub-questions: (1) How does Madagascar?s current MPA
strategy take into account GCC? (2) Given evidence of GCC resistance of some
coral populations, how well does Madagascar?s MPA system protect critical
regions and habitats and what areas should be prioritized in the future? (3)
What are the marginal costs and benefits of alternate MPA strategies? (4) Upon
whom do the costs and benefits of alternate MPA strategies fall? Partners for
this project include numerous non-governmental organizations involved in
conservation in Madagascar, two local universities, and the Free University of
Amsterdam.