* 0853157
* Computer-Aided Treatment Planning for Antiproton Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Shuang Luan, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

0853157&lt;br/&gt;Luan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
goal of this proposal is to develop algorithms and software for the treatment
planning of antiproton therapy. Radiotherapy is one of the most effective and
noninvasive means for treating local and regional tumors. Generally speaking,
the key to radiotherapy planning is how to deliver a radiation dose distribution
that is localized to the tumor while minimizing the damage to nearby healthy
tissues and structures. Since the discovery of radioactivity, many endeavors
have been made to find that perfect particle for radiotherapy, which have led to
the use of y-rays, X-rays, electrons, pions, protons, alpha particles, carbon
ions, and most recently antiprotons. Generally speaking, an antiproton is a
particle with the same mass as a proton but with a negative charge. Because of
its large mass and the negative charge, anti-protons travel through tissue in a
manner similar to those of heavy charged particles (such as protons and carbon
ions) until they reach the end of their range, where they annihilate with a
proton or neutron. This annihilation, which is unique to antiprotons, deposits
much more energy compared to other heavy charged particles and induces
significantly more biological damage. This exciting and unique radiobiological
property of antiprotons makes them very attractive for radiotherapy and
radiosurgery. In the last 5 years, many of the dosimetric and radiobiological
properties of antiprotons have been investigated extensively. It is now time to
develop the first ever treatment planning system for antiproton therapy in order
to continue pushing this promising and emerging technique
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes to develop algorithms and
software for planning antiproton therapy by bringing together techniques from
graph algorithms, computational geometry, and operations research. Both
dosimetric and radiobiological effects will be incorporated into the planning
system, and a prototype treatment planning system for anti-protons will be
developed and verified. While the focus of this proposal is on antiprotons for
radiotherapy, it is important to note that the planning system is universally
applicable to all forms of particle therapy. This would not only allow the
direct comparison of these different modalities but would also make available
all the advantages of the proposed treatment planning algorithms to other
modalities currently used in patient treatments. Using antiprotons for the basis
of the development has the advantage that the complexity of the problem is
maximized and therefore the benchmarking of the developed planning system
against experimental data presents the most stringent test for the algorithm and
software possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Successful completion of
the project will be a first major step toward clinical application of antiproton
therapy, which has the potential to help improve the quality of life for
thousands of cancer patients each year with treatments of unparalleled quality
and to potentially provide treatments for currently untreatable diseases. The
theoretical aspect of this research will bring a new set of exciting and
critical medical problems to the field of computer science and may give rise to
novel approaches to some old but tough engineering problems. The study will
bring together a group of renowned national and international scientists from a
variety of disciplines such as high-energy physics, radiation oncology, medical
physics and computer science to work on an important biomedical engineering
problem. It will therefore overcome the intellectual barriers between these
specialized disciplines and make recent advances in these areas accessible to a
broader community of scientists, clinicians and engineers. The planned research
also includes important clinical experimental components and provides
educational activities in undergraduate and minority student recruitment and
retention, course development and student training in the interdisciplinary area
of biomedical engineering, computer science, medical physics, and health
science. The research will be conducted at an EPSCoR and designated minority
serving institution.