* 0853579
* An Integrated Study of Floating Wind Turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Gretar Tryggvason, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,991.00

CBET-0853579&lt;br/&gt;Olinger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For wind to play a
significant role in meeting the energy need of the US two considerations must be
accounted for: The energy must be generated close to where it is needed and it
can only be generated where the wind blows. The energy is needed in cities on
the costs and the wind blows more steadily off shore. Wind turbines placed in
shallow ocean water on rigid platforms do however raise environmental concerns
and may degrade the natural beauty of beaches and coastlines. These concerns
often lead to significant delays in construction and installation. Floating,
far-offshore wind turbines, located farther from land in deep water, would
eliminate these environmental concerns, while at the same time tapping into even
greater wind power potential.&lt;br/&gt;While the potential for floating wind
turbines is vast, they pose major engineering challenges. Not only must the
turbines be stable and structurally sound when forced by large ocean waves, they
must also be economical to build. The present study will develop integrated
computer simulations and physical experiments to advance the state-of-the-art in
modeling of floating wind turbines located in deep ocean water. The results will
help us understand how such platforms behave, thus making it possible to design
economical wind turbines. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
activity is to lay the foundation for understanding how floating platforms
behave by developing numerical simulations with sufficient accuracy for the
early design stages where the overall character of the system are established.
In effect we will develop a "numerical" offshore water tank, and then validate
the numerical simulations with physical experiments. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the proposed activity is that it advances the nation's capabilities in
a new renewable energy technology by developing multi-scale computational tools
and physical experiments to model a complex system subject to extreme
environmental loads. The need for multiscale modeling capability is needed in a
broad range of applications and the success of the present project will have
wide impact for related problems.