* 0853773
* Biomechanical Microscopy Using Brillouin Scattering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Seok (Andy) Yun, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 430,131.00

0853773&lt;br/&gt;Yun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
investigate Brillouin scattering for probing the mechanical properties of
biological samples. The ability to measure the elasticity of tissue and
biomaterial in vivo at high spatial resolution would have a wide range of
biomedical applications. However, conventional mechanical tests are not well
suited for in vivo measurements, and other techniques, such as ultrasound and
elastography, offer a limited spatial resolution. Recently, the PI has
demonstrated the potential of Brillouin spectroscopy for non-invasive high-
resolution measurement and imaging of viscoelasticity. This project aims to
further develop the instrument, test the technology in tissues and cells, and
study the fundamental characteristics of Brillouin scattering of nano-materials
for biomedical applications. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits Although Brillouin
spectroscopy has long been known, its application to in vivo biomechanical
analysis has never been explored. The scientific merits of this project is that
it allows the following: (1) to extend the Brillouin technique from traditional
point-sampling spectroscopy to a novel biomechanical imaging modality, (2) to
understand the fundamentals and specifics of Brillouin scattering in various
tissues, cells, and nano-materials, and (3) to demonstrate the ability to
characterize the elasticity of crystalline lens. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts This
project invites multidisciplinary efforts and innovations to make broad impacts
across many disciplines, from physics and biophotonic imaging to biomechanics.
This provides an ideal opportunity to educate and train interdisciplinary
graduate students and fellows in highly innovative and collaborative
environments at Harvard Medical School. Undergraduate students enrolled in the
Harvard-MIT HST Summer Institute for Biomedical Optics and internship will be
given an opportunity to participate in this project. Successful clinical
implementation of Brillouin imaging may enable early diagnosis and monitoring of
intervention in a variety of ocular problems such as cataract.&lt;br/&gt;