* 0853963
* Magnetic Control and Optical Imaging of Nanoparticles for Biosensing
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0853963&lt;br/&gt;S. Majetich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The proposed research program will develop two types of plasmonic
magnetic particles, and investigate the ability to control the motion of single
particles magnetically while imaging them optically. Though these particles are
smaller than the optical diffraction limit, their positions can be tracked by
dark field optical microscopy through the surface plasmon resonance of the gold
coating, or by fluorescence microscopy when fluorophores are bound to the
particle surface. The rotation of rod-shaped particles will be monitored from
the polarization of the longitudinal surface plasmon mode. Magnetically guided
translation of nanoparticles is challenging because both viscous drag forces and
random Brownian diffusion forces become significant for small sizes. Peclet
number analysis suggests that it should be easier to control the motion of
nanorods than nanospheres of the same volume, but current models of nanorod
diffusion do not agree quantitatively. Another complicating factor is aggregate
formation in aqueous dispersions. While electron microscopy shows highly
monodisperse particle cores, the dispersions in water or biological media may
contain aggregates with a broad size distribution. For single particle-based
sensing as well as magnetic hyperthermia applications, the magnetic response
will depend on the size of the aggregate, and optimal control requires uniform
samples. We will coat 35-50 nm nominally spherical magnetite particles with
gold, and then with polymers to form stable dispersions in phosphate buffered
saline (PBS) solution. Our nanorod samples will be based on uniform but non-
magnetic hematite nanorods ~300 nm long and 20 nm in diameter, that are
reactively coated with thin layers of magnetite prior to the gold and polymer
coating stages. The size of the agglomerates in aqueous and PBS dispersions will
be determined from dynamic light scattering (DLS). The objective of the
synthetic portion of the proposed research will be to prepare highly uniform,
minimally agglomerated particles that show rapid magnetic response and have a
strong surface Plasmon resonance. We will investigate the translational and
rotational dynamics as a function of the applied field and field gradient first
macroscopically by the AC magnetic susceptibility, and for the nanorods, optical
modulation of the plasmon spectra. We will also construct an optical microscope
cell with magnetic control for single nanoparticle and nanorod translation and
rotation studies using dark field optical microscopy and fluorescence
microscopy. The results will be compared with the predictions of ellipsoidal and
cylindrical models of nanorod dynamics. In the final phase of the proposed work,
these results will be used to explore new biosensing approaches where magnetic
fields are used to move the particles and modulate their optical response. We
will investigate magnetically guided translation within living cells to probe
local viscosity and pH, and magnetically induced rotation to monitor selective
binding events through the sensitivity of fluorescence intensity to the surface
plasmons of the nanorods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact aims will be
linked with the research aims of the proposed program. A graduate student will
be co-advised by the PIs. There will also be several undergraduate research
projects involving magnetic, optical, and light scattering measurements on the
particle dispersions. We have already recruited an African-American
undergraduate to work on this project. A hands-on experimental module on
ferrofluids and magnetic forces that will be developed for use in the
Engineering Your Future program at Carnegie Mellon that targets middle school
and high school girls, and also provides the opportunity to disseminate
information to science teachers in the Pittsburgh Public Schools. This
connection will be used to recruit a middle school teacher to work with us in
creating age-appropriate classroom materials, demonstrations, and activities
based on colloidal stabilization forces in both ferrofluids and plasmonic sols.