* 0853354
* Showme Algebraic Geometry Meetings
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Dan Edidin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 15,455.00

This award funds three Showme Algebraic Geometry meetings at Washington
University, University of Missouri - St Louis (UMSL), and University of Missouri
- Columbia (MU) for the Spring semesters of 2009, 2010, and 2011 respectively.
Each school will take a turn organizing a meeting in the following order:
Washington University, UMSL and MU. Each meeting will have a focus area within
algebraic geometry. The focus areas are: modern trends in algebraic geometry
with special emphasis on birational geometry (Washington University), the
geometry and arithmetic of K3 surfaces and Calabi-Yau manifolds (UMSL), and
orbifold cohomology, Donaldson-Thomas theory and related moduli spaces (MU). For
each of these three meetings, we will have 3 or 4 invited addresses by algebraic
geometers from Missouri and nearby states, and two invited talks by leading
mathematicians from outside the geographic region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
meetings have two main goals. The first is to provide a forum for algebraic
geometers in Missouri and nearby states to meet with colleagues and learn of
recent research developments in the focused areas. The second is to give
graduate students, recent Ph.D's, women, minorities and persons with
disabilities an opportunity to broaden their mathematical horizons. The focused
areaes of these Showme Algebraic Geometry meetings are all areas of algebraic
geometry for which connections with different areas of mathematics and physics
are apparent and emerging. The meetings would have a high impact on diversity,
as well as scientific and educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;