* 0853981
* Towards an Areal grammar of Lower Fungom (Abar [mij], Fang [fak], Koshin [kid], Kung [kfl], Mbu' [muc], Mundabli [boe], and Naki [mff])
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Good, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2013
* USD 332,265.00

The Lower Fungom region of Cameroon is one of the most linguistically fragmented
areas of one of the most linguistically diverse countries on the planet. In an
area around half the size of Chicago, one finds at least seven indigenous
languages, five of which are not spoken elsewhere. The region's languages are
not well studied, and their names--Abar [mij], Fang [fak], Koshin [kid], Kung
[kfl], Mbu' [muc], Mundabli [boe], and Naki [mff]--are virtually unknown, even
to other linguists working in Cameroon. These languages are clearly related to
the Bantu languages that dominate Subsaharan Africa, but the details of their
genetic affiliations otherwise remain largely obscure.

Based on the results of fieldwork conducted since 2004, it has become clear that
an important feature of the Lower Fungom region is the nature of the
communicative network holding among its thirteen villages that has allowed such
extensive linguistic diversity to flourish. Thus, in addition to the traditional
issues encountered when doing grammatical description and comparative work on
any group of understudied languages, a second set of questions is raised when
conducting fieldwork in Lower Fungom regarding the sociolinguistic and
historical forces that have created such extreme diversity within such a small
area. This project will, therefore, continue the research already begun on the
grammar and lexicon of the languages of Lower Fungom and extend it by adding a
sociolinguistic and anthropological component to the work.The project will
result in the creation of a sociolinguistic survey of the region as well as
detailed documentation and description of three of its speech varieties that are
only minimally described.