* 0853582
* SGER: MCEER Hurricane Gustav Reconnaissance: Lessons Learned by New Orleans Hospitals from Katrina to Gustav and Beyond
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Lucy Arendt, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Project Title

MCEER Hurricane Gustav Reconnaissance: Lessons Learned by New Orleans Hospitals
from Katrina to Gustav and Beyond

Abstract

The proposed project investigates decision making under uncertain conditions by
examining the response of acute care hospitals in the New Orleans area before,
during, and immediately after Hurricane Gustav including the evacuation and
return of hospital patients and staff. ?Quick response? methodology will be used
to gather information via observation of behaviors and facilities, document
acquisition and evaluation, and semi-structured, face-to-face interviews of up
to 30 hospital executives representing all 10 of the acute care hospitals in the
New Orleans area. This qualitative approach is intended to provide a rich,
context-aware understanding of the decision making by hospital executives in the
New Orleans area with respect to emergency preparedness plans and execution. The
project extends research conducted by the researchers after Hurricane Katrina
and thus takes advantage of a natural experiment that allows the researchers to:
(1) identify revisions to hospital emergency plans following Hurricane Katrina,
(2) understand how revised emergency procedures were implemented during
Hurricane Gustav, (3) assess outcomes of revised emergency procedures, and (4)
make recommendations for improved hospital emergency procedures and healthcare
planning in a region with recurrent and predictable natural disasters. The
research thus examines whether Hurricane Katrina was a ?turning point? event for
New Orleans area acute care hospitals. Organizations that fail to learn from
disaster experiences are likely to repeat the mistakes that made them
vulnerable. Lessons learned will be disseminated to a broad array of individuals
and organizations through publications (e.g., MCEER Technical Report, peer-
reviewed journal articles) and presentations (e.g., to the Academy of
Management, to EERI, to regional and state agencies).

Hospitals, along with power systems, water supply, and critical infrastructure)
are vital components of a community?s critical lifelines, and emergency planning
and leadership decision-making should ensure that hospitals are able to respond
to a disaster and not become victims of a disaster (like some New Orleans
hospitals did during and after Hurricane Katrina). In considering the
consequences of disasters for communities, hospitals merit special attention
thanks to their complexity and occupancy characteristics and because of their
critical role in lifeline maintenance before, during, and after extreme events.
Lessons learned from emergency planning and operations for hospitals for
Hurricane Gustav will be broadened so that they are useful not only for
hurricanes but for a variety of extreme events and not just for hospitals but
for other institutions and organizations as well. Any organization that depends
on the external environment for essential inputs (e.g., human resources, energy,
supplies) to routine operations risks disruptions to those operations if sound
emergency planning does not plan for resiliency. Learning from the experiences
of hospital administrators and emergency officials who led organizations during
extreme events should enable future organizations to be more resilient when
facing various crises.

