* 0854306
* IRES: Sustainable Clean Water Technologies for the UN's Millennium Development Goals - A Partnership Between UNESCO-IHE  (Delft, Netherlands) and Univ. South Florida
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Daniel Yeh, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,932.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a collaborative
research program between the University of South Florida and the UNESCO-IHE
Institute for Water Education in Delft, the Netherlands. The Institute for Water
Education is the largest postgraduate water education facility in the world and
the only institution in the UN system authorized to confer accredited MSc
degrees and promote PhDs. Annually, a team of six students (graduate and
undergraduate) from USF will participate in an eight-week summer research
experience. Reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of water studies, the
students will be selected from environmental engineering, global health,
chemical engineering and environmental &amp; occupational health. The research
activities will focus on developing technologies to help advance the UN?s
Millenium Development Goals related to safe drinking water and sanitation in
three main areas: water recycling and desalination, waste treatment for
sanitation and energy, and water purification. USF students will be mentored by
IHE professors, postdoctoral researchers and doctoral students. Students will
work with IHE students, many of whom are water managers from developing
countries, as well as visit Dutch utilities, other universities and NGOs.
Internet-facilitated multimedia meetings with USF will occur throughout the
program period and a symposium will be held at IHE at the end of the program for
students to present their research findings.&lt;br/&gt;