* 0854794
* Synthesis and Properties of Magnetic Ceramic Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Monica Sorescu, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 361,291.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic ceramic nanoparticles will be studied in this project to
explore their interesting physico-chemical properties and their prospective
applications in catalysis and gas sensing. Enhanced device performance is
expected for these systems at the nanoscale, due to their large activity
associated with their large surface areas. In particular, the solubility in the
form of nanoparticles is considerably greater than the bulk solubility; the
reasons for that are not yet understood. Phase diagrams at the nanoscopic levels
will be constructed, as they are believed to be different from those of the
bulk. This approach could provide a veritable breakthrough in the nanotechnology
of magnetic systems. The students and the post-doctoral fellow involved in this
project will make a significant impact on the infrastructure at Duquesne
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The project
proposes the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles doped with tin, titanium, zinc,
cerium, chromium and zirconium. The techniques used to prepare the system of
nanoparticles are hydrothermal synthesis and mechanochemical activation. The
structural and magnetic characterization will be performed using Mössbauer
spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, magnetic measurements and
thermal analysis. This project determines for the first time the solubility
limits of a system of nanoparticles and it uses for the first time an
application based on the Mössbauer effect to infer information about
miscibility. The structural and magnetic information derived from these
techniques will be related to results of measurements of the sensing properties,
in order to develop tailored characteristics of enhanced chemical sensors for
select applications. This project will train undergraduate students who will
work at the frontiers of science and have a significant impact on the current
understanding of magnetism in solids.&lt;br/&gt;