* 0854706
* SGER: Bisanthracene-based Mimics of the Hemoglobin Protein
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Martin Burke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2010
* USD 125,000.00

This project aims to synthesize and characterize bis-anthracene-based small
molecules with the capacity to mimic the cooperative ligand binding properties
of the hemoglobin protein. These properties are critical to its switch-like
binding that underlies hemoglobin's respiratory function, enabling rapid
saturation with four molecules of oxygen in the lungs and efficient, complete
delivery of this cargo to the tissues. This cooperativity is achieved via
reciprocated conformational changes at the Fe-heme binding sites mediated via
the phenomenon of mechanochemical coupling. A series of bis-anthracene-based
small molecules designed to mimic these remarkable properties will be
synthesized. These novel compounds will then be systematically evaluated for
their capacity to cooperatively bind metal ions or molecular oxygen via
mechanochemical coupling using a suite of variable temperature NMR and X-ray
crystallographic techniques. The results of these studies will be used to design
future derivatives, based on the same bis-anthracene skeleton, with optimized
capacity for cooperative oxygen binding.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Martin D. Burke of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois. Professor Burke's research efforts are focused on the
synthesis and study of small molecules with the capacity to perform protein-like
functions. The synthetic methods developed through this research will have an
impact on the preparation of pharmaceuticals, natural products, and materials.
The fundamental understanding of the capacity of small molecules to perform
higher-order functions will enable the more effective utlilization of such
compounds in pharmaceutical applications, including the replacement of missing
proteins with "molecular prosthetics."