* 0854551
* RUI: Genetic Control of Sensory Hair Cell Membrane Channels in Zebrafish
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Bruce Yazejian, Mount Saint Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2013
* USD 327,337.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensory neurons in the ears of
vertebrates--called hair cells--detect and transduce sound, gravitational and
vibrational stimuli from the environment into electrical signals. They pass on
this information to higher order neurons in the brain by releasing chemical
neurotransmitters at synapses. The long-term goal of this project is to
understand how the genome specifies the instructions that control the release of
neurotransmitters from hair cells in auditory and vestibular structures. The
present project involves studying isolated wild type and mutant hair cells from
zebrafish using electrophysiological methods to characterize the membrane
channels and receptors that mediate transmitter release. The use of this animal
model is appropriate as it provides a simple, accessible preparation that will
shed light on the genetic and physiological control of hearing and balance in
vertebrates. Several lines of research will be pursued. First, because of the
importance of calcium and potassium ions in the electrical and chemical events
triggering neurotransmitter release, the channels that regulate the flux of
these ions across hair cell membranes will be characterized. Next, as
transmitter release from hair cells can be modulated by factors released by
other cells, the presence of receptors for these agents will be documented and
the effects of receptor activation explained. Finally, the changes in the
properties of hair cell channels and receptors that result from auditory and
vestibular mutants that affect hearing and balance will be analyzed. It is hoped
that through the study of both wild type and mutant animals in this model
system, a clearer understanding of the roles sensory hair cells play in
mediating hearing and balance in vertebrates will
emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Hearing and balance in vertebrates
are reliant on the electrical activity of sensory hair cells in the inner ear.
The present project is designed to discover the role the genome plays in
controlling the activity of these cells. This research will provide a much
needed investigation of the biophysical properties of hair cells in a model
species that is ideally suited to genetic manipulation and analysis. A major
goal of the project is to train women scientists. Mount St. Mary's College
undergraduates are all women nearly 75% of whom are the first in their families
to attend college. Furthermore, more than half are from underrepresented
minorities. This project will provide a mentoring environment to train and
educate these women in performing high quality independent research.