* 0854959
* US-Egypt Workshop on Software Development for Multicore and Heterogeneous Processors, Cairo, Egypt, June 22-24, 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Tarek El-Ghazawi, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2011
* USD 39,996.00

0854959&lt;br/&gt;Elghazawi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a US-Egypt ?Workshop on Software Development for Multicore and
Heterogeneous Processors?, to be held in Cairo, Egypt, June 22 to 24, 2009. The
U.S. organizer is&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tarek El-Ghazawi, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, George Washington University, Washington, DC. The Egyptian
organizers are Dr. Hisham El-Shishiny, Advanced Technology Center, IBM, Cairo,
and Dr. Ayman El-Dessouki, President, National Authority for Remote Sensing and
Space Sciences, Cairo, Egypt. Due to unprecedented levels of integration,
multicore, manycore and heterogeneous processor technologies are becoming widely
available and used. Software, however, is lagging behind, and with this new
array of exotic processor architectures, traditional sequential programming
methods are no longer applicable. Both systems and application software have a
long way to catch with these hardware developments, and computer scientists and
engineers as well as application scientists across the world must work together
to close this gap. The workshop will bring together U.S. computer scientists and
engineers who are leaders in the architectural issues of such modern processors
and who are aware of system software and application software requirements with
Egyptian scientists who are focused on software engineering and development to
tackle the new software challenges. The workshop attendees will include U.S.
prominent researchers and select students. Egyptian participants will include
scientists from IBM Egypt, Ain Sham University, Cairo University, Alexandria
University, the National Research Center, and the National Authority for Remote
Sensing and Space Science (NARSSS). The proposed workshop will be co-sponsored
by the IBM Center for Advanced Studies at Cairo, Egypt. To ensure success, a
follow-up focused meeting will be held a few months after the workshop in order
to monitor the promote progress on the planned collaborations such as joint
proposal writing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: These include
identifying new operating systems and programming languages research directions
to cope up with the new multicore/heterogeneous processor challenge through a
highly collaborative framework bringing together experts and students from US
and Egypt. The resulting interactions may lead to practical suggestions for new
programming models, new features to be incorporated in OS/run-time systems,
methods to migrate existing software applications to multicore systems. Longer
range collaboration will be enacted by using this workshop and follow up event
to produce joint research proposal(s) to funding agencies in Egypt and/or the
U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impact lies in the fact
that the proposed workshop is expected to result in innovative research
directions, due to the participation of top experts in the field. The workshop
would involve active participation of U.S. and Egyptian researchers and students
including women from both sides. The workshop will be an opportunity to get the
new generation of scientists to explore working together and understanding the
differences in the culture of science across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;This project
is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
Division of Computing and Communication Foundations.