* 0854132
* Collaborative Research: Thermally Actuated Pumping Mechanism During Boiling on an Asymmetrically Structured Surface
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sushil Bhavnani, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2013
* USD 86,157.00

0854132&lt;br/&gt;Bhavnani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative research
and educational program between investigators at Oregon State University and
Auburn University in the general area of phase-change heat transfer enhancement.
The research goal is to characterize the effect of a passively imposed
asymmetric force on a bubble during the boiling process. Such asymmetry is
created by the use of a surface with repeated ratchet structures and pyramidal
reentrant cavities located on one of its sides. The hypothesis is that with
several ratchets, this local asymmetric motion can be translated to a net fluid
pumping. Educational activities aim to provide a synergy between research and
education, as well as between several universities.&lt;br/&gt;The main
objectives of the project are to: (1) Determine, using a suite of non-intrusive
imaging methods, time-varying bubble diameters and frequencies, liquid and
bubble velocities, and temporally- and spatially- resolved surface temperatures,
(2) Refine preliminary models based on information obtained from the above
imaging experiments, (3) Validate the model against global measurements of a
large-array of ratchets, for which boiling curves will be established, and (4)
Integrate research findings into a new module in an existing multi-University
Electronics Thermal Management course.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
enhancement technique can be applied to heat transfer from adversely oriented
surfaces and in space thermal management. The proposed methods of
experimentation present a detailed estimation of flow and temperature field in
boiling flows that will be useful to modellers. The proposed analyses will
highlight forces of importance by performing experiments under different
orientations and subcooling levels, and with two fluids of contrasting
properties. Passive methods of heat transfer enhancement are important in a
broader context of energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Educational
activities will include integration of the project results in the form of a
module into an existing, past-NSF funded Electronics Thermal Management live-
internet multi-campus course and will incorporate Oregon State University as a
new partner. At the end of year 2, a DC-9 microgravity flight experiment is
planned as a part of a concurrent grant from NASA. Several senior undergraduate
students will take part in the design and eventual testing of this experiment.
An AT&amp;T-Minority-Engineering-Program student at Auburn University will also
be working closely with OSU undergraduate students. One promising high-school
student, through the Oregon-state-wide Apprenticeship in Science and Engineering
Program, will be involved in experiment design and testing.