* 0854050
* IRES US-Tanzania:  Developing Global Engineers and Scientists through Collaborative Technology Innovation for Public Health Improvements in Tanzania
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Kurtis Paterson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 145,468.00

Professor Kurtis Paterson of Michigan Tech University will lead twelve
engineering graduate students from Michigan Tech in an International Research
Experiences for Students project, with twelve engineering students from the
University of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania, to conduct research on critical
Tanzanian public health issues connected to potable water supplies, sanitation,
indoor air pollution, and malaria via the development or integration of
sustainable and appropriate technologies. While eight new university students
will participate each year, this program is unique in that all three years?
participants will be linked to produce workable solutions to these problems. The
first year will focus on concept development, the second year on design, the
third year on implementation and assessment. Over the course of twelve months,
each year?s teams will gain a breadth of international development research
experience with on-campus preparation, ten weeks of Tanzanian fieldwork, and
dissemination of findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an
important opportunity for American engineering and science students to be
exposed to and understand the problems facing the developing world. Only then
can designers develop effective technologies to solve these problems through
innovation within the constraints of available resources, cultural norms, and
technological appropriateness. It is clear that conventional classroom education
is insufficient preparation for this type of work. Students must experience
first-hand the challenges to the communities, and the resident engineers, of
such nations. Lastly, while student interest in international programs is high,
there are few meaningful opportunities for graduate students to weave into their
research training and professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program has the potential for many positive impacts. The partnering communities
will benefit directly from the research developed by the student teams. Public
health improvements in these communities could have far-reaching ripples through
education, economics, and well-being. The university student participants will
learn about another culture, make meaningful contributions to the community and
the literature, and grow professionally and personally. The secondary school
participants may better understand the value of a technical education, and
higher education. Lastly, the interaction between the universities, Peace House,
and the community could lay the groundwork for future education, research, and
service opportunities benefiting all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;