* 0854511
* Folding engineering strategies for efficient membrane production in E. coli
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Francois Baneyx, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 02/28/2013
* USD 402,010.00

0854511&lt;br/&gt;Baneyz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - E. coli is
one of the most popular model organism to study membrane protein biogenesis and
one of the most robust and best characterized hosts for heterologous protein
production. While membrane proteins can often be expressed as cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies in E. coli, their refolding into functional species is
challenging and often unsuccessful. Accumulation in membranes circumvents the
refolding problem but is usually toxic to the cell, severely reducing yields.
Recent genome-wide studies indicating that toxicity effects are associated with
translocation machinery saturation, coupled with a growing understanding of the
players and processes involved in membrane protein delivery, insertion and
folding have opened the door to a new paradigm for membrane protein production
that is called folding engineering. Not unlike metabolic engineering, the goal
is to optimize the expression host in a holistic fashion to maximize the yields
of a desired end product. However, while metabolic engineering addresses the
multi-enzyme conversion of a substrate into a high value-added product, folding
engineering focuses on the interconnected steps of how a nascent protein is
engaged, transferred and folded by molecular chaperones, ushers, insertases, and
foldases. Here, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to develop and validate
transformative folding engineering strategies that will allow efficient membrane
protein production in E. coli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - Membrane
proteins are found on the surface of every cell and play essential roles in
sensing, regulation, cell-to-cell communication and in the binding, import and
export of small molecules, peptides and proteins. One subclass of eukaryotic
plasma membrane proteins, the G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), are the
target of over 60% of pharmaceutical drugs currently in use, while bacterial
outer membrane proteins are proving increasingly important for the development
of much needed antimicrobial agents and vaccines. With applications ranging from
disease treatment to photonic devices construction and biofuel production,
membrane proteins hold enormous potential in the biotechnology and
bionanotechnology sectors. Yet, difficulties associated with their large-scale
production have severely hampered fundamental and applied progress. Here, the PI
proposes to rely on a growing understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
membrane protein trafficking and insertion to develop a holistic folding
engineering strategy that will yield enabling tools for the production of both
alpha-helical and beta-barrel membrane proteins in E. coli.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students involved in the project will be trained
at the interface of molecular biology, biochemistry and engineering and further
exposed to the vibrant area of nanobiotechnology. They will gain supervisory
experience by overlooking the research of undergraduate and high school students
participating in the project and will become involved in the multiple outreach
and educational activities conducted by the PI (REU, RET, High School Science
for Success program and Nanoethics). Undergraduate students trained in the PI's
laboratory (half of which are female) have a track record of joining graduate
and medical school programs.