* 0854179
* Enhanced capillary electrophoretic and hydrodynamic chromatographic separations on microchip devices using a combination of electrokinetic and hydrodynamic flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Debashis Dutta, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 256,189.00

0854179 Dutta

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professor Debashis Dutta at the University of Wyoming to develop
micro-/nanofluidic devices that can enhance the resolving power of Capillary
Electrophoretic (CE) and Hydrodynamic Chromatographic (HDC) separations using a
combination of electrokinetic and pressure-driven flows. In addition, the
proposed work will also design a novel HDC separation method for DNA molecules
based on their shear-induced migration in a pressure-driven flow field. The
development of this method will eliminate the necessity to use analysis columns
that have lateral dimensions comparable to the solute diameter in order to
realize high-efficiency HDC separations. The Specific Aims described above will
be accomplished using micro- and nanofluidic devices developed in the PI's
laboratory that can generate a pressure-driven flow on-chip using electrical
forces. In the proposed devices, a silicate based sol-gel membrane is used to
block electroosmotic flow generated along a channel yielding a pressure-gradient
in the system. The resulting pressure-driven flow is then guided to an analysis
column to drive or enhance a separation process. It is worth noting that the
ability to generate pressure-gradients on-chip in these devices provides a
precise and dynamic control over the hydrodynamic flow velocity in the analysis
column through minimization of dead volumes. Moreover, because this capability
is realized using electrokinetic forces, it allows the generation of pressure-
gradients within micro- and nanofluidic networks with equal ease. It is
anticipated that the proposed work could also have a broad impact on separations
research outside of the CE and the HDC techniques. This is because the micro-
pump presented here is easy to fabricate and simple to integrate to
micro-/nanofluidic separation systems compared to other designs described in the
literature. This aspect of the proposed micro-pump could make it attractive for
other laboratories to adopt it for their own research. Further, the ability of
the proposed devices to generate hydrodynamic flows in micro- and nanofluidic
ducts with equal ease makes it a valuable research tool for not only
miniaturizing existing pressure-driven separation methods but also studying new
separation schemes that rely on a pressure-driven flow field in
micro-/nanochannels. Finally, the proposed work will establish an inexpensive
and simple procedure for fabricating low resistance and durable silicate based
sol-gel membranes in micro-/nanochannels that can be employed under a wider
range of assay conditions compared to polymer based membranes commonly used
today.

While advances in micro-/nanoscale science are revolutionizing the way we
understand our world today, the integration of this knowledge into undergraduate
and graduate education has been slow. The problem is particularly prominent in
states like Wyoming where the development of high tech industries has been well
below the national average. However, with increases in the application of
nanoscience and nanotechnology to various sectors of the Wyoming economy there
is a growing demand on training future workforce in these scientific areas. As
the only four-year college in the State of Wyoming, the University of Wyoming
(UW) carries the primary responsibility for providing the required
infrastructure to meet these demands. The work described in this proposal will
help to address this problem by providing educational and research experience to
undergraduate and graduate students in applying nanoscience and nanotechnology
to important areas of basic and applied research, such as the specific projects
described here for improving the resolving power of CE and HDC methods. Besides
training graduate and undergraduate students, the PI proposes three additional
educational activities aimed at disseminating the results of the research to a
broad range of audiences, as well as directly involving high school students in
research activities. This will include incorporating proposed CE and HDC
separations methods into a graduate level chemistry course at UW, and initiating
a summer research apprentice program for high school students. At the same time,
the PI will also develop an outreach program with the Central Wyoming College
(CWC) that has about 20% Native American and 80% first-generation college
student population to broaden the participation of minorities and
underprivileged communities.