* 0854961
* FRG - Advanced Algorithms and Software for Problems in Computational Bio-Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Laura Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 870,478.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The numerical modeling of the dynamics
of biological fluid-structure interactions is a rapidly expanding research area
in mathematical biology. We will consider two successful strategies for
computing fluid-structure interactions which are popular in the applied
mathematics community: the Method of Regularized Stokeslets (appropriate in the
Stokes regime), and the Immersed Boundary Method (when inertial forces cannot be
ignored). Both of these methods are popular partially because they offer a
reasonably straightforward option for modeling complex boundaries interacting
with an incompressible fluid. &lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, in both cases there are
substantial computational bottlenecks which severely limit the efficiency and/or
accuracy of these methods for a wide class of problems. For example, in both
methods, the stiffness of the structure can restrict the allowable explicit
time-step of a computation by orders of magnitude. In addition, the desire to
model fine scale features of biological structures requires spatially adaptive
computations and parallel processing. Recent advances in multi-resolution
temporal integration methods and integral based methods for fast summation and
elliptic equations provide the technology to substantially increase the accuracy
and efficiency of these methods, although the analysis and implementation of
these algorithms has not been attempted. Our goal is to complete the
mathematical and computational analysis necessary to implement efficient
parallel, adaptive, multi-resolution time integration and fast summation methods
for fluid-structure problems and to build a computational infrastructure that
will enable researchers in the biological sciences to perform numerical
simulations of biological systems on massively parallel
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of improved algorithms and a
computational interface to facilitate massively parallel computation will enable
scientists to obtain a much more detailed understanding of the fluid dynamics in
a wide range of problems in the biological and medical fields such as the
swimming of fish or flying of insects, the reduction of drag in plants and trees
by changes in shape or texture, and the pumping of blood in the heart or the
flow of materials in the digestive system, the kidney, and the lungs. In
particular, our software will allow researchers to begin to study increasingly
complex problems such as fluid flow through bristled appendages, or interactions
or coordination between multiple structures or organisms. Beyond obtaining
fundamental insight into biological design, this work could motivate innovation
in the field of biomimetics, where engineers look to biology for design
strategies. For example, improved understanding of fin deformations in fish or
jet propulsion in jellyfish is of interest to both the biological community and
engineers working on micro underwater vehicles. Our computational methods can be
applied to model other systems of interest in biommetics including muscular
hydrostats such as octopus arms, earthworm bodies, and elephant trunks.