* 0854416
* Rate Constants and Toxicity Estimation for the Computer Discovery of Byproducts Fate in Advanced Oxidation Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Crittenden, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,010.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854416&lt;br/&gt;Crittenden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adva
nced oxidation processes (AOPs) have shown promise to destroy many of the
emerging organic contaminants in water, and are being considered in potable
water treatment, wastewater treatment, site remediation, and industrial
applications. AOPs are mechanistically complex in nature and are difficult and
expensive to study experimentally relative to the degradation kinetics and
pathways of each contaminant and the fate of the intermediates and byproducts.
With more than 90,000 organic chemicals produced annually, the increasing
concerns about emerging contaminants make the need for an analytical
computational tool more urgent. The principal objective of this project is to
develop computational tool of predicting reaction pathways that are involved in
the AOPs. The fundamental approach is to represent chemical molecules
numerically and to enumerate the reaction possibilities using a numerical
algorithm. Graph theory will be applied as a basic methodology for species
formation and reaction generation. The reactants and reaction types are
expressed by a two dimensional matrix called the bond and electron matrix.
Manipulating the matrices of reactants and the products according to reaction
rules generates the reaction pathway network. The risks of all the intermediates
and byproducts will be screened. Quantum theory and quantitative structure-
activity relationships (QSARs) will be applied to estimate the rate constants
for the reaction pathway network. An algorithm will be developed to write and
solve the ordinary differential equations that comprise the reaction pathway to
predict the concentration time profile of each species. The model will be
validated using several case studies that have been reported in the literature.
A new ASU supercomputer facility will be used to aid in simulating reaction
schemes, rate constants, and toxicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is a step towards building a comprehensive pathway generator. The
ultimate goal of this effort would be to predict the fate of all byproducts that
are formed in complex oxidation reaction systems. The broader impact of the
generator includes: 1) providing a tool for better understanding of chemical
reaction mechanisms that potentially could be extended to other systems; 2)
predicting the formation of trace byproducts in chemical oxidation processes; 3)
providing an excellent complementary tool for risk screening of all the
byproducts, and helping select more environmentally-friendly oxidants and
chemical treatment processes; 4) providing a comprehensive interdisciplinary
teaching and training tool for students to study the chemical kinetics of
processes that include the formation of intermediates; and, 5) providing
chemical insight so that time consuming experimental mechanistic studies can be
planned carefully. As part of this project, The PIs will develop course modules
that will be able to provide chemical intuition for complex radical chemistry
reactions.