* 0854182
* II-EN: Infrastructure Acquisition for Statistical Power, Leakage, and Timing Modeling Towards Realization of Robust Complex Nanoelectronic Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Elias Kougianos, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 07/31/2012
* USD 249,265.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate modeling of power, leakage,
and timing while accounting for process variations, is crucial for the
manufacturable design of nanoscale CMOS integrated circuits. Thus, there is a
pressing need for statistical models that allow design engineers to make fast
architectural or system level design space exploration without resorting to a
complete design iteration, from system to physical level. The thrust of the
project's methodology is the progression of data transfer from lowest
(transistor) to highest (system) level while utilizing minimal data from actual
silicon. This allows for fast concurrent design for manufacturing of new systems
with a clear delineation of the needed data at every
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To conduct research on nanoscale CMOS modeling that
can be used for realization of robust circuits, and to make the deliverables
available to the VLSI and educational communities, the project utilizes the
following infrastructure: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Specialized equipment: mixed-signal
analyzer, probing station and arbitrary waveform generator for sample data
collection, probing and analysis for model validation.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Computing
resources: a high-end, 4 processor server with 16-GB local memory and 4-TB RAID5
storage to be used by two faculty members and 10 students for nanoscale data
acquisition, control, analysis, and storage.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Research and
development personnel to develop the models and libraries, to validate the
methodology, and to maintain the infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;The educational
impact of the project is 3-fold: impact on curricula at UNT, impact on curricula
of other researchers who will use this infrastructure, and impact on the
community colleges around the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex.