* 0854902
* Finitely presented groups at The City College of New York, Spring 2009 conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Gilbert Baumslag, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/28/2010
* USD 15,000.00

How can you tell whether a knot is really knotted or &lt;br/&gt;whether it is
possible to find a formula for the &lt;br/&gt;solutions of certain equations or
how to make sense&lt;br/&gt;of the nature of the elementary particles of physics
&lt;br/&gt;or why there are only 17 really different wall paper
&lt;br/&gt;patterns? These and many other such questions depend &lt;br/&gt;on an
algebraic structure called a group. Groups arise &lt;br/&gt;in many parts of
mathematics and in science. They provide, &lt;br/&gt;in particular, the means to
understand and exploit&lt;br/&gt;symmetry. This makes it possible for them to
help&lt;br/&gt;in our understanding of the nature of the space we live
&lt;br/&gt;in, the structure of crystals and various molecules &lt;br/&gt;and in
the design of new cryptographic protocols. Indeed &lt;br/&gt;the security of
information transmitted electronically &lt;br/&gt;over the internet depends
crucially on a particular kind &lt;br/&gt;of group called a finite group. This
group provides a way&lt;br/&gt;to encode messages using the product of two very
large prime&lt;br/&gt;numbers. The encoding is the easy part of the
process.&lt;br/&gt;The hard part is the decoding and this is where group
theory&lt;br/&gt;is used. The present proposal deals with the current state
of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of certain groups, called finitely presented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;These finitely presented groups hold in many instances the
keys&lt;br/&gt;to solving important problems in mathematics and
science&lt;br/&gt;and the primary objective of this conference is for a
number&lt;br/&gt;of very prominent mathematicians to map out future directions
&lt;br/&gt;of study.&lt;br/&gt;