* 0854233
* Multispectral Retinal Imaging and Mapping of Naturally Occurring Fluorophore and Chromophore Distributions in Health and Early Pathology
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Wojciech Czaja, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 384,925.00

0854233&lt;br/&gt;Czaja&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
proposal is to integrate robust automated multispectral image analysis methods
with multispectral retinal reflectance and autofluorescence imaging to provide
quantitative maps of naturally occurring fluorophores and chromophore distri-
butions within the retina. The resulting high-resolution multi-component
molecular maps would be applied to better understand molecular events in normal
retinal aging and in early retinal disease
progression.&lt;br/&gt;Tasks:&lt;br/&gt;- To optimize the quality of molecular
image maps generated by automated image&lt;br/&gt;analysis methods from
different multispectral sets of autofluorescence and reflectance images obtained
using special filter sets in standard fundus cameras. Envisioned as an iterative
process of refinement of filters, imaging protocols and analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;- To apply spectral linear demixing models for extraction of
pure subpixel spectral signatures to obtain clinically important changes in
local concentrations of multiple endogenous molecular species&lt;br/&gt;- To
develop spectral classification schemes based on dimension reduction algorithms
to classify local cellular function and pathology&lt;br/&gt;- To develop locally
supported multi-scale (wavelet) representation systems for sparse representation
of reproducible features in order to follow changes overtime, particularly for
different classes of early pathologic lesions on the order of 100
microns.&lt;br/&gt;