* 0854942
* SGER:   Monitoring Cytoplasmic and Intraorganellar pH in Plants with a Novel BRET Reporter
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Carl Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 01/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Regulation of intracellular acidity (pH) is vital to cells for many reasons. The
measurement of pH inside living cells is therefore crucial to the study of many
biological processes. The currently available methods for measuring
intracellular pH mostly use fluorescence technologies that have limitations such
as autofluorescence, phototoxicity, photobleaching, etc. These problems can be
particularly serious in green plant tissue. Additionally, the currently
available pH methods are useless when measuring light-dependent pH changes (such
as those occurring in the chloroplast) because the method can trigger the very
responses that are to be studied. The goals of this project is to develop a new
method for measuring pH in living cells. The experimental approach that will be
employed is based on a technique developed by the Principal Investigator of the
project that allows for monitoring of in vivo protein interactions,
Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer (BRET). BRET avoids the problems of
fluorescence methods. The project will develop a genetically encodable,
targetable, ratiometric pH monitoring method. Therefore, pH can be quantified in
living plant and animal cells with this method. The usefulness of this
transformative technology will be demonstrated by application to important
experimental questions in plant physiology, including the measurement of (i) pH
changes in the chloroplast in response to light/dark transitions, and (ii) daily
rhythms of cellular pH.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.This project will lead to new
information about the impact of the environment (for example, light/dark) on
cellular activities in plants, thereby enabling new strategies for agricultural
adaptation. The project will also provide an optimal training environment for a
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student to learn innovative technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;