* 0854332
* Functional Analysis of Biofilms in Premise Plumbing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Qiang He, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/28/2013
* USD 169,031.00

0854332&lt;br/&gt;He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilm in premise plumbing could pose
both direct and indirect public health risks by impairing water quality
integrity and serving as a reservoir of harmful microorganisms. Practical and
effective strategies to minimize biofilm occurrence and reduce public health
risks, however, remain to be developed, due to the lack of adequate
understanding of the microbial processes underlying biofilm occurrence,
particularly in premise plumbing which represents over 85% of the total
distribution system but has not received adequate research attention. The
research objective of the proposed project is to identify the processes
responsible for the survival and adaptation of biofilm microbial communities in
premise plumbing. The research will be conducted by using community-level
characterization of biofilm functional processes. This research will use a
community-level approach combining high-throughput DNA microarray-based
functional analysis and 16S rRNA gene-based molecular microbial ecology tools
for the characterization of biofilm microbial communities in premise plumbing
systems of distinct characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide much needed insight into fundamental processes controlling biofilm
persistence which would enable the development of effective strategies for the
minimization of biofilms in premise plumbing by targeting key processes that
facilitate biofilm occurrence. Results from this work will also enable improved
risk assessment, design guidelines and regulations for premise plumbing by
providing much needed data regarding the impact of plumbing material, water use
pattern, environmental factors, and water quality characteristics on microbial
contamination in premise plumbing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding
of the microbial processes controlling the development of biofilm in water
distribution systems, particularly premise plumbing, will lead to more effective
strategies to minimize microbial contamination of drinking water and enhanced
safety of drinking water. This will lead further to minimized occurrence of
waterborne diseases, increased use of public water supply, and reduced use of
additional purification devices and bottled water. Our society will benefit
through reduced heath care costs and more sustainable uses of energy and
resources. In addition, the proposed research provides an excellent example of
the application of genomics and microbiology in environmental engineering. Thus
the infusion of research results from the proposed work into classroom teaching
will better prepare students for learning and working in the increasingly
interdisciplinary filed of environmental engineering. More importantly, the
participation of minority students from a local urban high school in the
proposed project will ensure that underrepresented students have the educational
exposure crucial to their success in learning and working in the engineering
profession.