* 0854618
* Mbar Chemistry: Novel States of Matter at Extreme Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Choong-Shik Yoo, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Application of high pressure significantly alters the
interatomic distance and, thus, the nature of intermolecular interaction,
chemical bonding, molecular configuration, crystal structure, and stability of
solid. With modern advances in high-pressure technologies, it is feasible to
achieve a large (often up to a several-fold) compression of lattice, at which
condition material can be easily forced into a new physical and chemical
configuration. The high-pressure thus offers enhanced opportunities to discover
new phases, both stable and metastable ones, and to tune novel properties in a
wide-range of atomistic length scale, substantially greater than (often being
several orders of) those achieved by other thermal (varying temperatures) and
chemical (varying composition or making alloys) means.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this proposed work is to investigate new states of matter and novel phenomena
occurring in simple low-Z molecules like carbon dioxide and nitrogen at Mbar
pressures. Commonly observed at these conditions are metallic and nonmetallic
extended solids that can store a large sum of energy in their three-dimensional
network structures. Yet, a large cohesive energy of low Z solids gives rise to
an extremely stiff lattice and novel electronic and optical properties. Broadly
speaking, these molecular-to-nonmolecular transitions occur due to electron
delocalization manifested as a rapid increase in electron kinetic energy at high
density, but there are many outstanding questions regarding the exact nature of
chemical bonding, phase stability, and chemical mechanisms. Many of the
questions are fundamental problems in solid state chemistries and condensed
matter physics, which will be addressed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The research outlined in
this proposal will impact fundamental solid-state chemistries and condensed
materials sciences, which will eventually establish new Periodic orders of
elements and solids at Mbars. The project will also have significant impacts on
training graduate and undergraduate students by providing hands-on research
experiences in cutting-edge experimental technologies at Washington State
Univerisity (WSU) and at synchrotron facilities and national laboratories. The
present study will bring the excitement of high-pressure materials research to
the scientists and students in Spokane and nearby areas well beyond the WSU and,
thus, enhance public appreciation of the relevance of fundamental materials
research to the future and society. Hence, the benefits of the project reach
well beyond the immediate scientific scope of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;