* 0854256
* Collaborative Research:  Political Violence as Communication
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Kristopher Robison, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2013
* USD 60,077.00

Collaborative Proposals &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0854121 &lt;br/&gt;Edward
Crenshaw &lt;br/&gt;Craig Jenkins &lt;br/&gt;Ohio State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0854256 &lt;br/&gt;Kristopher Robison
&lt;br/&gt;Northern Illinois University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Civil
terrorism is a form of "political theater" in the sense that civilian groups use
violent spectacle to intimidate specific targets and appeal to potential
supporters. As "propaganda by deed," terrorism is essentially a form of
psychological warfare, and is therefore heavily reliant on the modern mass media
to convey its symbolic messages. Unfortunately, little comparative or cross-
national research has explored the nexus between terrorism, the mass media, and
democracy, and what exists has suffered from theoretical anemia, definitional
ambiguities over the different types of political violence, and concerns about
how data on political violence are collected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
introduces innovations to help correct these problems. Specifically, nesting
social movements and diffusion theories within a social ecology framework, we
draw hypotheses concerning the media's role in various forms of political
violence. At the same time, we introduce a refined typology of political
violence as well as new media variables to partially correct some of the
problems plaguing current research. In terms of methodology, we will use pooled
time-series analysis on the ITERATE database as well as other data sources that
provide appropriate information for most of the world?s nations. Some
preliminary results using ITERATE suggest that 1) net of media effects,
democracy has very little influence on political violence; 2) democracy
interacts with the presence of the Western press to encourage transnational
terrorism; but 3) this is not the case when violent actors target government
(i.e., guerilla war). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to our
understanding of political violence in three ways. First, it will provide a new
theoretical framework for understanding political violence that suggests
fresher, more nuanced hypotheses (e.g., the mass media should encourage
terrorism but discourage ongoing guerilla/civil/international warfare). Second,
it will demonstrate how refined definitions of various forms of political
violence (such as strictly defining ?terrorism? as attacks on civilians) can
have a major impact on research findings. Third, as most data on political
violence are taken from media accounts, there is a natural (or artifactual)
correlation between media reportage and political violence. To correct this, the
project introduces a relatively simple technique for disentangling media
artifacts from the true influence of media on political violence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many scholars and policy-makers suspect that the
mass media and democratization are central to the staging of terrorism and other
forms of violence, there is no agreement on their distinctive or combined
effects. The research innovations introduced by this project will improve on
past research and, as these relationships become clearer, finally answer
questions about how democracy and the mass media invite or discourage political
violence, moving us beyond heated debate. More broadly, Shakespeare has proven
prescient when he said that "all the world's a stage." The modern mass media
have made it so, but the influence of media on other sociological, political and
economic phenomena is not well-understood. This project will demonstrate at
least one way to study media effects on a global scale, and the framework can
accommodate the investigation of many other media-driven phenomena such as
global business cycles, waves of democratization, transnational
protest/mobilization, the spread (and occasional contraction) of so-called
"world polity", and many other forms of transnational social change.