* 0854113
* Collaborative Research: The Antimicrobial Properties of Silver Nanoparticles: mechanisnms and water chemistry effects
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Vinka Craver, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2014
* USD 297,274.00

0854113&lt;br/&gt;Craver&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanosilver, the active component
of more than 20% of the nanoproducts currently available on the market, is the
most commonly used nanomaterial for commercial applications. Approximately 88%
of these products have some form of antibacterial or antimicrobial activity.
Silver nanoparticles exhibit physical properties that are different from both
the ion and the bulk material. Because of their strong antibacterial properties,
several studies have shown the potential use of silver nanoparticles in
biomedical and environmental applications, such as the treatment of wounds and
burns and water disinfection. While the antibacterial properties of silver
nanoparticles have been extensively demonstrated, their disinfectant
mechanism(s) and kinetics in the inactivation of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa
have not yet been elucidated. Indeed, there have been no studies testing the
ability of silver nanoparticles to deactivate protozoan pathogens like
Cryptosporidium parvum and Giardia lamblia. Previous studies have not addressed
the effect of environmental conditions on the antimicrobial properties of silver
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize that there are
three possible antimicrobial processes for silver nanoparticles: (1) direct
interaction of the silver particle with the cell membrane and subsequent damage
to the membrane and complexation with intracellular components, (2) release of
Ag+ ions and subsequent disinfection, and (3) formation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). None of these mechanisms have been conclusively confirmed, nor
has the relative importance of each mechanism in the inactivation of different
types of pathogenic microorganisms been elucidated. This work will synthesize
silver nanoparticles with different mean particle sizes and specific surface
areas and quantify their effects on pathogen disinfection mechanism and rate.
Pathogens proposed for study include a virus (MS2), a bacteria (E. coli), and a
protozoa (Cryptosporidium parvum). Experimental design will allow us to identify
each potential mechanism individually and determine its relative contribution to
the overall disinfection rate for each pathogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that this work will have broader impacts in several ways, including
a summer program for high-school students, adding an environmental
nanotechnology course module to an existing course, and working with the
University of Rhode Island chapter of Engineering Students without Borders
(ESWB) to develop a service project involving the manufacture and distribution
of nanosilver particles specifically designed for use in ceramic water filters
manufactured by Potters for Peace. They envision this latter effort to be a
sustainable service project for the student chapter that will teach them about
developing-world water problems, introduce them to silver nanotechnology, and
provide funds to support their student chapter service efforts.