* 0854259
* Collaborative Research: US - Costa Rica International Research Experiences for Students: Tropical Ecology Mentorship Program of Southern California
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Terry McGlynn, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2012
* USD 150,677.00

This three-year award, funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), will support undergraduate students, graduate
students, and K-12 teachers in doing international collaborative research in a
tropical rainforest setting. Under the joint mentorship of the PIs and Costa
Rican ecologists Dr. Marcelo Ard√≥n and Dr. Javier Espeleta, participants will
spend 8 weeks in the summer investigating contemporary hypotheses regarding the
transfer of energy and nutrients across trophic levels. Projects will include
the impact of terrestrial insects on stream foodwebs, the effects of species
diversity on leaf litter breakdown, the tracking of leaf area loss to
herbivores, and the role of leaf litter decomposition in the carbon cycle. These
experiments will take place at La Selva Biological Reserve in Costa Rica, in
cooperation with Dr. Liana Babbar of the Organization for Tropical Studies. Each
of the three participant cohorts will include at least one graduate student,
four undergraduate students, and an inner-city high school biology teacher. The
groups will also be joined by several research recruits (talented students from
underrepresented groups who are unable to commit for a full summer, but would
benefit from exposure to scientific research) and a citizen scientist (student
from a science policy background who would similarly benefit from a hands-on
research experience).