* 0854307
* Integrating Real-Time Chemical Sensors into Understanding of Groundwater Contributions to Surface Water in a Model Urban Observatory
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Peter Groffman, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 492,046.00

0854307 &lt;br/&gt;Welty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to
build onto the efforts developed in the first round of the WATERS Test Bed
program to quantify the significance of groundwater in the urban water cycle.
They will deploy nitrate analyzers and electrical conductivity sensors in
Baltimore watersheds and conduct mathematical modeling to address the following
questions: (1) How can sources, timing and fluxes of solutes from groundwater to
surface water vary as a function land use (ultraurban, suburban, exurban,
forest) and stream position (headwater vs downstream) (2) How can transport time
scales and subsurface flowpaths vary with flow regime (base flow vs storms) and
antecedent conditions (3) How can information from high frequency sensor
deployment across a range of hydrologic conditions be used to fill in the gaps
from the current weekly long-term monitoring to explain inter-annual changes in
residence times and flushing of solutes (4) How well can a physically-based
watershed flow and transport model represent solute transport behavior across a
range of time scales? A long-term goal of hydrologic modeling and observational
activities in the Baltimore region is to establish an end-to-end system of
field-deployed sensors and sensor networks feeding real-time data into
hydrologic and water quality models to enable prediction of water and chemical
fluxes in streams and aquifers. A principal objective is to understand how the
urban landscape and infrastructure partitions water in all components of
hydrologic cycle at multiple scales. This understanding is critical to
quantifying biogeochemical cycles, and to aid in understanding transport
pathways of contaminants to major tributaries and the Chesapeake Bay. Existing
infrastructure in the Gwynns Falls watershed provides a robust backbone for
quantifying fluxes of water, but has not yet been augmented to support high-
resolution real-time collection of water-quality data. The proposed sensor
deployment test program will also complement the 10-year weekly sampling of
chemical species that has been carried out by the Baltimore Ecosystem Study
LTER. An additional objective is to contribute to the national CUAHSI Hydrologic
Information System effort by beta-testing new software and assimilating legacy
regional environmental data into the HIS Observations Data
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work involves frequent communications
with managers and agency personnel concerned with planning and implementing
regulations affecting land use and water resources, including the Chesapeake Bay
Program. The importance of water resource management to serve the public
interest is a topic of growing importance to the State precisely because of
stresses induced by patterns of growth, but with inadequate tools and
insufficient data currently available to support decision-making. Results of
this and related studies in the Baltimore region can provide information to
assist local entities with stream restoration and other types of land
preservation activities. It is expected that data produced by this project will
be used in dissertation research by a number of graduate students in their
programs, whose expertise spans environmental engineering, hydrology,
biogeochemistry, aquatic ecology, economics, and public policy. The growth of
their monitoring and modeling network will enable them to broaden the scope of
training and research opportunities provided to students at all levels. They
have held discussions with the Florida (Santa Fe) Testbed (Wendy Graham, PI)
about cross-testbed comparisons of sensors and models as part of the test-bed
renewal program. We have already used to advantage the N sensor testing that the
Florida group carried out in Phase 1 to choose the Satlantic nitrate analyzer
for this proposal; they both plan EC as a surrogate sensor. They both plan to
use PARFLOW and SLIM in these very different hydroclimatic/ geologic
environments and have had discussions about how well the model works at each of
their sites. They believe that this kind of informal cross-site comparison can
contribute to concepts of building a network of sites, and can also contribute
to educational goals of involved post-doctoral associates and graduate students.