* 0854414
* Biomineralization and self-assembly of genetically modifiable nanofibers to build bone tissue engineering scaffolds
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Chuanbin Mao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 06/30/2013
* USD 385,542.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854414&lt;br/&gt;Mao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the fields of
bone biomineralization and tissue engineering while promoting teaching, training
and learning. A peptide that can specifically not only bind to but also nucleate
hydroxylapatite (HAP) nanocrystals will be identified by phage display. Phage
that double-displays this binding/nucleating peptide and the cell-adhesion
peptide on its surface can be site-specifically biomineralized and selfassemble
into a scaffold, which mimics the chemical composition and hierarchical
architecture of bone extracellular matrix (ECM) and thus is expected to have
biological functions of natural bone ECM. The resultant ECM-like scaffold can
support the proliferation and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
to form bone in vitro. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will have impacts on materials science, chemistry,
biology, bioengineering and medicine. It shows that phage is a good platform for
studying the mechanism of biomineralization and can be applied to develop
scaffolds for the engineering of other tissues. It will also be integrated into
outreach and educational activities and have many benefits. It will facilitate
the development of a new curriculum on bionanotechnology at Oklahoma University
to educate a new generation of workforce in the field of bionanotechnology. It
will allow bioengineering PhD and undergraduate students to be trained to
satisfy the urgent need of multidisciplinary talents in bionanotechnology.
Community college students will be motivated to pursue higher education. A
Native American Nanotechnology Outreach (NANO) program in Oklahoma that has
recently been initiated by the PI will be expanded and solidified by partnering
with Native American students, high school educators and the Native American
Research Center for Health (NARCH) program in Oklahoma. This program will help
Oklahoma Native Americans become interested in scientific careers and
competitive in job markets. Public awareness of bionanotechnology will be
increased in Oklahoma statewide by partnering with the Oklahoma Nanotechnology
Initiative, and more Oklahomans will be Speaking of Nano