* 0854411
* Gaskinetic Scheme for Micro-scale Gas Flows with Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chunpei Cai, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 183,488.00

Cai&lt;br/&gt;0854411&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately and effectively computing
micro-scale gas flows with heat transfer effects such as for electronic cooling
is a challenging task because of rarefication, electric and magnetic field
effect. Numerical schemes currently available are limited by the continuum
assumption, or they are not efficient. Recent work by the PI finds additional
defects in some current numerical methods. Though the Finite Different Lattice
Boltzmann Method (FDLBM) is very successful for highly compressible flows and
some incompressible flows with the isothermal assumptions, the PI plans to
extend it to rarefied micro-scale gas flows with heat transfer effects. The
proposed research will develop a comprehensive 2D and 3D gaskinetic FDLBM scheme
to simulate micro-scale gas flows. Immersed boundary conditions will be
implemented; and asymptotic solutions for micro-Hartmann flow will serve as
validation cases. Research results will have beneficial impacts on both industry
and academia. Microflows, such as those inside vacuum packaged microchips, and
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) sensors, behave differently from
ordinary continuum flows. Traditional computational fluid dynamics schemes
cannot simulate these microflows accurately or efficiently. To address the
problem, this project aims to develop new state-of-art simulation schemes based
on micro-scale physics. The planned tasks will buld upon the PI's experience
with asymptotic methods for rarefied flows. The developed FDLBM solutions will
be compared to simulations from other methods. Educational efforts will include
outreach presentations in senior high schools about MEMS. Undergraduate
involvement will include development and maintenance of internet materials about
these topics for teaching aids. Graduate students will include training at
national labs and at New Mexico State University, a Hispanic-serving university.
The PI will work with the Society of Hispanic Engineers and the Alliance for
Minority Participation to identify students from underrepresented groups for
participation.