* 0854880
* Characterization of the Magnetic Distortions in Closed-Circuit Magnetic Measurements
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Daniel Kramer, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2011
* USD 120,000.00

***** Technical Abstract *****&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Distortion of the
magnetic hysteresis loop in first and third quadrants in open-circuit
measurements was reported by Weiss in 1926 and named ?image effect?. Such
distortion was not reported in the closed-circuit measurements developed in
1960s until 2008 by this group, showing the hysteresis distortion to be linked
with the saturation magnetization and the geometry of the ferromagnetic
specimens. This research will investigate the distortion and develop a
fundamental understanding of the interfacial interactions between ferromagnetic
materials. Various factors, including the saturation magnetization and geometry
of the ferromagnetic specimens and electromagnetic poles, as well as the
pressure applied to the specimens, will be analyzed. Both actual measurements
and computer software will be used to analyze the interactions between the
ferromagnetic materials. This research provides a chance to revisit Weiss?s
magnetic theory for new discoveries, which is important for infrastructure
enhancement in scientific research and for development of advanced modern
technology to accurately identify new magnetic materials for high-performance
generators / motors for renewable energy. The project provides an excellent
training ground for young scientists; e.g., graduate students and post-
docs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;***** Non-Technical Abstract *****&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). Both scientists and industry rely on magnetic ?hysteresigraphs? in
closed-circuit measurements to characterize permanent magnetic materials, which
are considered to be free from errors associated with open-circuit measurements.
However, two reports published in 2008 by this research group show that such
magnetic hysteresis distortion exist in closed-circuit measurements and is
linked to the magnetic strength and geometry of the specimen materials when a
magnetic field is applied. The hysteresis distortion complicates identifying and
developing new magnetic materials. Only a comprehensive understanding of the
phenomenon can help to establish effective correction methods, which is
important for infrastructure enhancement in scientific research and for
development of advanced modern technology to accurately identify new magnetic
materials for high-performance generators / motors for renewable energy. This
project will use both magnetic measurements and computer modeling to investigate
the magnetic hysteresis distortion and develop fundamental understanding of the
phenomenon, and develop new devices for magnetic characterization. The project
provides an excellent training ground for young scientists; e.g., graduate
students and post-docs.