* 0854366
* Theory of Elementary Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Orlando Alvarez, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Sher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

One of the most important recent developments in string theory is the discovery
of integrability on both sides of the AdS/CFT correspondence. Nepomechie's main
objective is to apply techniques of integrable quantum spin chains and
integrable quantum field theories, which he has helped develop during the past
two decades, to problems in string/gauge theory. He has already contributed to
the understanding of exact bulk and boundary scattering matrices, which he plans
to exploit to obtain further exact results. Alvarez will conduct research in
quantum field theory and string theory. Alvarez is studying the extension of the
elliptic genus to families of Dirac-Ramond operators. The families index theorem
of Atiyah and Singer for the Dirac operator can be used in gauge theories to
study the anomalies that spoil the quantization of the theory. The analog in
string theory should be a families index theorem for the Dirac-Ramond operator.
Even though we do not really know what is string theory, this families index
theorem should give us some information about the structure of the theory beyond
perturbation theory. This is an important attempt at trying to learn about non-
perturbative aspects of string theory. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are as follows: this work may open new directions in string theory,
mathematics, as well as condensed matter physics and statistical mechanics. Both
Alvarez and Nepomechie will help provide scientific training to the next
generation of American citizens, in particular to those from the Latino
community in Miami. Their findings will be disseminated through the internet and
scientific publications, as well as through seminars and international
conferences. The PIs also give lectures at local public schools on science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;