* 0854316
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Advanced Inorganic Membranes for CO2 Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* S. Ted Oyama, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854316&lt;br/&gt;Oyama&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by
Professors S. Ted Oyama and Luke E. Achenie at Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University to develop advanced membranes for CO2/CH4 separation. The
studies will be carried out in a collaborative manner by the two Principal
Investigators to address experimental aspects of the preparation and
characterization of the membranes, and theoretical aspects of the mechanisms of
synthesis and permeation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research on CO2/CH4
separation is of importance for natural gas utilization. Many gas sources have
CH4 contaminated with CO2 and need treatment. The development of an improved
process for clean gas production will benefit consumers directly and could lead
to new technologies for energy distribution from new sources such as coal-bed
and shale-oil gas and microbial fermentation. This is timely bearing in mind the
heightened interest in green technologies. Some of the proposed concepts such as
the use of ultrathin graded layers on hollow fibers, can be used to improve
other membrane technology in which much good work is being done, but which is
beyond the scope of this project. Examples include supported Pd and zeolite
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training of students not only in the
important area of membrane technology, but also in advanced scientific
methodology. Membrane reaction engineering is unique in requiring mastery of a
wide diversity of knowledge, including physical chemistry, inorganic chemistry,
spectroscopy, quantum mechanics, computer programming, and engineering. Research
in this area requires integration of skills, and leads to higher-level thinking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fourth, we have a commitment to the education of
underrepresented groups like women, minorities, and handicapped individuals. We
actively recruit members of our research teams from these groups. Currently the
combined laboratories of the two lead researchers are composed of 8 members,
half of whom are women and one is handicapped. Great efforts are also underway
to involve undergraduate students in the research and helping to enhance the
teaching environment in local community schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
will be close interactions and mutual exchange of information from the
experimental and theoretical sides to help in the development of improved
membranes and to increase understanding of the molecular processes involved. In
summary our proposed project will have significant impact in several areas of
importance to society and contribute to the "green" revolution.