* 0854838
* RUI: Quantum mechanical studies of hydrogen atoms and molecules in various environments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Forrey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,896.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RUI project involves several
topics, including (1) single and double excitation, ionization, and electron
transfer reactions in collisions between hydrogen atoms, (2) the collisional
dissociation of hydrogen molecules, and (3) interactions of hydrogen molecules
with clusters. Existing calculation schemes for collisions will be enhanced by
the addition of hyperfine, non-adiabatic, and frame-transformation coupling
terms; the research is appropriate for students and will provide basic atomic
data for use in "cold collisions" investigations. Calculation of energetic
collisions of H2 near the dissociation limit is enabling for the interpretation
of astrophysical data. Calculation of the interaction of H2 with metal clusters
is relevant to the active current experiments on the effects of cluster size and
geometry on chemical reactivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
of relevance for the very active field of cold collision studies and for
astrophysics. It may help provide more accurate basic atomic and molecular
collision data. The molecule cluster calculations may help in the analysis of
surface catalytic reactions. They are thus of relevance beyond the AMO
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's affiliation at an undergraduate
institution explains the rather broad range of topics in this proposal. Many
undergraduate students have been successfully involved in these beginning
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;