* 0854527
* Endocrine-Disrupting Compounds in a Rocky Mountain Stream:  Effect of a Major Wastewater Treatment Plant Upgrade
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alan Vajda, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2013
* USD 350,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;CBET- 0854527&lt;br/&gt;Ryan,
Joseph&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado at
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endocrine-Disrupting Compounds in a Rocky Mountain
Stream: Effect of a Major Wastewater Treatment Plant Upgrade
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary research team assembled
for this proposal will apply an integrated chemical, biological, and
hydrological approach in field and laboratory studies to investigate the
relationships between nutrient loading, endocrine-disrupting compound release,
and perturbations in the stream ecosystem and endocrine function of aquatic
organisms. Joseph Ryan (University of Colorado), Larry Barber (U.S. Geological
Survey), and graduate research assistant Jeffrey Writer will evaluate the fate
and transport of a suite of endocrine-disrupting compounds in Boulder Creek.
David Norris, Alan Vajda, and a graduate research assistant (University of
Colorado) will experimentally evaluate the interaction between nutrient and EDC
load on fish reproduction and periphyton communities using an innovative on-site
mobile exposure laboratory. The team will collaborate to examine the effects of
the changes in endocrine-disrupting compound and nutrient loading using in-
stream analyses of aquatic bio-criteria indicative of ecosystem function. These
integrated analyses will elucidate the role of engineering upgrades in
sustainable watershed management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the proposed research is increased understanding of the role of wastewater
treatment in the preservation of human health and ecosystem function.
Determination of the processes governing fate and transport of endocrine-
disrupting compounds will elucidate and facilitate engineering and watershed
management efforts to mitigate detrimental impacts on aquatic ecosystems. This
unique and timely opportunity to evaluate the effect of a wastewater treatment
plant upgrade on nutrient and endocrine-disrupting compound loading and
ecosystem response will help water managers evaluate the efficacy of engineering
solutions designed to restore environmental systems and protect water resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research include
dissemination of the results by a variety of means to training of new
researchers in an important interdisciplinary area of environmental engineering.
The principal investigators have been and will continue to participate in a wide
range of community and watershed organizations to provide access to the results
of this study, including the Boulder Creek Watershed Initiative, the Boulder
Area Sustainability Information Network, the Watershed curriculum, the Colorado
Riparian Association, and associated forums and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;