* 0854059
* TiO2 Nanotube-Quantum Dot Composites for Photocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Kenneth Balkus, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2013
* USD 295,847.00

0854059&lt;br/&gt;Balkus, Kenneth J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to use
light and more preferably sunlight to affect chemical change is growing in
importance as green chemistry and energy conservation become critical. The
various polymorphs of titanium oxide (TiO2) are probably the most widely studied
materials for photocatalysts. Titanium oxide nanotubes (TNT) provide the unique
opportunity to combine the high aspect ratio, high surface area and mesoporosity
in the design of next generation photocatalysts. The band gap for bulk TiO2 (3.2
eV for anatase) lies in the ultraviolet such that only about 10% of the sun's
energy could be used in a photocatalytic process. Metal and non-metal doping as
well as surface modification define the current strategy for enhancing the
properties of TiO2 based photocatalysts and photovoltaic devices. Thus, in
addition to controlling morphology, doping and surface modification of the TNTs
is an important aspect of catalyst development. A unique feature of the TNTs is
the outside and inside surfaces that can be functionalized separately. These are
unprecedented composite nanostructures and potentially could lead to ground
breaking photocatalysis. The proposed research below will address the synthesis
and characterization of TiO2 nanotubes decorated with semiconductor
nanoparticles and films as well as the evaluation of photocatalytic activity
relevant to environmental pollution and energy conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the proposed activity &lt;br/&gt;It
is clear that researchers are starting to think more of composite nanoscale
materials and structures as attractive catalysts. The exciting aspect of TNTs is
the ability to separately modify the inside and outside surface which may impart
unprecedented catalytic activity. Thus there is the opportunity to prepare
unique hybrid composites not possible with nanorods or mesoporous particles.
Preliminary results show that semiconductor quantum dots and films can be
exclusively encapsulated in the mesopores or coated on just the outer surface.
The proposed research will describe the strategies for decorating the surfaces
of TiO2 nanotubes with various semiconductor quantum dots, nanorods and films.
Preliminary results for the photodegradation of organic dyes indicate dramatic
improvements in activity relative to benchmark catalysts. Progress on the
proposed research could also result in deployment of our new technology in areas
such as photovoltaics. The results from the proposed activity may serve to
define new directions in photocatalysis and water splitting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader Impacts of the proposed activity
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include numerous tasks that will
lead to the integration of research and multilevel education in the area of
catalysis and novel nanomaterials. If the proposed effort to develop TiO2
nanotube composite photocatalysts for the conversion of organic pollutants and
water is successful, then we anticipate that the near term impact on society
will be significant. Probable areas that will benefit from the proposed activity
include ground water detoxification and homeland security as well as
nanocatalysis, smart textiles, sensors, filtration and energy conservation.
Additionally, a strong educational component will coincide with the research
activities. The proposed research addresses contemporary topics in nanoscience
and the skills acquired by students during this project will enhance their
preparation for careers in nanotechnology, chemical engineering and materials
chemistry. In addition to seminars and course development on nanomaterials and
their applications in environment and energy, we seek to engage students at all
levels in the study of nanomaterials and their many exciting applications in
environment and energy. We will participate in the NanoExplorers program where
students participate in discussions, workshops, and experiments/research. We are
also committed to other high school student research experiences as part of the
Welch and Clark Foundations summer programs as well as ACS Project SEED for
disadvantaged high school students. It is anticipated that a high school teacher
may be involved in this project as well. As such we anticipate that this project
in catalysis and nanotechnology will also impact the community at large by
educating our high school teachers and students.