* 0854684
* Microbe-mediated Electricity Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Arum Han, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 319,700.00

CBET-0854684&lt;br/&gt;de Figueiredo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial fuel cells
are remarkable "green energy" devices that exploit microbes to generate
electricity from organic compounds. These fuel cells have generated significant
excitement in the bioenergy community because of their potential for powering
diverse technologies, including waste water treatment, autonomous sensors for
long-term operations in low accessibility regions, mobile robot/sensor
platforms, and renewable energy systems. Unfortunately, current microbial fuel
cells produce low amounts of power, a fact that has stymied widespread
application of the technology. A better understanding of how microbes can
generate electricity will significantly improve fuel cell performance. In
addition, new platforms that allow for microbial electricity production to be
studied in a massively parallel fashion are essential to significantly advance
the field. With these ideas in mind, a novel technology that can, in a massively
parallel fashion, uncover how microbes generate electricity will be developed.
In addition, a minority outreach and educational program that will train the
next generation leaders in the bioenergy sciences will be pursued. Taken
together, these efforts will have far-reaching implications for the study of
electricity generation by microbes, and the development of next generation
microbial fuel cells.