* 0854889
* QCD, Electroweak Symmetry Breaking, and Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Elizabeth Simmons, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

The PIs plan to investigate QCD, electroweak symmetry breaking, and physics
beyond the Standard Model. The grant period coincides with the first experiments
at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, which will probe QCD processes to
unprecedented precision and discriminate among proposed models of electroweak
symmetry breaking. One strand of the PIs' research in theoretical particle
physics addresses the origins of mass. They study the causes of electroweak
symmetry breaking (responsible for the masses of the W and Z particles that
transmit the weak nuclear force) and the mechanisms responsible for the diverse
masses of the quarks and leptons, the elementary constituents of matter. While
the Standard Model of particle physics can accommodate massive particles, it
does so by invoking a particle (the Higgs particle) that has not yet been
observed and it does not explain the dynamics through which mass arises. Hence,
the PIs seek to advance the understanding of the origins of mass by using field
theory, model building, and computer simulation to explore physics that lies
outside the Standard Model. Of particular interest are "Higgs-less" models whose
only new particles are massive vector bosons, heavier analogs of the W and Z .
They plan to construct new models of this kind that can provide insight into the
masses of the quarks and leptons, analyze the experimental consequences of such
models, and propose incisive new tests based on LHC data. &lt;br/&gt;Another
strand of the PIs' research stresses topics, such as QCD and the properties of
the Higgs boson, that are both intrinsically interesting within the Standard
Model and also necessary precursors for many studies of physics beyond the
Standard Model. The PIs engage in detailed QCD calculations necessary to compute
the production rate and detection backgrounds for a standard model Higgs boson;
they provide software to experimentalists to allow for the proper evaluation of
experimental results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes multiple
efforts in the areas of linking research to education, diversifying
participation, and broad dissemination of research results. The PIs will keep
presenting pedagogical lectures at international summer schools for doctoral
students and collaborating with Master's Degree and undergraduate Honors
students on research and outreach projects. These efforts introduce students to
new areas of knowledge and provide them with faculty mentoring. The PIs will
continue to create, employ, assess, and disseminate particle physics and
cosmology outreach materials for K-12 students and teachers. Several of their
annual outreach events focus on female students or those from socio-economically
disadvantaged backgrounds. Simmons will also sustain her efforts to improve the
climate for women physicists at the college, university, and national levels.