* 0854574
* Development of a Screening Tool for Nanotoxicology
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Henry Forman, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 06/30/2011
* USD 99,923.00

Proposal Title: Development of a Screening Tool for
Nanotoxicology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Valerie Leppert
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California -
Merced&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET- 0854574
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A model is
proposed for the respiratory toxicity of ambient and engineered nanophases based
on production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) from the reaction of surface
transition metal impurities with components of the lung extracellular lining
fluid (ELF), and subsequent lipid peroxidation and production of inflammatory
mediators. The proposed research will seek to verify the model and investigate
the role of particle characteristics and dose. Specific objectives include
determination of the effect of particle size, shape, surface transition metals,
and dose on respiratory toxicity and/or the alveolar macrophase respiratory
burst; and determination of whether hydrogen peroxide production and/or lipid
peroxidation products are involved in the mechanism through which trace metals
at sub-lethal concentrations are involved in the production of inflammatory and
fibrogenic mediators. Complete characterization of the nanophases investigated
is essential in order to understand the mechanisms at work in respiratory
toxicity, and this will be accomplished by ICP-MS, and scanning and transmission
electron microscopy in concert with high spatial-resolution electron energy-loss
and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Following confirmation of the model,
an in vitro screening assay for macrophage inflammatory mediator production that
could be used to predict lung inflammation caused by naturally occurring and
engineering particles will be investigated. Phases that will be investigated
include ambient silica, synthetic silica, titanium dioxide, and SWCNTs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will contribute to several
educational and outreach objectives. Research results from the proposed work
will be presented in nanotechnology and air pollution lectures given by the PI
and co-PI in UC Merced?s General Education Core Courses (these course are
required for all UC Merced students). A student Engineering Service Learning
team that the PI mentors will also incorporate results from the research into
nanotechnology exhibits that the team designs for the Castle Science and
Technology Center. CSTC is a local science discovery museum that most middle
school students in Merced and surrounding counties visit (the population of the
area is ~50% Hispanic). New capabilities in hard-soft electron microscopy at UC
Merced?s Imaging and Microscopy Facility will be utilized for the proposed work,
and new microscopy techniques developed in the course of the proposed work will
be disseminated in the electron microscopy courses that the PI teaches. In
addition, the PI and co-PI will incorporate undergraduate students in the
proposed research through the NSF NSEC Center Of Integrated Nanomechanical
Systems program that UCM participates in. UC Merced, a Hispanic Service
Institution, is the 10th and newest campus of the University of California, with
a ~50% minority student population. The PIs are committed to the engagement of
underrepresented and nontraditional students in science and engineering research
and education