* 0854412
* IRES:   U.S.-China Collaboration on Dinosaur Eggs and Education
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Varricchio, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2013
* USD 141,002.00

0854412&lt;br/&gt;Jackson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: IRES: U.S.-China
Collaboration on Dinosaur Eggs and Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The award
is made to Professor Frankie Jackson at Montana State University in Bozeman. The
participating U.S. graduate and undergraduate students will collaborate with
researchers in the Paleontology Department at the Zhejiang Natural History
Museum in Hangzhou, China. Their foreign collaborator at the museum is Dr.
Xingsheng Jin. The project will provide a quality international research
experience for 27 graduate and undergraduate students enrolled in paleontology,
biology, geology, and earth science programs over a three year period. The
students will have a unique opportunity to conduct research on specimens from
one of the largest fossil egg collections in the world. The proposed research
focuses on one egg type, referred to as Dictyoolithus, represented by hundreds
to thousands of specimens in the Zhejiang museum. They will work in a number of
different groups to collect data on egg size and volume, clutch configuration,
number of eggs within clutches, eggshell thickness and microstructure, abnormal
or unusual egg features, dimensions of the openings in the egg surface, and
associated sediments. In addition, students will learn to measure and describe a
stratigraphic section through the egg-bearing rocks. These data will be used to
assess the method of egg incubation and hatching, determine variation within the
oogenus and the extent to which features reflect biologic, rather than geologic
processes. The research will conclude with submission of a written report on the
results of their analyses. Egg incubation methods employed by dinosaurs provide
important information on the physiology of the animal and insight into the
evolutional origin of the unique reproductive system that characterizes modern
birds. Interpretations about dinosaur reproductive biology, however, remain
contentious in the literature because of the difficulty of interpreting behavior
from the rock record. This project specifically addresses these problems and
will provide important new evidence about dinosaur reproductive biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major emphasis of the project is to engage U.S. students
in meaningful projects with international students and faculty. Students will
work closely with researchers with different scientific backgrounds and will
learn field and laboratory techniques that will enhance their research skills.
Altogether, these experiences will increase the networking and international
competitiveness of the student participants. By intentionally creating
opportunities for first-generation, minority, and female students, the research
program will have broad impacts on geological education and research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;