* 0854436
* IRES: U.S.-India Summer Program in Astrophysics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Frank Hill, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

0854436&lt;br/&gt;Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Experience for Students
(IRES) award to Frank Hill, National Solar Observatory (NSO), Tucson will allow
for the continuation of a successful IRES program recently established at NSO
that provides qualified and motivated U.S. graduate students with the
opportunity to perform scientific research at the Indian Institute of
Astrophysics (IIS) in Bangalore, India. The research covers all areas of
astronomy and astrophysics, including solar physics, stellar evolution, pulsars,
novae, and astronomical site testing. The students, who are drawn from
universities throughout the U.S. with graduate programs in astronomy and
astrophysics, will gain experience in conducting research in collaboration with
foreign investigators, exposure to India's culture, and the opportunity to
develop networks with IIA scientists that will influence their future careers.
The program is evaluated using technical reports, cultural reports, and a
participant survey for both students and mentors. The student research reports
are published on the NSO website:
http://eo.nso.edu/ires/.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Astronomy and
astrophysics are fundamental scientific topics. Advances in these areas increase
our understanding of the physical laws that govern the universe. Solar physics
topics are increasingly relevant to daily life that depends on modern technology
for communications, navigation and power distribution. The research conducted by
the students and their Indian mentors contributes to all of these areas.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The exposure of U.S. graduate students to life in
India increases their global cultural sensitivity, leading to an enhanced
appreciation for the accomplishments of other societies. By working with IIA
scientists, the program provides the students with opportunities for future
scientific collaborations.