* 0854033
* Collaborative Research:  GOALI:  A New Advanced Process Control Framework for Next-Generation High-Mix Semiconductor Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,08/31/2012
* John Stuber, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 173,459.00

0854033&lt;br/&gt;Edgar &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
collaborative GOALI research is to develop and validate a novel non-threaded
advanced process control (APC) framework for next-generation high-mix
semiconductor manufacturing. Semiconductor technology lies at the heart of the
revolution in computing, communications, consumer electronics, transportation
and health care. In the last decade, diversified demand from consumers has been
pushing semiconductor industry to produce many differentiated products. As a
result, multi-product-multi-tool ("high-mix") manufacturing has become
increasingly the standard manufacturing model, which poses many challenges that
the current APC framework cannot address. The PIs plan research in the fields of
run-to-run (RtR) control, control performance assessment (CPA) and statistical
process monitoring (SPM) to meet the emerging needs in high-mix production.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research will create a non-threaded paradigm
for high-mix semiconductor manufacturing by breaking from the current tradition
of threaded APC, and provide new theories and techniques to address the
challenges posed by high-mix production. By sharing information among different
threads and different APC components, monitoring and control performance will be
greatly improved and the number of required models will be significantly
reduced. Specifically merits of each project are summarized below.
&lt;br/&gt;Project 1: State estimation and control model update: It will provide
theoretical analysis on the non-threaded state estimation problem; in addition,
it will develop a systematic approach for non-threaded state estimation and
control model update for high-mix production, which handles large-scale
nonlinear systems through a linear regression formulation. &lt;br/&gt;Project 2:
Control performance assessment and diagnosis (CPA/CPD): Instead of comparing the
actual control performance against a theoretical benchmark, the proposed
framework explicitly estimates model-plant mismatch and disturbance dynamics to
achieve CPA/CPD simultaneously. In addition, it will provide the first non-
threaded CPA/CPD tools for RtR controllers in high-mix fabs. &lt;br/&gt;Project
3: Statistical process monitoring: Analyzing the pattern of batch statistics
instead of the pattern of process variables for SPM is planned. The approach
eliminates data pre-processing required by threaded methods, greatly improves
monitoring performance, and significantly reduces the number of required models.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research will have an immediate impact on the
industrial practice of semiconductor manufacturing, as it specifically addresses
emerging industrial needs. Due to the complexity of semiconductor processes and
the critical role of APC in fab-wide monitoring and control, the problem
addressed in this research has the potential to transform the way industry
performs process control. &lt;br/&gt;Because few restrictions were posed during
the framework development, the proposed framework is not limited to the
semiconductor processes, instead, it can also be applied to the batch-oriented
pharmaceutical, specialty chemical, and polymer industries and could inspire new
solutions and research directions in general batch process monitoring and
control. &lt;br/&gt;This research promotes the education of control engineers
for semiconductor manufacturing at both graduate and undergraduate levels.
Currently, U.S. semiconductor companies are facing challenges in sustaining a
well-qualified semiconductor workforce, including engineers in the area of
process control. Therefore, the three universities are committed to the
continuing education and training of students and professionals in semiconductor
manufacturing process control. Moreover, these projects are potential resources
for involving minorities and giving them research experience in semiconductor
process control. Finally, the PIs will offer short courses on the new process
control paradigm to mid-career professionals in the semiconductor industries.