* 0854467
* Enhancement of thermoelectric performance by synergistic effects from multiple dopings in complex oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Choongho Yu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2013
* USD 299,927.00

0854467&lt;br/&gt;Yu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and education plan centers on
understanding and manipulating energy transport phenomena within nanostructured
complex oxide materials, as well as educating a broad spectrum of students
including graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students in aspects of energy
conversion processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research includes investigation
of: (1) energy transport phenomena through confined oxide structures; (2)
thermal transport in oxygen-deficient, impurity-doped nanostructured oxide
materials; and (3) influence of multiple dopants on electron and phonon
transport for thermoelectric applications. In addition, the proposed education
and outreach program will: (5) educate graduate and undergraduate students, as
well as K-12 students and teachers in nano- and micro-scale thermophysical
phenomena for energy conversion; and (6) recruit minorities and women to study
engineering disciplines and enroll in graduate
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Significant improvement in
conversion of waste heat to electricity using thermoelectric devices hinges upon
the simultaneous reduction of thermal conductivity and enhancement of electric
conductivity of thermoelectric materials. Recently, several researchers have
suggested that the suppression of phonon thermal conductivity is very effective
in improving the performance of thermoelectric materials, as this influences
thermal transport but often has a minimal influence on electronic transport
properties. However, current efforts using state-of-the-art bismuth telluride
alloys do not provide sufficient room to obtain a large reduction in thermal
conductivity due to the intrinsically low thermal conductivity of these
materials. In this regard, it is timely and important to explore materials that
have not been considered extensively in the past, such as complex oxides. The
electrical and thermal transport properties of these oxides can be altered using
various methods, which provides an opportunity to develop new, high-performance
thermoelectric materials. For example, the simultaneous use of property tuning
methods might produce synergistic effects that will dramatically increase
thermoelectric performance. The knowledge gained from this research will advance
the fundamental understanding of energy carrier transport through confined
structures and will provide a methodology to tailor the properties of many
different materials. The understanding of energy-carrier transport will be
obtained through a series of experiments and theoretical /computational
calculations, that can be used as a platform to identify other promising complex
oxides for thermoelectric applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Highly efficient thermoelectric materials have the potential to generate large
amounts of electric power from waste heat, while simultaneously reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. The research will be integrated into a graduate course
as well as core undergraduate courses, and will form the basis for presentations
in nanoscience-related courses and seminars, as well as for outreach to K-12
students and teachers through various education programs including the
Enrichment Experiences in Engineering (E3) program at Texas A&amp;M University.
Visits to minority and K-12 schools in Texas will encourage women and
underrepresented groups to pursue undergraduate and graduate studies in various
engineering disciplines.