* 0854945
* U.S. - Poland Workshop: Science and Applications of Nanoscale Diamond Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 04/30/2012
* USD 57,200.00

Proposal: OISE-0854945&lt;br/&gt;PI: Andrei Stanishevsky, University of
Alabama&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Poland award will support a series of two
workshops on the ?Science and Applications of Nanoscale Diamond Materials?. The
workshops will take place in Zakopane, Poland and in Hejnice, Czech Repulic.
They will take place in 2009 and 2010 and will be organized by Dr. Andrei
Staniskevsky (University of Alabama), Dr. Yogesh Vohra (University of Alabama),
Prof. Stanislaw Mitura (Technical University of Lodz, Poland), and Prof. Petr
Louda (Technical University of Liberec, Czech Republic). The purpose of the
workshops is to provide a forum to discuss five major challenge areas in
nanoscale diamond thin-film and particles materials. They include: (i)
microscopic understanding of the mechanisms of the nanocrystalline (NCD) films
nucleation and growth; (ii) intrinsic stresses in NCD films; (iii) modification
of the surface chemistry of both nanoscale diamond films and particles; (iv)
control of aggregation phenomena and preparation of non-aggregated diamond
nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution; and (v) control of diamond
nanoparticle fluorescence. Each workshop will bring together researchers from
the U.S and Europe to evaluate current fundamental research and development
challenges, knowledge gaps, and research needs. Particular emphasis will be
placed on educating students and junior researchers on the science of nanoscale
materials and structures. The participants will include 14 U.S. students and
junior researchers from the University of Alabama and Alabama State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will address key challenge areas in
nanoscale diamond materials. They will strengthen collaboration in nanoscale
diamond materials between researchers in the U.S. and Europe by providing a
forum for the researchers to coordinate and plan joint research and student
training activities. The workshops will enable U.S. undergraduate students,
graduate students, and junior researchers to develop an international research
network early in their careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;