* 0854498
* Modeling and Identification of multi-joint arm dynamics post stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Li-Qun Zhang, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 290,818.00

0854498&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtually all functional
movements require coordination among multiple joints. Neurological disorders
such as stroke affect multiple joints simultaneously with considerable motor
impairment. However, there is a lack of quantitative methods and apparatus to
evaluate neuromechanical changes at the multiple joints simultaneously and
individually, especially for complex systems with three or more joints involved.
This project will develop a rehabilitation robot to control the shoulder, elbow
and wrist individually. In general, the approach can be similarly applied to
even more complex systems involving more joints and/or more degrees of freedom
(DOF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project will develop a
novel method and associated whole-arm rehabilitation robot to characterize
multi-joint/multi-DOF arm dynamics with dynamic and static terms to characterize
the relevant contributions, including both properties local to the individual
joints and cross-coupling terms between joints. Such characterization has been
impractical when 3 or more joints (and/or DOFs) are involved. A systematic
multi-step method will be developed to characterize such complex system by
controlling the joints individually and identify the system dynamics with a
divide-and-conquer approach. Scientifically, it will help us investigate motor
control of multi-joint movements with the ability to control/perturb each joint
individually and multiple joints simultaneously. Clinically, it will help us
understand the mechanisms underlying the abnormal couplings between joints and
dynamic and static changes associated with spastic hypertonia in patients with
hemiparesis. Furthermore, in addition to the above characterization of system
dynamics, ability of controlling individual joints and loss of individuation
post stroke will also be characterized systematically using the proposed
measures of an inter-joint torque-coupling matrix and an inter-joint movement-
coupling matrix, which provide complete characterization of biomechanical
couplings among the joints during voluntary movements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed activity will develop a new
method to characterize multi-joint neuro-dynamics with complete dynamic and
static terms in the stiffness and viscosity matrices, including both components
local to each individual joint and coupling terms between the joints, under both
passive (by the robot) and active (by the subject) conditions. In general, the
method can be used to investigate complex systems not practical to evaluate with
existing methods. Complex systems with any number of joints can be reduced to
the single-joint level, making investigations of very complex system dynamics
systematic and practical. Furthermore, a similar approach can be used to examine
the cross-couplings between different DOFs at a single joint or at different
joints, such as between shoulder flexion and shoulder abduction and between
wrist flexion and forearm pronation. Lower limb as well as upper limb can be
similarly evaluated. Considering that many joints are involved in the upper and
lower limbs (with multiple DOFs at each joint), the potential impact of the
proposed method will be broad. Finally, a systematic method has also been
proposed to characterize couplings among joints and loss of individuation during
voluntary movements, which are directly related to functional movements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientifically, the proposed activity will facilitate the
investigation of multi-joint and multi-DOF limb dynamics in general and provide
a foundation for better understanding of the complex system behaviors.
Clinically, the proposed activity will provide us a practical and quantitative
tool to investigate impaired motor control of multi-joint movements, which often
involve excessive inter-joint/inter-DOF couplings. The proposed activity will
deepen our understanding of hemiparetic hypertonia in patients with stroke by
characterizing the complete stiffness and viscosity matrices including dynamic
and static changes and abnormal couplings between joints/DOFs. Furthermore, the
comprehensive diagnosis can potentially be used to guide rehabilitation
treatments of the impaired arms by conducting impairment-specific treatment
based on the diagnosis, including both multi-joint passive stretching and
voluntary movement training based on the multi-joint diagnosis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will be incorporated into classroom
teaching and disseminated through Internet, publications, and presentations at
scientific/clinical conferences for broader impact.