* 0854420
* Flow, Memory and Aging of Soft Particle Pastes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Roger Bonnecaze, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2013
* USD 280,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854420&lt;br/&gt;Bonnecaze&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intell
ectual Merit: Many concentrated materials consist of soft particles (e.g.,
emulsions, elastic particles, microgels, star polymers or polymer-coated
particles) packed and deformed into an amorphous state. These pastes are
important as rheological modifiers for food, materials and coating processes,
friction reduction in cement pumping and hydrofracturing. There are, however,
several aspects of their behavior that are not fully understood. Soft particle
pastes (SPPs) display complex shear thinning, normal and yield stresses, coating
instabilities, slip, memory and aging. Their aging behavior is similar to that
in structural, spin and polymer glasses. We propose to develop simulations and
models to describe the behavior of these soft-particle pastes in order to: 1)
develop a complete rheological model for soft particle pastes with arbitrary
interparticle potentials to describe their elasto-plastic flow; 2) identify the
microstructural events that occur during flow and that give rise to aging and
memory in soft particle pastes in order to accelerate, stop or otherwise
mitigate these effects; 3) test existing theories of aging and develop a new
theory for aging and memory of these materials specifically accounting for the
elastohydrodynamic interactions. To achieve these goals we will build on our
discovery of the importance of elastohydrodynamic interactions for these
materials and our recent simulations and experiments on the viscoelastic
properties of microgel suspensions undergoing shear. Specifically, we will: 1)
develop a theory to describe the microstructure in terms of the pairwise,
particle distribution function of the relaxed, unstrained paste for arbitrary
interparticle forces and predict elastic properties of SPPs; 2) develop a theory
that determines the perturbed distribution function under flow and thus predict
the yield strength and the general viscoelastic properties of SPPs; 3) modify
our existing 3D particle-based dynamic simulation of soft particle pastes to
simulate aging and memory; 4) use the simulations for parametric studies of
aging and memory of soft particle pastes correlating macroscopic behavior and
microstructural rearrangements; 5) evaluate existing models and develop new
models for the bulk rheology, aging and memory of soft particle pastes. For all
stages of this work, we will continually compare our theoretical predictions to
experiments in the literature and those conducted by a collaborator at the
ESPCI. The simulations will allow the direct connection between the macroscopic
properties (e.g., yield stress, modulus, effective viscosity, normal stresses,
aging and memory) to the microscopic interactions of the soft particles and a
fundamental understanding of the origins of their rheology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The rheology of SPPs appears to be
universal across a broad array of deformable particles ranging in size from
nanometers to hundreds of microns. The knowledge gained from this work will
provide engineers and colloid scientists a means to tailor the formulation of
soft particle pastes to have desired rheological properties. Theories from this
proposed work for predicting the non-equilibrium microstructure will also
provide a new methodology for modeling the properties of highly concentrated,
amorphous suspensions of soft particles and other complex fluids. The aging and
memory phenomena seen in pastes are also seen in many other systems, including
nematic polymers and spin and structural glasses. The proposed work will provide
fundamental insights into these behaviors. The aging phenomenon in pastes is
part of a broader issue of and an industrially important concern about shelf
life of formulations of suspensions. The results of this work will provide
guidance into controlling aging and shelf-life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed will involve the education of one graduate student and two
undergraduate students over the course of the project. They will become skilled
in rheology of complex fluids, computational simulation and modeling.