* 0854708
* US - Kenya Doctoral Dissertation Enhancement Project: The Impact of Macropores on the Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Soil Moisture in Dryland Ecosystems of Central Kenya
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Kelly Caylor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

PI Kelly Caylor of Princeton University will supervise his doctoral student
Trenton Franz in this Doctoral Dissertaion Enhancement Project. Pastoralist
activities in the dryland ecosystem of central Kenya are being threatened by
changes in landuse policy and shifts in climate. In the late 1960?s, native
pastoralists were placed on Group Ranches, which fundamentally changed their
nomadic lifestyle. The sedentarization of the people coupled with improved
healthcare and population growth has lead to overgrazing of the landscape. The
change from native tree-grass savanna to degraded barren landscapes has severe
implications to human populations, wildlife populations, water and energy
balances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to water balance, one impact to the
system is the change in the distribution of rainfall. Rainfall records in the
region indicate a shift to more intense infrequent events, while annual totals
remain unchanged. Perturbations to the system from landuse and climate change
can be addressed with ecohydrologic models. Dryland ecosystem processes are
governed by complex interactions between the atmosphere, soil, and vegetation
that are tightly coupled through the mass balance of water. Fully-resolved
physical models of surface and subsurface processes require numerical routines
and parameterization that are not trivial to solve for the spatial (hillslope)
and temporal (many plant generations) scales of ecohydrologic interest. In order
to reduce model complexity, a water balance study was installed to empirically
derive flux terms from different landscape patch types (bare soil, grass, and
tree). The results of the study revealed a strong subsurface component of the
water balance and that termites may play a substantial role in creating the
flux. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to resolve the subsurface component of the
hillslope water balance, three studies are proposed using innovative geophysical
methods. Two studies will use direct current resistivity to track a pulse of
water injected into a soil medium. The first study will be performed in the
laboratory in a uniform sand to test the methodology and instrumentation. The
second study will inject water into a termite nest to track the redistribution
of water downstream over time. The resistivity measurements will be used to
create a general picture of water redistribution from termite nests with the
hope of using analytical solutions to approximate the process. The analytical
solutions are desirable for implementation in an ecohydrologic landscape model
as they will greatly reduce complexity. The third study will investigate the
temporal and spatial impacts that multiple termite nests have on the hillslope
water balance. Electromagnetic induction (EMI) will be used to obtain survey
data (5-10 ha) of the bulk electrical conductivity of the top 1 meter of soil.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will be carried out in 2009 at the Mpala
Research Center of Central Kenya. The director of the research center, Dr.
Margaret Kinnaird, will serve as the host collaborator on the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity will be
field and modeling studies on the hillslope hydrology of the central Kenya
dryland ecosystem. The innovative studies will specifically address the spatial
and temporal impacts that termites have on the hillslope water balance. The
results of the studies will be used to justify reasonable simplifications to a
numerical model of the system at more appropriate spatial (hillslope) and
temporal (many plant generations) scales of ecohydrologic interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity
will be to provide groups like the Mpala Research Center with analytical tools
to address concerns of the community and government about landuse and climate
change. Dryland ecosystems cover 20% of the earth and are extremely sensitive to
perturbations. Multiple scenarios on climate change and landuse policy can be
run with the model that will provide more accurate and robust estimates on
current grazing practices and future policy decisions to local communities.
&lt;br/&gt;