* 0854912
* New Directions in Nuclear Structure Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Bruce Barrett, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2014
* USD 519,489.00

Research Program: One of the fundamental outstanding problems in the field of
physics is to understand the structure and properties of the atomic nucleus
starting from the basic interactions among the neutrons and protons
(collectively called nucleons) and employing only quantum mechanical many-body
theory. Great progress has been made in solving this problem in the last ten
years due to new developments in nuclear many-body theory and advances in
computer technology. One of these developments is the so-called No Core Shell
Model (NCSM), in which all the nucleons in a nucleus are treated as being
active, instead of only a few valence nucleons outside an assumed inert core.
The NCSM approach simplifies the structure of the many-body problem to be solved
and has had considerable success in describing the properties of light nuclei,
up to masses near oxygen, i.e., nucleon number 16. This same NCSM approach can
be and is being now applied to nuclear reaction theory. One of the fundamental
advances following from these investigations is the understanding of the
importance of not only pair-wise interactions among nucleons in determining
nuclear structure, but also of triplet (or three-nucleon) interactions. More
work needs to be done to determine whether or not four-nucleon and higher-
nucleon interactions are also necessary. Another important problem is to
understand the relationship between the energy required in the two-nucleon
system relative to the energy available for all the nucleons in a
nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Our NCSM approach not only has
wide applications in theoretical nuclear physics but also in atomic and
molecular physics and in condensed matter physics, such as, the problem of a
small number of fermions, e.g., electrons, constrained by an harmonic oscillator
trap. In addition, our research program is actively educating and mentoring a
new generation of young nuclear theorists. For example, during the previous
award period, our research group included two undergraduate students, two
graduate students, and three post-doctoral research associates. The principal
investigator also teaches undergraduate and graduate nuclear physics courses at
the University of Arizona and lectures on nuclear structure theory at
international summer schools, workshops and symposia.