* 0854636
* U.S.-Singapore Workshop:  Expanding U.S.-Asia Collaborations in Geography Education
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Michael Solem, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 08/31/2011
* USD 48,400.00

0854636&lt;br/&gt;Solem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Singapore Workshop:
Expanding U.S.-Asia Collaborations in Geography
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the participation of American
researchers, postdocs, and graduate students in a U.S. - Singapore workshop on
expanding U.S.-Asia Collaborations in Geography education to be held in
Singapore in early 2010. The co-organizers are Dr. Michael Solem of the
Association of American Geographers (AAG) in Washington, D. C. and Dr. Chew?Hung
Chang of the Southeast Asian Geography Association and the Nanyang Technological
University in Singapore. The workshop will extend the networks of the AAG?s
Center for Global Geography (CGGE) education to support online international
collaborations between geographers. In the past they have developed Phase 1
consisting of three modules (Nationalism, Global Economy, and Population) and
are now planning on developing Phase 2 consisting of three new modules
(Migration, Global Climate Change, and Water Resources). The workshop sessions
will result in three major outcomes for the Phase 2 project: 1) a collection of
new Asian case studies and collaborative activities for the modules, 2)
classroom trials of the workshop materials in undergraduate geography classes
taught in the U.S. and Asia, and 3) a cadre of American and Asian geographers
who actively use the modules to plan collaborations in their own geography
classes. Materials developed in the workshop will draw on geographic research by
participating students and faculty. Workshop participants will receive training
for managing collaborations with the modules. They will also be prepared to
collect data as part of an international research effort to study the impact of
the materials developed in the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
sufficient overlap of interests between the Association of American Geographers
and the Southeast Asian Geography Association to indicate that they can
successfully pursue the activities proposed and that the interaction will
benefit both sides. When published, these modules will offer a larger variety of
resources for teaching geographic issues. By involving postdocs and students in
early career stages, the workshop will provide an opportunity for participants
to build valuable international networks that can continue to enhance their
teaching and research in subsequent years. Ultimately, these relationships will
enhance the international perspectives of undergraduate students in the U.S. and
abroad who use the CGGE modules to learn about geographic issues in Asia. Broad
dissemination of the workshop?s materials will be made available through
publications and the AAG websites. The materials will be published in English,
Spanish and Chinese. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;