* 0854099
* GOALI: Understanding the effect of sequence on expression of recombinant monoclonal antibodies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Susan Sharfstein, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 04/30/2010
* USD 44,000.00

0854099&lt;br/&gt;Sharfstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the relationships
between gene and protein sequence and expression level of recombinant monoclonal
antibodies by:&lt;br/&gt;* Creating a library of sequence variants for a
recombinant therapeutic monoclonal antibody&lt;br/&gt;* Expressing these
variants in Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells&lt;br/&gt;* Analyzing the mRNA
levels and intra- and extra-cellular antibody levels and correlating the
expression with gene and protein sequence&lt;br/&gt;* Comparing the results of
this study with previous studies of other antibodies performed by UCB Celltech
(Slough, UK) to determine whether always controlled by protein stability or if
other mechanisms also play a role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed work are to: &lt;br/&gt;* Provide a unique educational experience
for a female doctoral student in Chemical Engineering, combining an industrial
internship and an international experience that can serve as a model for
international experiences for domestic graduate students&lt;br/&gt;* Provide
critical knowledge to the biotechnology and biopharmaceutical industry in the
United States&lt;br/&gt;* Develop an ongoing relationship between Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute and UCB that will play an important role in an invited
IGERT proposal in molecular bioprocessing