* 0854249
* Towards Deep Tissue Imaging of Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer Parameters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 404,505.00

0854249&lt;br/&gt;Webb&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) has proved to be of immense value in the study of chemical
transport into cells and the underlying cause of disease due to, for example,
protein misfolding (which may lead to Alzheimer's disease). The quenching of
donor fluorescence by FRET transfer has been measured, and the intramolecular
FRET parameters (lifetime and yield, and in the case of a flexible linker, the
mean and variance of the linker distance) have been widely used. However, FRET
imaging has been limited to in vitro or surface microscopy because of the
deleterious effects of substantial scatter. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate a method for imaging FRET parameters in highly scattering media,
thereby providing the opportunity for deep tissue in vivo FRET studies. The new
work planned is as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Development on an Approach to
Image FRET Parameters with ODT: A fluorescence resonance energy transfer optical
diffusion tomography (FRET-ODT) imaging approach will be developed. This will
involve a solution for the intramolecular FRET parameters with both rigid and
flexible linkers that are incorporated as unknown sources in a diffusion
equation representation for the donor fluorescence. The sensitivity to the
parameter space (modulation frequencies, source-detector arrangement, FRET
parameters, signal to noise ratio) will be studied and software suitable for use
with experimental data for FRET sources in a scattering medium will be
developed. The merits of incorporating acceptor kinetics will also be
investigated. In a similar way, intermolecular FRET sources will be implemented
in an ODT framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- FRET-ODT Experimental Studies: A
model tissue experiment will be constructed to obtain data to evaluate the FRET-
ODT imaging approach to be developed. Data allowing the influence of varying
degrees of scatter, varying FRET chemical concentration, varying donor-acceptor
distance and distance distribution, and multiple modulation frequencies, as well
as the effect of an inhomogeneous background, will be obtained. As an in vivo
FRET-ODT application, a mouse model for targeted drug delivery to cancer cells,
with the subsequent drug entry and release, will be studied using a FRET model
that incorporates information about the transport kinetics and which emulates
the drug delivery process. Information from this study will aid in the
development of targeted drugs that are selectively delivered to cancer cells,
thereby preventing damage to healthy cells that usually occurs during
chemotherapy (for example, leucopenia - a deficiency in white blood cells,
alopecia - hair loss, constipation, and hypertension). This work will be done
with the Low group in the Dept. of Chemistry at Purdue.