* 0854935
* Establishing SM processes and seeking beyond-SM signals with ATLAS, and addressing gap in physics interest of youth in Chicago
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Florencia Canelli, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 07/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This award will fund the
research of Florencia Canelli, an assistant professor in the experimental
particle physics group at the University of Chicago. The research work is
focused at the ATLAS experiment at the LHC. The physics program of the proposal
consists of developing searches for physics beyond the standard model while
making measurements of known standard model processes. The known processes such
as W, Z, and t-tbar production are going to be used to establish a good
understanding of the detector, Monte Carlo, and to develop and improve tools
such as jet energy corrections, jet resolution and b-tagging algorithms. The
award will enable her group to make significant contribution to the
commissioning, monitoring and validation of the trigger at the ATLAS experiment.
This will involve taking an active part in the running of the experiment as
collisions start at the end of 2009. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an important
contribution to the ATLAS upgrade this research proposal also proposes to work
within the ATLAS trigger and data acquisition group to design and construct a
Fast Tracker Trigger (FTK). Among some of the benefits of having implemented FTK
in the ATLAS trigger is that it will allow the possibility of b-quark and tau
lepton identification within the online trigger system. The proposal will enable
the expansion of the Enrico Fermi Summer Intern program, a program of science
lectures series for seventh grade students from the Chicago Public Schools and
to the University program which will be complemented with lab sessions on
particle physics and tours of Fermi lab. A second outreach program is called
"Girls Science Salon", a program which brings science to girls in 6th through
8th grade with the purpose of encouraging them to pursue science in their
education and careers.