* 0854962
* AHSS:  Development of a High Strength, High Toughness Ausferritic Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Susil Putatunda, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 11/30/2013
* USD 303,461.00

The objective of this research award is to advance fundamental understanding of
the synthesis of a high strength, high toughness bainitic steel with extremely
fine scale microstructure consisting of ferrite and carbon stabilized austenite.
This novel steel will be synthesized using the concept of austempered ductile
cast iron technology and by applying a novel concept of adiabatic deformation
together with a two-step austempering process in a medium carbon low alloy steel
with high silicon content. This novel process will result in extremely fine
bainitic ferrite and carbon stabilized austenite which will in turn provide
simultaneous high yield strength, fracture toughness, impact strength and
fatigue strength. Currently such combination of unique properties can not be
obtained in conventional low alloy steels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research will pioneer a novel technology for creation of a
series of Ausferritic Steels with excellent combination of mechanical
properties. It will establish whether a combination of adiabatic deformation and
two-step austempering will lead to large super cooling and carbon partitioning,
and thus lead to an extremely fine scale bainitic ferrite and carbon stabilized
austenite. Moreover it will validate whether such a microstructure will impart
the desired combination of mechanical properties i.e. simultaneous high yield
strength, fatigue strength, fracture toughness and impact strength. The creation
of Ausferritic steel will be totally new and a novel concept. The concept of
Ausferritic steel will make a valuable contribution to the theory of phase
transformation in ferrous alloys. In addition to this, we have also developed a
thermodynamic model and the assumptions made in derivation of this thermodynamic
model will also be examined. Thus this proposed research will advance the state
of knowledge in the ferrous physical metallurgy as well as basic thermodynamics
and kinetics of phase transformation. This novel steel will make the structural
components lighter, more energy efficient and consequently improve fuel economy
and reduce pollution. This novel process will also lead to a near net shape
production technology for steels. The austempering process is a more energy
efficient heat treatment process since no post heat treatment after quenching is
required. Therefore, this process will lead to significant energy
savings.&lt;br/&gt;