* 0854579
* Athabaskan Origins: Special Session at the 2009 Athabaskan Languages Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Andrew Garrett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2010
* USD 17,200.00

The 2009 Athabaskan Languages Conference, to be held at the University of
California, Berkeley, will feature a special session that addresses one of the
outstanding questions in the study of prehistoric America: the precise Asian
origins of indigenous Americans. Athabaskan is the largest indigenous language
family in North America, both in terms of land area and number of speakers. It
spreads over a huge area, with concentrations in Western Canada (Slave, Dëne
Suliné, Sarsi), Alaska (Koyukon, Ahtna, Gwich'in), the west coast of the US
(Hupa, Tolowa), and the US Southwest (Navajo, Apache). Despite their great
geographic separation, the languages are very closely related. Although
Athabaskan languages are highly endangered and incompletely researched,
documentation and comparative analysis have advanced to the point that it is
possible to establish reliable reconstructions of Na-Dene, a protolanguage that
is the common ancestor of Athabaskan and the modern Tlingit and Eyak languages.
These reconstructions, in turn, have made it possible for linguists from several
institutions to assemble compelling evidence in support of a long-sought
connection between Na-Dene and the Yeniseian language family of Siberia. Their
research has shown that the abstract forms of words and the rules of composition
of the verb in Yeniseian languages find systematic and numerous parallels in Na-
Dene. These correspondences are too numerous and share too many idiosyncratic
features to be explained by anything other than common descent. The comparison
has also shown conclusively that Haida, sometimes associated with Na-Dene, is
not related.

The 2009 Athabaskan Languages Conference will bring together in one place many
of the scholars who have participated in this multifaceted research effort. It
will be an opportunity for the evidence supporting the Dene-Yeniseian hypothesis
to be discussed and critically evaluated by an audience of specialists in
Athabaskan and other Na-Dene languages. If correct, the Dene-Yeniseian
connection is the first solid linguistic evidence connecting Asian and
indigenous American populations. These results have ramifications for our
understanding of the prehistoric movement of North American populations. The
distance from the Yeniseian range to the most distant Athabaskan languages is
the greatest overland distance covered by any known language spread not using
wheeled transport or sails. Archaeologists have speculated that the Na-Dene
speakers may descend from some of the earliest colonizers of the Americas, who
eventually created the successful and long-lived Northern Archaic tool tradition
that dominated interior and northern Alaska almost until historical times. The
research therefore also has important implications for the theory and practice
of historical linguistics itself. Although the precise age of well-understood
language families such as Indo-European is sometimes disputed, the oldest dates
accepted by most researchers are typically no more than 6,000 BP. Some scholars
have suggested that this is near the outer limit of reliability for historical-
comparative linguistic methods. The Dene-Yeniseian hypothesis raises the
possibility that the method may be reliably used to establish linguistic
relationships of a much greater time depth, at least as far back as the last
migration from Eastern Siberia into North America, and perhaps much earlier.