* 0854510
* Subsurface Carbon Cycling in Bioremediation of Acid Mine Drainage:  Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* JoAnn Silverstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 06/30/2012
* USD 339,089.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854510&lt;br/&gt;Silverstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) is a serious environmental problem resulting
from oxidation reactions in sulfidic rock, which is mediated by iron-oxidizing
bacteria (IOB). The principal objective of this proposal is to develop a
fundamental quantitative understanding of the coupled biogeochemical processes
involved in the pyrite oxidation cycle and the carbon cycle, facilitating the
evaluation and design of a sustainable remediation process. The proposed work is
a follow-up to previously-funded bench-scale studies of the use of organic
carbon additions for mitigation of AMD, which demonstrated that addition of
organic carbon to acid generating rock stimulates the growth of heterotrophic
microorganisms, consuming oxygen and sequestering ferric iron, thus inhibiting
pyrite oxidation. The proposed research, which combines experiments and modeling
across a range of scales, consists of the following major tasks: &lt;br/&gt;(1)
Monitor reactions of AMD generation and inhibition under simulated environmental
conditions for sufficient duration to determine mineral and organic carbon
storage and transport from the interstitial pore to waste rock pile scale.
&lt;br/&gt;(2) Develop expressions for microbial and chemical kinetics and
diffusion rates in waste rock to use in computational models. &lt;br/&gt;(3)
Characterize transport and storage of reactive organic and mineral constituents
along flow paths in waste rock media over the range of spatial and temporal
scales, to evaluate the sustainability of carbon addition for in-situ AMD
remediation. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Incorporate the understanding gained from (1) - (3)
into a rigorous reactive transport model and combine it with models of complex
unsaturated flow in waste rock systems to predict the behavior at the waste-rock
column and pile scale. &lt;br/&gt;(5) Carry out sensitivity analysis to evaluate
the robustness of carbon addition in inhibiting AMD formation in waste rock
under a variety of environmental and hydrologic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remediation strategy being explored in this project
for in-situ control of AMD generation can potentially result in significant
reduction in cost compared with current approaches. Moreover, the study of
carbon addition to waste rock is an opportunity to identify the mechanisms that
control carbon cycling in the subsurface after perturbation of an existing
biogeochemical system. Once developed, the multi-scale model approach could be
used to assess sustainability of other bioremediation methods such as
constructed wetlands and bioreactive subsurface barriers. The multi-disciplinary
nature of the research will provide unique opportunities for graduate student
research and training in environmental engineering - with broad exposure to
hydrology, geochemistry, microbiology and modeling. Large lab columns will
provide educational and outreach opportunities targeted at undergraduate
students, stakeholder groups and K-12 students in Colorado, where the
environmental impacts of AMD are widespread. A diverse group of undergraduate
student researchers will be recruited through the University of Colorado REU
site in environmental engineering and the Summer Multicultural Access to
Research and Training (SMART) program.