* 0854619
* 1.54 micron optical amplifiers and emitters based upon erbium doped III-nitrides grown on silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Hongxing Jiang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 07/31/2012
* USD 328,011.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop new types of
electrically pumped optical emitters and amplifiers on silicon based upon
nitride-on-Si photonic materials system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Research in silicon photonics has received much attention in
recent years because of its potential to utilize well developed silicon
processing technology. The foremost challenge in silicon photonics so far is the
difficulty of making electrically pumped light sources and amplifiers. We
propose to develop new types of optical emitters and amplifiers on silicon. Our
approach is to exploit erbium (Er) doping in III-nitride semiconductors and is
based on our successful synthesizing by MOCVD of Er-doped III-nitride device
structures on silicon that exhibit predominantly the desired optical emission
for optical communication at 1.5 microns. The technical aims are to further
develop the MOCVD growth technology for the in-situ Er incorporation into III-
nitride device structures grown on silicon and device fabrication technology for
the realization of Er-doped nitride optical amplifiers and emitters active at
1.5 microns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
understanding of Er-doped III-nitride materials and the growth of such materials
on large area Si substrates have the potential to open up unprecedented
applications because such nitride-on-Si photonic materials system would be
compatible with the standard CMOS processes. Graduate students will be actively
involved in a research program that is highly interdisciplinary in nature;
covering from the state-of-the-art epitaxial growth of novel photonic
materials/structures, to advanced materials characterization, and to nano-scale
photonic/optoelectronic device fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;