* 0854247
* Experimental Probing and Molecular Modeling of Key Sorbent-Solute-Solvent Interactions in Chiral Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Nien-Hwa Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0854247 Wang

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professors Nien-Hwa (Linda) L.Wang and Elias I. Franses of Purdue University
to study adsorptive separations of chiral enantiomer pairs, or racemic mixtures.
These separations are a critical problem of the pharmaceutical and fine
chemicals. This is an integrated research and education project. A new approach
is used to understand the sorbent-solute-solvent interactions in a major class
of chiral sorbents of derivatized amylose and cellulose. These sorbents are used
in over 50% of all analytical and preparative adsorptive chiral separations,
involving chiral molecules, which are either right-handed or left-handed, but
otherwise exactly the same physically and chemically. Drugs such as thalidomide,
and many statins, depression, and respiratory drugs are more effective when only
one enantiomer is used. In fact, the less effective enantiomer may be toxic or
teratogenic, as it happened with thalidomide in the 1950's. For these reasons
the FDA has mandated that each enantiomer pair should be separated and tested. A
series of simple non-chiral solutes with one or two hydrogen bonding (H-bonding)
functional groups and hydrophobic functional groups are studied using elution
chromatography, to identify the key molecular groups which contribute to solute
retention factors in various solvents. Particular attention is given in the
study of the effect of the solvent on sorbent-solute interactions. Choice of
benign solvents and minimization of solvent use are important for the
environment and for worker safety. Various advanced experimental physicochemical
methods, including infrared spectroscopy, solid-state NMR (Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance spectroscopy), and X-ray diffraction, are used to help identify the
key molecular interactions and the structural changes of the polymer sorbent
films, caused by adsorption of solutes and solvents. Molecular simulations are
used to visualize, elucidate, educate the students, and predict the binding
energies of the enantiomer molecules with and without solvent. The predictions
are compared with chromatographic separation results and spectroscopic results
for solutes of high enantioresolution (good separation with that sorbent-solvent
combination). Understanding the specific interactions of the individual
functional groups is used to interpret the retention behavior and
enantioselectivities (quality of separation) of solutes with two or more
functional groups in different solvents and at different temperatures. The
combination of chromatography studies with direct probing techniques and
molecular simulations is scientifically unique and transformative for this area
of research. The results lead to new rules, insights, and general guidelines for
selecting solvents, sorbents, and temperatures, for optimizing process design
for production of single enantiomers. Such understanding is the foundation for
understanding more complex interactions of large molecules with surfaces or
other molecules. Improved scientific understanding of the interactions of the
specific chiral recognition mechanisms at the molecular level could lead to
innovation in other areas, such as sensors, biomaterials, drug design, and
nanotechnology.

Chiral separations are crucial for producing safe and affordable enantiomer
drugs. This research aims at helping reduce costs of analytical and production
scale chiral separations. The project should improve the research infrastructure
in chiral chromatography and techniques for characterizing sorbents and thin
films, and their interactions with various solutes. The research will impact the
training of two graduate and two undergraduate students, who will be trained and
specialize in an important technology area, and may lead to further fundamental
research and innovative materials and processes. Some of these students will be
recruited from under-represented minority and female student groups. The
research will lead to educational improvements of several graduate and
undergraduate courses, in the areas of Separations, Interfacial Engineering,
Thermodynamics, and Mass Transport. The project aims to help enhance the
competitiveness of the US industry and of the US universities in an important
area of advanced technology.