* 0854711
* Flux Distributions and Path Densities: A New Look at Stratosphere-Troposphere Exchange (STE)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2013
* USD 548,837.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project will quantify stratosphere-troposphere exchange (STE) using novel
transport diagnostics: one-way cross-tropopause flux distributions and path
densities with their associated transport rates. This new approach will extend
the current knowledge of STE by revealing, with unprecedented detail and
precision, a comprehensive picture of transport across the tropopause and
through the troposphere and stratosphere. The flux distributions computed with
MATCH (Model of Atmospheric Transport and Chemistry), driven by reanalyzed
winds, will allow extant disparate estimates of STE fluxes to be validated and
reconciled as differently conditioned integrals of the underlying fundamental
flux distributions. The path-density diagnostic will quantify the advective-
diffusive "conveyor" circulation in the atmosphere, partitioned according to the
origins and destination regions of different paths and the origin-to-destination
transit time.

This research will make the first substantial use of idealized general
circulation models to analyze atmospheric tracers and transport. Analysis of
idealized model experiments will determine how different meteorological
processes and flow regimes control STE. The computational efficiency of these
idealized models will allow the systematic determination of the sensitivities to
model parameters so that the robustness of the results can be assessed.

The results of this project will be of value to the wider atmospheric-chemistry
community, because the flux-distribution and path-density diagnostics isolate
the role of transport in determining atmospheric composition. In particular, the
rates and pathways with which different photochemical environments are accessed
by both boundary-layer and stratospheric species will be quantified. This will
have implications for air quality, by constraining the contribution of
stratospheric ozone to boundary-layer air and by quantifying the rates and paths
with which boundary-layer air and pollutants are removed to the stratosphere. A
baseline climatology of detailed STE transport diagnostics will be provided,
from which changes in transport and atmospheric composition caused by future
green-house-gas warming can be asssessed. Results will be of value to the
observational community, because the geographic distribution of cross-tropopause
fluxes, the statistics of deep intrusions and their lifetimes, and the
meteorological processes that are conducive to STE will be quantified. This will
be useful for planning aircraft and other measurement campaigns.

The computed Green functions and the idealized model configurations will be made
available to the community. These tools can be used for a wide variety of
investigations on the STE of air and trace species. Research activities will be
integrated into teaching and educational outreach. A team of a high-school
student, a high-school teacher, and an undergraduate university student from the
New-York-City area will participate in the project through the New York City
Research Initiative during its annual six-week summer outreach program.