* 0854433
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: FLAME-GRADIENT SYNTHESIS OF TRANSITION METAL OXIDE NANORODS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wilson Merchan-Merchan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 181,626.00

0854433&lt;br/&gt;Merchan-Merchan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research between teams at the University of Oklahoma (OU) and North Carolina
State University (NCSU) intends to achieve controlled synthesis of transition-
metal-oxide (TMO) nanoforms and to develop a scientific understanding of the
underlying mechanisms. Flames have been successfully applied for the synthesis
of high-demand nanomaterials such as metal and ceramic nanopowders, carbon
fibers, carbon nanotubes, and fullerenes. As a nearly unexplored research area,
the flame-gradient synthesis of TMO nanostructures is of fundamental and
practical interest due to the potential variety and multifunctionality of the
formed nanoforms, their unique properties, morphology and prospective
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The team will use a flame-gradient method based on the
interaction of a bulk metal support with a flame environment of varying
temperature and chemical composition, a method they had pioneered. The
successful preliminary experiments proved the applicability of this method for
the synthesis of unique TMO nanostructures that have never been generated using
flames or other traditional synthesis methods. The new research will extend the
method to various important transition metals, such as molybdenum, tungsten,
iron, cobalt, tantalum, chromium, vanadium, and zinc, to produce an experimental
database on generated nanoforms and corresponding synthesis conditions. The
focus of the proposed studies will be the confirmation of the key hypothesis
that various 1-D TMO nanostructures can be generated in flames by a synergetic
action of a highly reactive flame environment possessing strong thermal and
chemical gradients. Within this collaborated research, the OU team will study
the structure and morphology of generated nanoforms that will be analyzed using
advanced material diagnostic techniques, and the NCSU group will conduct flame
diagnostics and modeling to uncover the mechanisms. Flame chemistry, the nature
of flame interaction with the metal surfaces, and the mechanism of the synthesis
process will be closely studied.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are both
technological and educational. This research will serve as a fundamental basis
for the development of novel technologies for flame synthesis of advanced TMO
nanostructures with potential applications in electronics, medicine, chemistry,
optics, sensors, recording and imaging media. The advantages of flame synthesis
over other synthesis methods involve reduced cost, shorter processing times,
improved scalability and quality. The method to be studied suggests essential
economic and technological advances over current synthesis methods. Graduate and
undergraduate students at OU and NCSU working on this interdisciplinary project
will gain expertise in the fields of combustion, nanotechnology, and material
synthesis. Underrepresented minority students will be encouraged and aided to
start graduate school studies by providing them with a supportive and
stimulating research experience during their junior and senior years.
Additionally, the educational program involves high school teachers and students
of North Carolina and Oklahoma communities by exposing them to the field of
modern science via lectures, laboratory demonstrations, and hands-on experience.