* 0854131
* The propagation and breaking of topographically generated internal waves in the ocean
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* James Rottman, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,000.00

0854131&lt;br/&gt;Vanderhoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topographic generation,
propagation and breaking of oceanic internal waves is an essential part of the
ocean mixing processes that contribute to the general circulation of the ocean,
the exchange of heat and gasses with the atmosphere, and the dispersal of
pollutants and nutrients. This project aims to develop modeling tools, perform
simulations and compare with observational data to understand the dynamics of
the topographic generation of internal waves in the ocean, how these waves
propagate through a realistic ocean environment with vertically varying density
and shear, gain additional insight into the subtle processes of how these short
internal waves evolve toward breaking and dissipation, and how to quantify and
parameterize the dissipation and mixing effects of breaking. The primary methods
used will be recently developed hybrid ray-tracing techniques that allow the
efficient calculation of the propagation of internal waves through a realistic
ocean environment, including the calculation of wave amplitudes, and that
eliminate or minimize the need for corrections at ray singularities. The
simulations will be closely coordinated with ocean observations, specifically
with data obtained during the NSF-sponsored Hawaiian Ocean Mixing Experiment, of
the generation of internal waves by ocean bottom topography and their subsequent
propagation. This investigation will allow for funding and training of graduate
and undergraduate students in the concepts and practice of oceanography,
internal wave theory, ray methods, data analysis and large-scale numerical
simulation techniques.