* 0854431
* IRES Poland - Experience in Civil Infrastructure Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Andrzej Nowak, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 144,108.00

Proposal: OISE-0854431&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Dr. Andrzej Nowak, University
of Nebraska-Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Poland International Research Experience
for Students (IRES) will provide an international research experience for
graduate and undergraduate students from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and
Florida A&amp;M University. The program has two overarching goals. The first is
to formalize international research training for U.S. undergraduate and graduate
students in the field of civil infrastructure systems. The second is to nurture
the development of strong professional relationships between European Union
engineers, in this case Polish engineers, and U.S. engineers. The objectives of
this program include 1) recruiting a diverse group of four undergraduate
students and two graduate students to the program annually, 2) connecting these
students with established researchers in the U.S. and in Poland, 3) providing a
series of industry-related research activities in Poland, and 4) providing a
sequence of scientifically related cultural experiences in Poland to promote a
better understanding and appreciation of international research and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In total, 24 undergraduate and graduate students will be
recruited from the University of Nebraska and Florida A&amp;M University to
participate in this IRES project. These students will be formed into teams and
each team will focus on particular civil infrastructure-related theme. Each team
will have a graduate student as team leader and an undergraduate student from
each of the participating US institutions. It is anticipated that three of the
students will be from historically underrepresented groups. The project leader,
in conjunction with the faculty advisor, will select a specific research topic.
The team will identify the project, formulate the activities, and coordinate
with each other and the Polish engineers. During their six week technical tour
of Poland the teams will collaborate with Dr. Henryk Zobel (Warsaw University of
Technology), Dr. Tadeusz Tatara (Cracow University of Technology), and Dr. Maria
Kaszynska (Szczecin University of Technology). The teams will also attend a
civil infrastructure conference and tour large-scale European civil
infrastructure-related projects.