* 0854641
* Magnetic Relaxation and Dynamics in Ferromagnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/11/2008,06/30/2011
* Shufeng Zhang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2011
* USD 241,333.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research aimed at
developing a self-consistent transport and magnetic theory capable of addressing
the magnetization damping and dynamics due to microscopic interactions between
non-equilibrium conduction electrons and magnetization. Many recently discovered
phenomena in magnetic nanostructures originate from the interplay between the
spin transport properties and magnetization dynamics. The magnetization damping,
a key component in analyzing magnetization dynamics, is microscopically least
understood.&lt;br/&gt;The PI intends to develop a microscopic theory of
magnetization dynamics so that new phenomena displayed in faster and denser
magnetic storage and memory devices can be better analyzed and predicted. A
detail understanding of the magnetization process depends critically on the
magnetization relaxation. The present program intends to build the theory of
magnetization relaxation by simultaneously solving the transport equation for
the non-equilibrium conduction electrons and the magnetization dynamics for the
local magnetization. Both the magnetization relaxation and the random magnetic
field at finite temperature will be derived from the microscopic interaction
between conduction electrons and the local magnetization. Emphasis is placed on
the dynamical process of damping that includes the temporal correlation of non-
local damping. The theory will remove the physical inconsistency imposed by
using a constant damping parameter and an uncorrelated random field ("white
noise") in the landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation. Several applications of the
theory are domain wall dynamics. heat-assisted magnetization reversal, and the
size dependence of magnetization relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research aimed at developing
a practical theory of magnetic materials that would provide an impoved
theoretical description of how magnetic properties change in time. The research
will also address key issues in magnetic technology development. The theory will
be broadly applied to various emerging magnetic storage devices and magnetic
random access memory. The exchange of knowledge and research results with
industry will be facilitated through established collaboration with an
industrial partner. The direct connection to problems of interest to industry
and the graduate and postgraduate educational experience that this project
provides contributes to enhancing American
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;