* 0854020
* US-Ireland Partnership Program: BEACONS: Biosafety for EnvironmentAl COntaminants using Novel Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Laurie Connell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 04/30/2013
* USD 377,025.00

0854020&lt;br/&gt;Connell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BEACONS is a unique collaboration
between the United States, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, that
aims to develop a novel sample preparation device coupled to a portable sensor
which will be capable of rapidly analyzing for the presence of major aquatic
toxins and associated organisms in water samples. It harnesses the substantial
complementary expertise of the international partners and their institutions to
address a problem that has world-wide implications for human health and aquatic
related industries. The results will be used for the generation of a
commercially applicable prototype device that could have the potential to be
applied to a wide range of different analytical problems. The program will
involve significant exchange of personnel and expertise and will generate novel
scientific data and approaches linked with the solution of a key problem for all
the partners' jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
set of easily portable instruments that can be utilized for biotoxin and toxic
organism detection, and be adapted subsequently for monitoring of other
potentially harmful organisms and their toxins. A key element for any field
deployable sensing instrument is the acquisition and preparation of samples.
Thus, the proposed research includes development of a sample preparation
platform and associated protocols for concentration and delivery of targeted
toxin and nucleic acid sequences to a hand-held detection device. The expected
outcome is the development of a sample preparation module and assay methods for
an optical detection device, based on planar waveguide technology, capable of
measuring in real time the presence of both toxin producing organisms and the
toxins themselves in coastal and fresh water samples. The sample preparation
module will involve the integration of novel microfluidics with peptide nucleic
acids (PNAs) and engineered broad affinity, highly stable capture antibodies.
Resultant extracts will be introduced into the detection system, which will
employ an array-based, planar waveguide technology previously incorporated into
a hand-held device by a commercial partner and made available to project
collaborators for development of assays for toxins and organisms. They will
utilize highly specific, engineered antibodies for capturing toxin molecules and
PNAs as capture probes to detect the corresponding toxigenic organisms. This
technology is expected to provide new and improved means of assessing the
potential risks associated with contamination of coastal and fresh water fishery
resources by algal biotoxins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US-Ireland Partnership
Program has been endorsed at the highest political levels by the three
jurisdictions (U.S., Republic of Ireland, and Northern Ireland). The added value
for the U.S. from the BEACONS proposal includes a combination of significant
intellectual and financial contributions from Ireland. Moreover, the project
will involve a well coordinated exchange of researchers between the
participating organizations. In particular, the opportunities of exchange visits
for young scientists employed on the project will be important from both
scientific and cultural perspectives. A critical element of detecting any
analyte is sample processing. Therefore, in addition to stronger international
collaborations and training of young scientists, this project aims to provide a
new portable and flexible platform that can be adapted for the sensor-based
detection of other biotoxins and/or microbes.