* 0854463
* Computational and Experimental Studies of Cellulose Degradation for the Production of Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Muhammad Karim, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0854463&lt;br/&gt;Khare&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellulose that is derived from
biomass such as plant material provides an attractive renewable feedstock for
the production of the biofuel ethanol. The naturally occurring cellulose is a
long chain polymeric molecule that is predominantly in semi-crystalline form. In
the process of enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose for the production of ethanol,
the polymeric cellulose molecule is broken down into shorter fragments in the
first stage. These fragments are further broken down by the action of enzymes to
even shorter fragments leading to the disaccharide cellobiose and finally to the
monosaccharide glucose; fermentation of these sugar molecules yields ethanol.
The short fragments of cellulose that are formed in the initial stage have been
suggested to be attached to the surface of the crystalline cellulose and it is
hypothesized that this phenomenon slows down the overall rate of enzymatic
hydrolysis process. The objective of this proposal is to determine the
energetics of the process of separation of such cellulose fragments from the
cellulose crystal surface. The fundamental understanding gained in this study
will be useful in the long term for increasing the rate of enzymatic hydrolysis
of cellulose and thus increasing the rate of ethanol production from cellulose.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will consist of an approach that will
combine molecular simulation studies with experiments performed using atomic
force microscopy (AFM). Molecular simulations account for the detailed chemical
interactions as well as the specific molecular structure of the system. These
simulations will be used to characterize the molecular pathway of the process of
separating the cello-oligomer fragments from the surface of a cellulose crystal
and the energy required for this process. The simulation results will be
validated against AFM measurements of the force required for separating
cellulose fragments from the cellulose surface. A detailed mechanistic
understanding of the process of cello-oligomer separation from a cellulose
crystal surface will be developed in this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the fundamental knowledge gained in the proposed work will lead to
new strategies for increasing the rate of enzyme hydrolysis of cellulosic
biomass and hence the ability for economical production of ethanol from
cellulose. This will have significant implications on removing the current, ever
increasing dependence on fossil fuels. The proposed work will involve
multidisciplinary research in the areas of interfacial thermodynamics, organic
chemistry and alternate energy sources. The graduate students working on the
project will receive interdisciplinary training in the techniques of molecular
simulations, AFM measurements and chemical synthesis.