* 0854907
* GOALI: Hybrid Dynamic Feedback for Partially Autonomous Cooperative Active Safety Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to develop
algorithms and experimental demonstrations for partially automated cooperative
active safety systems at traffic intersections. This instance of intelligent
transportation systems (ITS) exploits global positioning systems and wireless
communication technology to design on-board warning and control systems. These
systems should guarantee traffic safety while adapting to the presence of human
drivers and imperfect sensory information. The research will result in dynamic
coordinated control algorithms that are scalable with the number of vehicles and
can account for human behavior. The research approach relies on model based
control of hybrid dynamical models subject to imperfect state information and on
exploiting the naturally monotone dynamics of traffic systems. This order
preserving structure of the dynamics enables the employment of interval methods
to reduce the complexity of the coordinated control task. Deliverables include
scalable algorithms, the development of a software system implementing such
algorithms on the Ann Arbor TOYOTA full scale experimental facility,
experimental validation on the same facility, engineering student education, and
research experience for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide efficient algorithms for
the cooperative active safety systems of the future. These systems have the
potential of dramatically decreasing the number of accidents, fatalities, and of
increasing traffic flow. This research will further provide a concrete
transition to technology through the implementation on the Ann Arbor TOYOTA
Technical Center experimental facility. The results will be disseminated through
conferences and in particular through experimental demonstrations to the public.
Graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will benefit from
the collaboration between academia and industry by being exposed to concrete
problems and to the process of their abstraction to forms suitable for formal
analysis.