* 0854807
* Research in Gravitational Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Robert Wald, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2013
* USD 712,762.00

This award supports a broad range of research in gravitational physics,
including quantum field theory in curved spacetime, classical general
relativity, and cosmology. The specific research topics proposed for
investigation include the analysis of a new mathematically rigorous framework
for quantum fields in curved spacetime and the ramifications of this framework
for interpretation of previous less rigorous calculations and potential new
effects. The research program will also include investigations of issues arising
in extra-dimensional "brane" models and further study of issues involving
gravitational self-force on ?point particles? arising from a recent rigorous
derivation of this effect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research areas have a
common theme: To obtain a deeper understanding of the mathematical and physical
properties of classical general relativity and of quantum phenomena occurring in
strong gravitational fields. All aspects of this research will involve the
direct participation of graduate students. The general areas of research
supported by this award are of considerable interest to the public. This
interest will be fostered by public lectures and by the PI's participation in
the promotion of interdisciplinary conferences and research collaborations
between physicists and philosophers and historians of science.