* 0854738
* Collaborative Research: Static and dynamic parameterizations of spatially clustered data
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Ge Lin, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2011
* USD 133,041.00

This project will derive space-time explicit models and measurements that can
parameterize spatially inter-influenced patterns among space, time, and
ecological covariates. By defining parameterized spatial associations in the
context of generalized linear models and generalized linear mixed-effect models,
this project will provide a package of spatial measurements to quantify the
shape, size, and value gradient of spatially clustered data that may change over
time. Since it is unlikely to have a closed form for all the estimation methods,
the project will investigate frequentist, Bayesian, and numerical methods for
statistical estimations and parameterizations of spatially clustered data.

Results from the project are likely to have a number of impacts. It generally is
accepted that a wide range of spatial factors influence spatial disparities,
spatial grouping, and reorganization of various natural and human environments.
Statistical studies of spatial patterning are able to account for these issues
while revealing various spatial associations and correlations. As a result,
there is a growing interest in spatial methods in fields such as economics,
criminology, demography, and population health. For example, a quick
parameterized surveillance of spatial patterns and signals and their strength on
the basis of known risk factors will add the nation's quick response
capabilities for potential harms. Moreover, the training of graduate students
during the project years and beyond will foster interdisciplinary learning and
groom the next generation of scholars who will help develop quantitative methods
that can benefit academic disciplines and society as a whole.