* 0854340
* Modeling of fluids and interfaces via synthesis of integral equations and Mayer-sampling cluster integral calculations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0854340 Kofke

Intellectual Merit. This project aims to develop and apply methods for
calculating cluster integrals that appear in statistical mechanical theories of
fluids. The primary method used is the Mayer sampling approach that was
developed and refined in prior work. The present work is focused on the
calculation of virial coefficients, and has two general thrusts. First, the
project aims to improve methods for calculating these coefficients. Efforts here
consider better characterization of the temperature dependence, more efficient
grouping of the clusters to minimize the computational effort, and use of
approximate integral equation closures to reduce the magnitude of the necessary
Mayer sampling integrals and thereby reduce the error in their calculation. The
second project goal is to study the performance and improve the application of
the virial treatment in characterizing fluid phases. The aim is to better
characterize the convergence of the virial series, and determine how it may be
applied to approximately locate vapor liquid critical points, particularly as
applied to mixtures. The work also looks to develop reformulations or
approximants that can improve the range of application of the virial series.

Broader Impact. Advances from this research have intrinsic potential for broad
impact in chemical thermodynamics. The ability to rapidly move from a molecular
model to its macroscopic properties can facilitate the formulation of molecular
models that are better able to characterize fluid phases. This in turn can yield
truly predictive capabilities in material properties over a useful range of
conditions, given only molecular specifications and thermodynamic state. The
results of this research would thus produce an enabling technology that can lead
to progress in other fields in many unforeseen ways. At a minimum, this research
will eliminate the need to ever perform a molecular simulation of a vapor phase
or supercritical material, instead permitting a much more efficient and accurate
characterization through a molecular based virial treatment. This capability can
be useful for diverse applications, such as characterization of gas-phase
molecular clustering, or phase equilibria calculations performed in the Gibbs
ensemble, or study of solute partitioning in supercritical fluids; notably, all
of these capabilities are important to energy and environmental applications.

Several special forms of dissemination are performed to ensure that this work is
readily adopted by others. Graphically oriented software applications are
developed and made available via the web. Different versions of this software
are, respectively, designed to: (1) permit the user to generate clusters meeting
particular specifications, in a form suitable for use by his or her own computer
codes, or simply for presentation pictorially for instruction or contemplation;
(2) calculate cluster integrals and virial coefficients for arbitrary potentials
using the methods being developed in the project; and (3) identify pure fluid
and mixture critical points given values of the virial coefficients.