* 0854030
* Integrated Selection of Thermally Responsive Aptamers for Specific Purification and Enrichment of Biomolecules
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Qiao Lin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,997.00

0854030 Lin

Aptamers, or oligonucleotides that bind with high affinity to chemical and
biological targets, are isolated through an in vitro selection and amplification
procedure called systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment
(SELEX). Aptamers can be developed for an extremely broad spectrum of targets,
such as small molecules, proteins, cells, viruses, and bacteria, with well
controlled target selectivity and predefined binding characteristics. In
particular, aptamer binding in general exhibits strong temperature dependence;
thus, aptamers may specifically bind target analytes at a predefined temperature
and reversibly decouple from the targets at a modestly different, yet also
predefined, temperature. This property is attractive to affinity purification,
as it can enable specific purification with thermally activated release and
isocratic elution of analytes, as well as regeneration of the purification
instrument. Additionally, thermally activated isocratic elution frees
experimental procedures from unnecessary and potentially harmful reagents, and
simplifies the purification procedure. Conventional SELEX instruments are widely
used but are generally labor-intensive and time-consuming. These limitations can
be addressed by leveraging microfluidic technology. We propose to develop a
microfluidic SELEX system that integrates all steps of the SELEX method to allow
automated development of aptamers with predefined temperature-dependent binding
characteristics for applications to affinity purification of analytes. Our
specific aims include: (1) developing a bead-based polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) technique in a microchannel to establish its applicability to microfluidic
SELEX; (2) integrating microchip DNA selection and amplification processes to
create a prototype microfluidic SELEX system; and (3) validating the prototype
system and demonstrating its utility with selection of aptamers targeting
proteins which are involved in cancer detection and therapy, and for which
established aptamers are available.

The proposed research will have broader impacts in healthcare and biotechnology.
Applied to therapeutics, aptamers can be tuned to target and inhibit particular
proteins which are the cause of diseases. Given their selectivity, drug delivery
mechanisms can be devised where aptamer molecules for a specific disease
initiated protein are released into the system for location and suppression of
the protein. Alternatively, aptamers can also be used to screen potential drug
candidates. Aptamers specific to the prospective drug can be used to immobilize
the molecule to undergo extensive characterization. Moreover, the proposed
research has potential in diagnosis and biosensing for environmental and food
monitoring, antiterrorism, and pathology. Aptamers can be selected for toxins,
pathogens and parasites which can contaminate air, water and food supplies.
Also, aptamers are of utility in cell manipulation. Cell separation with
thermally sensitive aptamers offers attractive alternatives to current
techniques in cell counting. In particular, cells, such as mesenchymal stem
cells, can benefit from specific extraction, enrichment and isocratic elution
using aptamers. Finally, a strong educational component in this research will
involve undergraduate- and graduate-level teaching, interdisciplinary training
of graduate and undergraduate students including those from minorities and
underrepresented groups, and active educational outreach activities in New York
City.