* 0854972
* SGER: Stratigraphy, Sedimentology, Microfossil Content and Preservation of Hurricane Ike Storm Surge Deposits in Southeast Texas and Southwest Louisiana.
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Harry Williams, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,185.00

This project will study the effects of the storm surge of Hurricane Ike in
southeast Texas and southwest Louisiana. Specifically, the research will examine
the sediments resulting from the surge, and their distribution within the
coastal environment. By comparing these deposits to similar sediments from
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, this project will provide quantitative estimates of
the significance of these extreme events in reshaping the coastal environment.
The project will collect sediment cores from lakes that had already been sampled
prior to the hurricane landfall. Comparison of pre- and post-hurricane deposits
will provide a very clear picture of the exact nature of sediments and
microfossils that were transported onto the lake beds, before this evidence is
potentially obscured by bioturbation. It will also provide a baseline for
identifying hurricane deposits that have occurred in the region over the past
several hundred years.

The results of the study will contribute to a better understanding of the
effects of storm surge on the coastal environment.These include more reliable
assessments of the recurrence interval of hurricane strikes and associated
hurricane risk, an improved record of the the geographic variability of
hurricane strikes along at-risk coastlines; and the documentation of prehistoric
hurricane activity that can be used to assess the relationship between the
frequency and strength of hurricanes and climate change.