* 0854005
* Development and Validation of Particle-Phase Stress Constitutive Models for Non-Spherical Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Jennifer Curtis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 02/28/2014
* USD 300,001.00

0854005 Curtis, Jennifer

Virtually all solid handling operations involve particles that are non-
spherical in shape. However, most fundamental studies of granular material
undertaken to date have involved spherical particles. Hence, there is a current
significant disconnect between the model particles which are used in fundamental
research studies and the characteristics of real particles dealt with in
industry. While industrial practitioners comprehend fully that the influence of
particle shape on particle flow behavior is significant, the role of particle
shape in flowing granular systems is not understood. Hence, this proposal
outlines a series of DEM simulations and complementary experiments which will
result in a fundamental understanding of the influence of various specific
features of particle shape on bulk particle flow behavior. In addition, results
from the proposed work will yield the ability to predict general trends in flow
and segregation behavior for non-spherical particles in a wide range of
processes. The proposed work has three specific objectives:

1. To evaluate the quantitative accuracy of DEM simulations involving non-
spherical particles modeled as collections of linked/overlapping spheres

2. To investigate the effect of particle shape on particle segregation in
particle storage devices - a significant problem in industry

3. To develop and validate constitutive models for particle-phase stress of non-
spherical particles that can be employed in CFD simulations

The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in the simulations and
experiments, involving non-spherical interacting particles, which will be
conducted, and the novel fundamental relationships and insights, pertaining to
the influence of particle shape on bulk solids handling, which will be obtained.
Real particle properties, not idealized smooth, round particles, must be
considered before most industrially-relevant problems can be tackled. While a
three-year project can not treat all aspects of real particles mixtures (e.g.
particle size distribution, cohesion, electrostatic behavior, etc.), making
headway on the effect of particle shape is a very significant advance in the
field of granular flow. In addition, successful completion of this project fits
well with the PI's longer term goal of developing first principles, predictive
models that can be used for design, scale-up and optimization of particle flow
processes.

The proposed research will have broad impact since the research results are
applicable to virtually all industrial granular flows which involve non-
spherical particles. The research results will lead to improved constitutive
models for CFD simulations, which are widely employed by industrial researchers.
The results will also yield recommendations on ways to mitigate particle
segregation during hopper discharge by altering the particle shape and/or
particle size (based on equivalent volume diameter), as well as particle
composition based on shape and size. Finally, the proposed research will have
broad impact via involvement of students (one PhD student as well as minority
undergraduate researchers) in the research, and the dissemination of the
research findings to the scientific community, both through journal publications
and through the education of large numbers of students and industrial personnel.