* 0854542
* Kinematics and Hydrodynamics of Aquatic Jet Bio-Propulsion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Kamran Mohseni, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 178,291.00

CBET -0854542 &lt;br/&gt;Mohseni, Kamran &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program addresses the fundamental
science of jet and vortex propulsion by Cephalopods (squid, cuttlefish, etc) and
Medusa (Jellyfish) in contrast to more well-investigated aquatic locomotion
through body and fin undulations like most fish. We plan a hybrid experimental,
computational, and theoretical approach to understand and advance hydrodynamics
and biomimicry of aquatic jet propulsion. The research plan has three main
thrusts Kinematic Investigation, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and
Experimentation and Biomimicry. A squid care and storage facility will be built
for investigation on aquatic thrust-generation mechanism by jet and vortex flow.
High-speed photography and flow visualization will provide kinematic data for
the squid mantle cavity and siphon during several flow regimes including escape
and maneuver. These new simultaneous and detailed measurements are needed for
direct numerical simulation of squid locomotion based on the measured kinematic
data. In addition, the swimming performances such as swimming velocity, thrust,
power requirement and efficiency can be computed directly. The knowledge gained
in the kinematic and CFD studies will be translated into engineering design and
testing of bio-inspired actuators for effective underwater propulsion. The
actuators will be modeled and experimentally characterized. Design of reliable
underwater vehicles for sensor networking is playing a major role in National
and Homeland Security and costal area protection. Efficient Autonomous
Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are needed for long-term operation in oceans for
coastal area monitoring and protection and data collection related to global
warming. This project provides an application focus that will be of interest to
researchers and students working in ocean engineering, vehicle systems, and
biologists. Undergraduate research assistants will be sought via supplementary
REU support. The PI intends to develop a course on bio-propulsion while existing
disciplinary courses will be enriched with this work, expanding student
multidisciplinary exposure. A summer Bio-propulsion Summer Camp for local
secondary school students to participate in a week-long educational activity and
an International Exchange Student Program, initiated by the PI, will be
expanded.