* 0854699
* Neutron Stars as Probes for the Structure of Compressed Baryonic Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Fridolin Weber, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2013
* USD 315,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Neutron stars are among the most enigmatic objects that exist in the Universe.
They are as massive as our Sun but are around one thousand trillion times
smaller in size. The matter in the cores of neutron stars is therefore
compressed to densities that are several times greater than the densities of
atomic nuclei. This feature, combined with the unprecedented progress in
observational astronomy, makes neutron stars superb astrophysical laboratories
for a broad range of intriguing physical studies. Several such studies are the
subject of this NSF project. These range from (1) investigations of nuclear
fusion processes among lattice nuclei and novel states of matter in the crustal
layers of neutron stars to (2) thermal evolution studies of neutron stars
possessing magnetic fields that are trillions of times stronger than the Earth's
magnetic field. The results of these studies are crucial in order to obtain the
full physics potential of the investments that are made in new astrophysical
instruments such as the square kilometer Array (skA) and the International X-ray
Observatory (IXO, formerly Constellation X), which promise the discovery of tens
of thousands of neutron stars. In addition, they provide most valuable insight
into the physics of superdense but cold nuclear matter, which can not be studied
in relativistic collider experiments.

Students from middle and high schools in the San Diego area will profit from
this research in the form of public lectures and multimedia presentations, which
will be developed by the researches and students carrying out this project.
Moreover, students at San Diego State University will get a chance to learn, and
apply, advanced quantum mechanics and Einstein's theory of general relativity to
cutting-edge research projects, which enriches their educational experience
beyond what they learn in the classroom.