* 0854757
* D-BRANE MODULI SPACES IN MATHEMATICS AND PHYSICS
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Duiliu Diaconescu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 06/30/2012
* USD 321,131.00

Employing D-brane moduli spaces as a unifying theme, this research program
consists of three projects lying at the interface between algebraic geometry and
string theory. The first is centered around a new mathematical construction
(ADHM sheaf invariants) yielding new mathematical conjectures concerning local
BPS invariants, quantum cohomologyof quiver varieties and black hole
correspondence. The second project investigates the cameral structure and
wallcrossing behavior of moduli spaces of Bridgeland stable objects on local
surfaces emphasizing a connection between Donaldson-Thomas type invariants and
black hole physics. The third proposes a systematic approach to correlators of
surface operators in topological gauge theories via virtual cycles and
localization for parabolic Higgs bundles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The interaction between mathematics and string theory has been a major driving
force in modern mathematical physics. The research planned here aims at
revealing new aspects of this interaction opening new directions of research in
Donaldson-Thomas theory, quantum cohomology of quiver varieties as well as
fundamental areas of theoretical physics such as black hole physics and string
duality. This aims to stimulate the development of several areas of mathematics
and physics by unraveling new connections between them. With respect to
education, this research program offers multiple training opportunities for
students of all levels as well as postdoctoral fellows, stimulating the
development of a variety of technical and communication skills with a wide range
of applicability beyond the academic environment.