* 0854941
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Italic Patronage of Early Apulian Red-Figure Pottery
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2009
* Jed Thorn, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,350.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Kathleen Lynch, Jed Thorn will conduct a chemical
analysis of South Italian red-figure pottery as part of his doctoral
dissertation project. The red-figure technique was transmitted to southern Italy
by Athenian craftsmen during the mid-5th century BC. In addition to having been
an important export market for Attic red-figure, South Italy had also received
colonial settlements of Greek immigrants from c. 700 BC onward. Consequently, it
has been widely assumed that the main branch of South Italian red-figure -
termed "Apulian" after its primary area of distribution - was produced by one of
these Greek colonies.

As the only Greek colony in Apulia, Taras (modern Taranto) is commonly regarded
as the birthplace and primary production center of Apulian red-figure pottery.
However, there is still no firm archaeological or archaeometric evidence for
where this pottery was produced. The distribution data suggest that the primary
consumers of this pottery were not, in fact, colonial Greeks, but rather the
region's pre-colonial Italic population. In subjecting a large group of Apulian
red-figure samples to chemical analysis, this project will constitute an
important and unprecedented step toward determining whether this pottery was
produced at a Greek or a non-Greek site.

The project's primary objective is to determine the degree of chemical
variability in the clays utilized by Apulian red-figure workshops. A program of
neutron activation analysis will be used to isolate the chemical compositions of
Apulian red-figure vases drawn from seven different museum collections. It will
also analyze ceramic reference material from the site of ancient Taras, which
will reveal whether Apulian red-figure vases assumed to have been produced at
Taras conform chemically to ceramic objects that are known to have been produced
at Taras.

Contrary to consensus opinion, it is possible that Apulian red-figure pottery
was produced itinerantly at a number of non-Greek sites. The neutron activation
analysis could confirm the use of multiple regional clay types, which would lend
significant weight to this hypothesis. The possibility of itinerant production
has significant implications not only for our understanding of Apulian red-
figure pottery, but also for our understanding of intercultural dynamics between
Greeks and non-Greeks in ancient South Italy. As a European colonial environment
that predated concrete conceptions of "Europe" or "the West," ancient Apulia
emerges as an extremely useful point of comparison for studies of more recent
colonial interactions that were constrained by more modern social, religious,
and economic attitudes.

The project represents a multidisciplinary approach to an important
archaeological question. The sample-collection process has entailed the
cooperation of museum conservation laboratories, and the project will
successfully bridge the disciplines of classical archaeology, museum studies,
and archaeometry. It will employ the services of the Archaeometry Laboratory at
the University of Missouri, which is designed to be an educational facility. A
multi-tiered staff ranging from undergraduate interns to PhDs will prepare and
process the sample group. Finally, the results of the neutron activation
analysis will contribute to a growing dataset that will permit further research
questions to be asked and answered by future investigators.