* 0854036
* Physiologically-Coupled Biosensing Approaches for Real-time Monitoring of Environmental Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Porterfield, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 397,828.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;CBET-
0854036&lt;br/&gt;Porterfield, David M&lt;br/&gt;Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physiologically-Coupled Biosensing Approaches
for Real-time Monitoring of Environmental
Contaminants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring of effluents from point
contamination sources and protection of drinking water supplies is a main
environmental concern ? any engineering solution aimed at minimizing
contamination to surface waters should include a system capable of detecting
harmful substances in real-time. The principal objective of this project is to
develop a biotechnology approach and instrumentation platform that enables real-
time biomonitoring for environmental protection and remediation. The research
tasks include: (1) Develop a high-throughput, multichannel monitoring system for
detection of contaminants by transducing physiological responses of individual
fish (Pimephales promelas) and aquatic invertebrate (Daphnia magna) embryos in
real-time; (2) Validate this high-throughput monitoring system and iteratively
optimize its performance using a wide array of water contaminants; and (3)
Integrate interdisciplinary education programs within Discovery Park at Purdue
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the only real-time biomonitors that
utilize whole animals are based on detecting changes in behavior of fish and
invertebrates. These systems do not necessarily have the response time needed
for real-time monitoring, as physiological systems must first respond to injury
to elicit a change in behavior. Our preliminary data on monitoring O2
consumption in fathead minnow embryos suggests that this physiological sensing
approach is much more sensitive than the best commercial system for real-time
broad contaminant detection. By developing an advanced throughput, real-time
instrumentation platform we will be able to monitor statistically reliable
numbers of embryos, as a biomonitoring system that can be used to detect
environmental toxins in surface waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physiologically
coupled biomonitoring technology will be a dynamic new tool for environmental
monitoring that could be deployed to monitor surface waters, effluent from point
sources, or to monitor remediation efforts. The technology will also be used for
toxicology research as a high throughput screening approach for chemicals to
develop policy and water quality standards. As a result, the project will
provide rich education opportunities for students, made possible by the
interaction between biologists and engineers. A significant component of the
educational impact, coordinated through the Discovery Learning Center will be
the broad interdisciplinary opportunities aimed especially at minority students.
Also, the Burton D. Morgan Entrepreneurial Center will facilitate education and
commercialization of the novel instrumentation and technology. Finally, the PSF
will disseminate this instrumentation by collaborating with outside users and
hosting Web-based tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;