* 0854744
* Lattice Field Theory and Hadronic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Rajamani Narayanan, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2014
* USD 285,218.00

Quarks carry a color charge and nuclear matter is formed from the binding of
colored quarks mediated by gluons. Quantum Chromo-Dynamics (QCD) is the theory
that describes the interaction of these color charges. Experiments have shown
than quarks come in three colors but all nuclear matter is color neutral.
Separation of nuclear matter into quarks and gluons needs very large energies
similar to what was present in the early universe. Since solving QCD with three
colors have proven to be very difficult and since qualitative properties do not
depend on the number of colors, an attempt following 't Hooft is made to solve
QCD for a very large number of colors. Research using lattice gauge theory has
proven to be quite useful in extracting several physics results in the last six
years. We will continue to make progress and focus on the phase of the theory
that exists at high densities (like inside neutron stars) and high temperatures
(close to the big-bang). Numerical computations will be used to study quark
matter in this phase and we will attempt to make qualitative comparisons with
current experiments in RHIC and CERN. Since QCD in the limit of large number of
colors is closely related to recent developments in string theory we will also
be able to make connections between field theory and string theory. We have
already shown that quarks form a colorless condensate and we have also succeeded
in computing the properties of the lightest colorless particle - the pion. We
will attempt to compute the masses of other heavier colorless particles as part
of this proposal. We will also attempt to study the effect of temperature
thereby showing evidence for the formation of nuclear matter from a primordial
soup of quarks and gluons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific methods involve
analytical calculations and numerical computations. A graduate student at FIU
working toward a Ph.D will learn quantum field theory and numerical techniques
and will make significant contributions. Computer clusters will be used for
numerical computations and the results obtained as part of this proposal will be
presented at international conferences in nuclear and particle physics.