* 0854318
* Interaction of fluid interfaces with structured solid surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Vladimir Ajaev, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 109,908.00

Ajaev, Vladimir S.&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 0854318 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses several issues in modeling of
fluid flow phenomena in systems with deformable fluid interfaces and structured
solid surfaces. The latter have been the subject of recent experimental studies
motivated by potential applications ranging from microfluidic devices for
chemical analysis to self-cleaning surfaces. However, the effect of size and
shape of the small scale structures on the macroscopic fluid flow phenomena is
still not completely understood and will be the focus of the planned studies.
The problems of interest for the present study include impact of droplets on
superhydrophobic surfaces, drainage of a film in contact with a structured
surface, and the effect of surface structuring on the motion of liquid droplets
on inclined substrates. To gain fundamental insights into these phenomena,
mathematical models will be planned that take advantage of the small values of
some parameters but do not rely on any ad hoc assumptions. New equations will be
derived to describe the effect of dispersion forces and electrical charges at
interfaces on the flow near structured solid boundaries. Theoretical results
will be tested by comparison with both existing experimental data and the
results of new experiments to be conducted as part of the planned studies. The
planned project will promote learning through research and interdisciplinary
scientific collaborations. Both graduate and undergraduate students will gain
valuable research experience and expand their knowledge beyond their field of
study by interacting not only with the PI but also with his collaborators
working on experiments. As in the previous NSF-funded projects, the recruitment
of minorities and women will be emphasized. The planned research also has broad
technological impact. Potential applications of the planned work include the
development of the so-called self-cleaning surfaces and advances in microfluidic
technology.