* 0854612
* GOALI: Modeling and Design of Composite Web Roll-to-Roll Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Karl Reid, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 06/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop fundamental dynamic models of
web behavior for composite webs that are manufactured and processed in roll-to-
roll (RTR) manufacturing systems. Composite webs are formed from dissimilar
individual flexible material layers or through application of a thick gel
material onto a base layer. In addition to developing models, a related core
objective is to design the configuration (selection of location of driven
rollers, web guides, and sensing systems) of the RTR systems and associated
coordinated control strategies for RTR machine elements that would enable
manufacture of quality composite webs with fewer defects. The research approach
is to develop realistic models of web dynamics using first principles that can
predict observed behavior during the formation of the composite web and its
subsequent transport through processing machinery. The models will be analyzed
to develop methods to efficiently configure primitive elements of RTR systems.
The project will also develop new model-based control strategies for primitive
elements to control key process variables such as web tension, transport
velocity and lateral position. Deliverables include composite web models,
modeling and analysis tools for RTR systems, demonstration and validation via
software and hardware, documentation of research results, engineering student
education, and training of practicing engineers in modern methods and
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will provide methods to manufacture composite webs with improved product
quality, less wastage, and reduced cost. The focus will be on composite flooring
and ceiling products but the methods and tools developed will be general enough
for use in manufacture of a wide variety of other existing consumer web products
such as paper tissues, plastic film, hygiene products, etc. The potential for
application of the research to development of new consumer products such as
flexible electronics using RTR manufacturing is also substantial. Graduate and
undergraduate engineering students will benefit through interactions with
practicing engineers and involvement in applied research activities at the
industrial site. International collaboration will enhance research progress and
will provide a mechanism for engineering students to interact with foreign
counterparts. &lt;br/&gt;