* 0854339
* Collaborative Research: Preparation,Characterization,and Evaluation of Bimetallic Catalysts Using Electroless Deposition Methods for Selective Oxidation of Biomass-Related Alcohols
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* John Monnier, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2012
* USD 411,937.00

0854339 &lt;br/&gt;Monnier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of modern catalysis
research is design and fabrication of catalysts that are selective toward
reaction of a particular functional group. In attempting to tailor catalytic
surfaces for selectivity, not only is it important to have a high level of
control over the surface composition, but also to achieve this control using
methods that can be scaled up for the economical production of large amounts of
catalyst. One promising technique is electroless deposition (ED), which allows
one metal component to be deposited in controlled quantities on the surface of a
second metal. Because ED is a scaleable method that can be used to prepare truly
bimetallic surfaces on supported catalyst particles, it shows great promise for
catalytic applications in which selectivity can be tuned through adjustment of
the surface composition. In the proposed effort, ED will be employed as a tool
for tailoring bimetallic catalysts for the selective oxidation of biomass-
related alcohols. In addition to being very important for the future production
of fuels and chemicals, they serve as excellent probe molecules for assessing
the capability of ED to prepare highly selective catalysts this class of
reactions. The proposed effort will integrate a wide-ranging set of
characterization techniques in pursuit of selective catalysts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. ED will be used to prepare a series of Au, Ag, and Cu-
modified Pt and Pd catalysts having targeted metal compositions; these catalysts
will be characterized using an array of spectroscopic techniques, and will be
evaluated for glycerol oxidation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. DFT computational
studies on the bimetallic compositions will be used to better understand and
corroborate the characterization results and to suggest directions for further
bimetallic catalyst compositions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Catalyst evaluation
results will be interpreted within the guidelines predicted by catalyst
characterization and computation to make subsequent generations of catalysts.
This iterative cycle should facilitate catalyst development leading to improved
alcohol oxidation catalysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to use
these diverse capabilities to assess the utility of ED for preparation of
bimetallic oxidation catalysts, and to take steps toward making rational
improvements in catalyst design based on a fundamental understanding of
electronic and structural features of the bimetallic catalysts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The proposed work will help to develop
ED as a potentially important technique for large-scale production of bimetallic
catalysts. These efforts will also provide a template for programs aimed at
identification of selective catalysts for reactions of multifunctional
molecules. Furthermore, the close integration between (a) preparation and
characterization of supported metal catalysts and (b) fundamental modeling and
surface science studies will help to further develop the integration of basic
science with applied catalysis, ultimately promoting rational design approaches
for catalysis and materials synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The
selective oxidation of biomass-related alcohols represents an important
industrial target for production of a new class of bio-derived products. ED-
prepared catalysts that facilitate higher selectivity can help to reduce process
separations costs, over-use of feedstocks, and emissions to the environments.
This collaborative effort will also allow graduate and undergraduate students to
be involved in the integration of diverse research approaches within the
catalysis community, ranging from surface science experiments to computational
chemistry to selectivity probes of realistic catalysts. The broad experience
gained by the students who work on this project, as well as the interactions
with multiple PIs at different institutions, will allow those students to
recognize the important contributions available from these different types of
catalysis studies.