* 0854242
* GOALI: MEMS-Based Preconcentrators with Nano-Structured Adsorbents for Micro Gas Chromatography
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Vikas Meka, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 361,039.00

0854242&lt;br/&gt;Agah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the 1950s, gas
chromatography (GC) has been a common approach for analysis of volatile
mixtures. The use of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology for GC
development (ìGC) is a promising approach for developing micro-instruments
having lower cost, smaller size, lower power consumption, faster analysis, and
greatly increased portability for in-field use compared to their conventional
counterparts. These instruments have applications in homeland security,
industrial process control, bio-monitoring, and in improving environment
quality. Due to the low concentration of volatile and semi-volatile organic
compounds (VOC) in ìGCs, a preconcentration step prior to real-time chemical
sensor measurement is needed. The ideal preconcentrator would automatically
sample the ambient gas and improve the measurement sensitivity by 10-1000 fold
while having low power consumption. We will address this challenge by combining
and bridging the gap between top-down miniaturized processing (MEMs) and bottom-
up self-assembly approaches (nanotechnology). The objective of this work is to
employ MEMS technology to develop VOC preconcentrator chips with integrated
thermal desorption capability and high surface-to-volume-ratio and to utilize
nanotechnology to coat them with nano-structured adsorbents. Four specific goals
are proposed: 1) fabricate low-mass (low-power) preconcentrators with on-chip
heaters and temperature sensors using high-aspect-ratio silicon etching
techniques and a silicon-on-glass wafer process, 2) deposit ionic self-assembled
multilayers (ISAM) or alkane functionalized gold nanoparticles on all surfaces
of the MEMS-based preconcentrators with nanometer resolutions, 3) coat MEMS
preconcentrators with conventional adsorbents such as OV-1 and Tenax and
evaluate their performance against those coated with nano-structured materials
in terms of desorption width, breakthrough volume, and temperature profile as
well as develop new models to predict the behavior of such preconcentrators, and
4) characterize the performance of ìPCs and their corresponding adsorbents for
monitoring bioanalytes present in breath and compare the performance of the
microchips with conventional industry-standard preconcentrators through
collaboration with Convergent Engineering Inc. (CE). We expect to demonstrate
the concentration and desorption of n-alkanes (C5-C16) and polyaromatic
hydrocarbons as well as breath analytes that vary in ring-size by achieving a
concentration factor of &gt;200, desorption widths &lt;0.2s, and power
consumptions &lt;1W at 50°C/sec temperature ramps. The ability to self-assemble
both polar and non-polar adsorbent materials will enable us to have selective
concentration of analytes in a wide range of applications, namely environmental
monitoring, homeland security, and biomedicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcome of this project will set an outstanding example of how MEMS and
Nanotechnology can become highly complementary methodologies for developing low-
cost, low-power, high-performance devices that impact industries across the
globe, considering that the worldwide market for GC instruments is estimated to
be around $1 billion annually. This research will also advance discovery while
promoting teaching and learning at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate
levels. This includes: 1) development of gas chromatographic demonstrations
using the MEMS-based preconcentrators with nano-structured adsorbents for
Virginia Tech?s Society of Physics Students outreach programs to rural,
southwestern Virginia high school students, 2) research opportunities for
undergraduates at Virginia Tech (VT) and the College of William and Mary
(W&amp;M), 3) recruiting of graduate students from under-represented groups into
a highly interdisciplinary research program, and 4) incorporation of the project
results in the courses taught by the PIs in different departments/institutions,
namely VT?s MEMS: from fabrication to application and Nanotechnology, and
W&amp;M?s Instrumental Analysis and Advanced Analytical Chemistry and 4) annual
joint seminars by VT, W&amp;M, and CE on microsystems applications in
biomedicine. Additionally, the outcome of this research will be widely
disseminated to the engineering and scientific communities in peer-reviewed
journals and in presentation at multidisciplinary conferences, to CE and other
industries that use or develop gas chromatography and VOC preconcentrators
(microtraps), and in web pages that will serve as resources for off-campus
faculty who are teaching undergraduate and graduate analytical chemistry courses
that deal with separation science