* 0854957
* Humans Transforming the Water Cycle: Community-Based Activities in Hydrologic Synthesis
* GEO,EAR
* 06/30/2008,05/31/2011
* Charles Vorosmarty, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 766,353.00

Intellectual Merit. Hydrology is at an important crossroads. As articulated in
several "Grand Challenge" documents, we've made enormous progress in process-
level understanding at plot, hillslope, and small catchment scales, but our
capacity to pass to the next horizon .to understand inherent variability in the
water cycle, its predictability, human dimensions, and links to biogeochemical
cycling over broader domains.requires a major reformulation of our thinking and
a purposeful move toward synthesis and systematic observation. We focus here on
an emerging view that humans are rapidly embedding themselves into the basic
character of the water cycle, through a myriad of processes including direct
water abstraction and flow diversion, land cover change, pollution, destruction
of aquatic biodiversity, and climate change. The major scientific challenge is
to understand how these changes manifest themselves and if they bear synergistic
impacts across the different scales. Our primary scientific goal is to:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Quantify the widespread alteration of hydrologic systems
over regional-to-continental U.S. domains, identify natural and anthropogenic
sources of such change, and assess their systemic
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science agenda will be advanced
by:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Convening a consolidated synthesis Working Group
(WG), to study Regional Watersheds, Hydromorphology, and Continental Processes,
for the purpose of carrying-out synthesis activities and serving as a test-bed
for ideas on how to optimally execute synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our WGs
expand activities originally consolidated under the aegis of CUAHSI, and welcome
new members who have led major community-based CUAHSI, NSF, National Academy,
regional, national and international assessment activities. The focus of the WG
will be on hydromorphology, an emerging science theme that addresses the
evolution of hydrosystems as a complex amalgam of factors, today including
natural processes as well as human management. Our attention will initially
focus on the Northeast Corridor, a region with sharp gradients in climate, land
and water manage-ment and emblematic of pressures on water resources across the
nation. The WG will also maintain a continental U.S. perspective, testing our
capacity to upscale regional dynamics and to simulate synergistic responses in
the larger water system. In this context, we will bring together our
geographically-oriented studies with the UIUC synthesis of predictability. The
WG will produce models and data sets, organized through an IT framework to
provide focus and unity of purpose. We will also designate a sub-team to
interact with funded initiatives (EU-sponsored WATCH, NASA-NEWS, GWSP), to find
the place of U.S. water systems on the global stage. In Year 4 we will produce a
"lessons learned document and blueprint for a National Center for Hydrologic
Synthesis. We also propose a Northeast Regional Student Consortium supported by
a competitive scholarship program. The Consortium shares nationally prominent
advisors from Boston U., Columbia, MIT, Penn State, Tufts, UMass, UNC, and UNH,
and will be used as a model for synthesis education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Beyond its scientific value, a synthetic
understanding of hydrology is of enormous strategic importance both to the US
and internationally. The globalization of water-related problems has gained a
new sense of urgency in science and public policy circles. Given the central
role of water in our environment and human well-being, it is not difficult to
articulate the many benefits of a coordinated set of prototype synthesis
activities focusing on water. The benefits of hydrologic synthesis go well
beyond those of any new science alone and aim at several US strategic and
strategic environmental issues: managing climate extremes, agricultural sector
competitiveness, preserving ecosystem services and biodiversity, protecting
human health and sustaining economic development. The proposed WG activities
build toward our longer-term vision of creating a national platform -- a
National Center--for a new interdisciplinary science of water that engages the
water policy and management sectors, educates the next generation of students
and makes hydrological knowledge more relevant to the public. Use of the WG as a
springboard to study the process of synthesis among collaborators provides an
important model for other disciplines undergoing a similar transformation toward
synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;