* 0854911
* Observations of Galactic TeV Sources with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Philip Kaaret, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2011
* USD 90,000.00

Our Galaxy contains astrophysical systems that accelerate particles to energies
beyond the reach of any accelerator built by humans. What drives these
accelerators is a major question in astrophysics, and understanding these
accelerators has broad implications. This award will fund studies using the Very
Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS) to image flashes of
Cherenkov light produced when highly energetic photons strike Earth's
atmosphere. Observations in the TeV band are a sensitive probe of the most
energetic physical processes occurring in a variety of Galactic objects. There
has been a long-standing suggestion that the main accelerators of cosmic rays
are the shock waves created in supernova explosions, but direct observational
confirmation is lacking. Images and spectra of supernova remnants in the TeV
band should resolve this question. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award,
VERITAS, a ground-based TeV telescope array, will be used to study Galactic
particle accelerators including supernova remnants, jets from stellar-mass black
holes and rapidly rotating, young neutron stars, and unidentified gamma-ray
sources. This group will operate and maintain the pointing monitor system that
enhances the performance of VERITAS in regard to source localization and mapping
of extended objects. The scientific results of this program will advance our
understanding of the origin of cosmic rays, relativistic particle acceleration,
the interaction of relativistic particles with their environment, and the
physical nature of relativistic particle accelerators within the Milky Way.
Progress in these areas, particularly the nature of cosmic rays and the
interactions of relativistic jets with their environment, is important to
advance our understanding in several areas of
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral part of the proposed Broader
Impacts activity will be the broad dissemination of information on very high
energy gamma-ray astronomy to college and high school students and the general
public making use of material developed in the VERITAS education and outreach
program being led by the Adler Planetarium and Astronomy Museum. Undergraduates
will participate in research on the gamma-ray science and hardware of VERITAS.