* 0854134
* Effect of Chemical Structure on Pollutant Formation Kinetics in Algae-Derived Biofuel Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Anthony Marchese, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 324,268.00

0854134 Marchese

This research project is aimed at determining the pollutant formation chemistry
of algae-derived biofuels, which have potential to be high-yield, efficiently
produced, renewable fuels. In combustion of biodiesel and straight vegetable oil
(SVO), formation of pollutants such as NOx and soot has been linked to the
chemical structure of the triglycerides present in the feedstock. Pioneering
work is needed to characterize the combustion chemistry and pollutant formation
chemistry of algae-derived biodiesel and SVO, which have far different fatty-
acid compositions than typical vegetable or animal-fat feedstocks. Research
activities are focused on homogeneous-compression ignition and partially
premixed droplet ignition of algae-derived SVO, fatty acid methyl esters (FAME)
and renewable diesel. Combustion and pollutant formation studies are performed
using a rapid compression machine (RCM). These experiments enable instantaneous
measurement of gas-phase intermediates and pollutants such as NO, NO2, CO, CO2,
formaldehyde, HCN and soot precursors, which can be compared against chemical
kinetic models currently under development. In a second configuration, ignition
of a monodisperse liquid droplet stream in a high temperature oxidizing
environment is used as an analog to the heterogeneous diesel ignition and
combustion process. This configuration allows quantitative, temporal and spatial
measurements of NO, OH and CH in the vicinity of an igniting algae-based fuel
droplet using planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF), along with soot volume-
fraction measurements using laser-induced incandescence (LII). Droplet data are
then compared against a transient, spherically symmetric, chemically reacting
flow model. Performing these combinations of experiments and modeling on algae-
derived fuels will provide valuable insight into both the rapid premixed-
combustion phase, where prompt NOx and soot precursors are formed, and the
transition to non-premixed combustion, where thermal NOx and soot are formed.
Anthropogenic climate change is a civilization-scale challenge. While there is
no single solution, renewable fuels such as biodiesel and SVO can play a
significant role in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions. This research provides
opportunities for undergraduate research, undergraduate design, and graduate
research aimed at educating the new generation of engineers who must provide
creative energy solutions that effectively address climate change.