* 0854166
* Structure-Composition-Magnetostriction Correlations in Strong and Ductile Fe-Based Alloys with large Low-Field Magnetostriction
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Sivaraman Guruswamy, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 02/28/2013
* USD 329,989.00

TECHNICAL: This work examines the large enhancements in the magnetostriction of
Fe with W and Mo additions, and how local atomic environment, short range
ordering and structural defects can dramatically influence the magnetostriction
in Fe-W, Fe-Mo, FeGa, and other alpha-Fe based magnetostrictive alloy single
crystals. PI and co-workers have earlier shown that the addition of Ga to Fe
results in a large increase in magnetostriction at low applied magnetic fields
and that these alloys are strong and ductile. In a recent work, PI and coworkers
have discovered a large increase in magnetostriction with W and Mo additions to
Fe. The magnitude of magnetostrictive strain achieved in ductile Fe-4.4% W
alloys, on a per atom basis, is comparable to that obtained in Fe-20 at.% Ga and
Fe-27.5 at.% Ga alloy single crystals. Ongoing investigations also suggest that
internal inhomogeneous strains introduced by the structural changes and defects
play a much greater role than has been appreciated in determining the
magnetostriction in these alloys. The long-term objectives are to gain an
improved understanding of magnetostriction in Fe and Fe alloys and formulate the
guidelines for the design of alloys with attractive magnetostrictive and
mechanical properties. As a part of this effort, the work will focus on detailed
examinations of (a) magnetostriction in bcc phase binary Fe-W and Fe-Mo alloy
single crystals and the influence of ternary additions (b) the characterization
of local atomic environments that shed light on near-neighbor interatomic
distances and how they influence the magnetostriction in Fe alloys (c) how short
range order is changed with thermal treatments and how it influences
magnetostriction in Fe-W, Fe-Mo and Fe-Ga alloys, and (d) the effect of well-
defined crystal defects and their distribution on magnetostriction. The defects
to be examined include dislocation structures introduced with controlled single
crystal deformation, and coherent second phases introduced through precipitation
hardening treatments. The work envisaged involves alloy preparation by vacuum
arc-melting, single crystal growth using Bridgman technique, structural
evaluation, magnetic and magnetostriction measurements, and structure-
composition-property correlations. Transmission electron microscopy will be used
to characterize the defects. Extended X-ray absorption Fine Spectrum (EXAFS)
measurements using a synchrotron radiation source will be used to probe the
local atomic environments and determine the mean inter-atomic distances,
coordination number and type of neighboring atom, and mean-square disorder of
neighbor distance. Elastic measurements will be made using the resonance
ultrasound spectroscopy technique. X-ray diffraction scans, rocking curve scans
and X-ray topography measurements will be performed to assess the crystal
orientation, short range order and the structural defects. NON-TECHNICAL: The
work will further the knowledge that will enable the design and development of a
new generation of inexpensive and high performance low-field magnetostrictive
alloys for use in sensor and actuator applications. The work will (i) lead to
Ph.D. dissertations of two graduate students, (ii) provide research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students, (iii) be used as an
educational element to attract undergraduate students to metallurgical
engineering, in particular women and underrepresented minority students, and
(iv) enhance the undergraduate- and graduate-courses in Magnetic Materials,
Metals Processing and Physical Metallurgy. Besides providing a basis for a more
scientific understanding of magnetostriction in Fe alloys, this work will lead
to the development of inexpensive and high performance alloys for use in
acoustic sensors and actuators and magnetomechanical devices that are very
rugged and of interest in a wide range of defense and commercial applications
that would include nano-positioning devices, MEMS devices, sonar devices, active
vibration damping devices, load and torque sensors, and electrical delay lines.