* 0854473
* Documenting Chippewa [ciw] Conversation and Training Indigenous Scholars
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Nichols, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2013
* USD 362,857.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will document Chippewa [ciw] (Ojibwe)conversation and other non-
narrative speech genres in at least three distinct varieties, filling a gap in
the current documentation of the language. The research team will work with six
Chippewa Elders to record, translate, transcribe, and annotate at least 22 hours
of conversation and other text types. The resulting archive can be consulted by
language students and linguists, and will be used in the production of
interactive multimedia learning modules. This software may serve as a model for
other indigenous nations in their own language revitalization efforts.

This documentation project focuses on conversation, since from a socio-
linguistic perspective, discourse is at the heart of language and culture. For
first speakers of Chippewa, naming their world in collaborative dialogue is an
essential act of cultural production that is vital for documentation and seminal
for revitalization. This research may produce breakthroug contributions to
Ojibwe language teaching and learning, by providing lessons based on natural
conversation and other forms of discourse. The documentation project will
strengthen networks across communities and institutions while training emerging
second language speakers in Ojibwe documentary linguistics and involving them in
software production. Documentation, training, archive creation and distribution
all dovetail and overlap in reciprocal ways in this project. This project builds
on previous work (funded by the Department of Education, "Ojibwe Movies") in the
creation of an interactive multimedia software for teaching and learning
Ojibwemowin ("Ojibwemodaa" distributed by Grassroots Indigenous Multimedia).