* 0854870
* FRG:  Collaborative Research:  Modeling and Computation of Crystalline Nanostructures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Peter Smereka, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2014
* USD 440,484.00

This project is aimed at advancing the state of the art for simulating
nanocrystalline materials. A common technique to manufacture such materials is
depositing a monocrystalline film on a monocrystalline substrate of a different
composition (heteroepitaxy); in the process elastic interactions are very
important. The project will develop highly efficient computational tools by
combining continuum mechanics to handle long-range elastic interactions with
kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations that can accurately describe transport
kinetics at the atomic level. The methods developed will be broadly applicable,
but the immediate focus is on quantum dot nano-structures. Three different
approaches will be used to accomplish this task. One of these will use KMC to
deduce various parameters used in continuum models. Another approach will be
based on a new formulation of KMC which can be shown, using statistical
mechanics, to be connected with the chemical potential. This will allow a fairly
seamless connection between our KMC formulation and continuum mechanics. We can
exploit this connection to use KMC on small, well separated regions and then
combine these regions together using macroscopic variables, such as atomic flux
and elastic displacement fields. Another approach is to perform KMC everywhere
but using coarse-grained continuum fields that are updated on a macroscopic time
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystalline materials have shown great promise
for many applications such as solid state lasers, memory devices, and
photovoltaic cells. It is anticipated that the modeling and computation methods
developed in this research will pave the way for performing device level
simulations and provide valuable guidance in the interpretation of experimental
measurements for strained alloy systems. Our group has close ties with
experimental groups based in the semiconductor industry and academia, which will
allow us to assess our modeling progress.&lt;br/&gt;