* 0854015
* Brain Mimetic Materials for Cancer Cell Migration Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Jessica Winter, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 05/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

0854015 Winter

This research objective of this project is to create new brain mimetics and
migration models to explore the effect of the extracellular matrix (ECM) on
glioma cell migration. The mimetics consist of hydrogels; swollen, cross-linked,
yet insoluble, polymer networks, composed of hyaluronic acid and proteoglycans
(e.g., brevican and versican). Mimetic materials will be used to construct two
three-dimensional models of in vitro cell migration: an invasion assay, which
examines migration of cells from solution into a 3D brain tissue mimetic; and in
interface assay, which examines migration of cells from a 3D brain mimetic of
one composition into a brain mimetic of differing composition. These models
differ from current methods of investigating tumor cell migration because they
are (a) composed of materials that naturally occur in the brain, (b) are three-
dimensional, more closely mimicking in vivo conditions. Deliverables include
brain tissue mimetic materials, models of cell migration, preliminary analysis
of cell response to two types of brain tissue mimetic materials (i.e., 'cancer'
brain with added brevican, 'normal' brain with added versican), engineering
student education at the graduate and undergraduate level, and a hallway cart
exhibit based on this research for COSI, a local science museum.

The research will provide new tools with the potential to transform
understanding of glioma cancer cell migration. Gliomas, tumors of supporting
cells in the brain, are among the most deadly cancers, with an average survival
of 10-30 months from time of diagnosis, and affect 22,500 individuals/year. They
are particularly difficult to treat because they are highly aggressive,
infiltrating throughout the brain. In addition to clinical benefits, this work
will enhance research infrastructure, creating new collaborations between
engineering and clinical departments. Research results will be disseminated
through journal publications, conference presentations, and also, to the general
public, through interactions with an area science museum. Graduate and
undergraduate students will participate in the research, and results will be
disseminated through classroom materials as well.