* 0854954
* RICO - Continuing Research
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Robert Rauber, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 800,163.00

The Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO) field campaign was carried out by the
Principal Investigators and colleagues within the northeast trade winds of the
western Atlantic near the Caribbean Islands of Antigua and Barbuda from November
2004 to January 2005. The objective of RICO was to characterize and understand
the properties of trade wind cumulus at all scales, with particular emphasis on
precipitation. Precipitation from shallow tropical convection has become a focus
of investigation because of its potential to alter marine boundary layer
dynamics and cloud organization, modify aerosol distributions and associated
direct and indirect climatic effects, and regulate heat and moisture transported
into the intertropical convergence zone, which influences the Hadley
circulation. Understanding how precipitation forms within shallow tropical
convection, and the effects precipitation has on trade wind cloud organization
and the thermal, moisture and aerosol properties of the marine boundary layer
are the overarching goals of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this new
project, research will continue on the outstanding scientific questions
regarding trade wind clouds and precipitation that motivated RICO. The
scientific approach involves analyses of data collected during RICO, and
numerical modeling studies, to test hypotheses developed from earlier data
analyses. With the addition of new research involving satellite data, the
research crosses all scales relevant to trade wind clouds and addresses many of
the key scientific objectives of RICO. The specific goals are to quantify and
understand (1) the microphysical and environmental processes influencing the
rate of precipitation formation in trade wind cumuli, (2) the mechanisms by
which precipitation influences the mesoscale organization of trade wind clouds,
(3) the mechanisms by which clouds and precipitation influence the mesoscale
substructure of the marine boundary layer, and (4) the impact of clouds and
cloud processing on the distribution of aerosols within the marine boundary
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is the
advancement of knowledge and understanding of cloud, aerosol, and precipitation
characteristics in the trade wind region, and the mechanisms that govern their
evolution. These problems are central to understanding the role of trade wind
clouds in the climate system. The broader impacts of the research will be
substantial. It will contribute to the global effort to model trade wind clouds
by providing data analyses that will allow direct comparison with models. It
will lead to new understanding and discoveries about trade wind cloud systems
that will almost certainly translate into improvements in understanding of
climate and climate change, as well as tropical weather forecasting. The project
provides training for graduate students as well as undergraduate students under
the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program. The team of graduate
students will collaborate with a network of research scientists on and beyond
their campus.