* 0854566
* WATERS Network:  Observing and Predicting Freshwater Eutrophication-Algal Bloom Dynamics Using Local Hyperspectral Imaging
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Thomas Harmon, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 395,000.00

WATERS Network: Observing and Predicting Nutrient-Algae Dynamics Using Ground-
Based and Underwater Hyperspectral Imaging&lt;br/&gt;Thomas C. Harmon and
Qinghua Guo&lt;br/&gt;School of Engineering, University of California,
Merced&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT -
Problems associated with primary production include eutrophication, hypoxia and
harmful algal blooms, all of which can negatively impact human health and
ecosystem services in the critical zone. The proposed research will explore
expanded use of a commonly implemented remote sensing tool, hyperspectral
imaging (HSI), in the realm of water quality observation. HSI has proven
invaluable when deployed both aerially and on-the-ground for noninvasively
classifying vegetative type and other properties and, to a lesser yet
significant extent, for mapping water quality properties (e.g., chlorophyll,
suspended solids, dissolved organic matter) in lakes, relatively large rivers,
estuaries and coastal water bodies. Underwater application of HSI is as yet
unproven, but recent evidence points to the potential of HSI to reveal complex
spatiotemporal patterns of a vast array of chemicals, including nitrogen and
phosphorous species critical to many aquatic ecosystems. The main objective of
the proposed work is to test a strategy for expanding the application of
hyperspectral imaging (HSI) to a broad array of coupled physical, chemical, and
biological processes in aquatic systems. The work will emphasize the use of
ground-based and underwater (as opposed to airborne) HSI. Experiments will begin
in the laboratory, and extend to reservoirs and streams in the San Joaquin
Valley and the Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory. The approach will not
only provide a powerful noninvasive and real-time sensor for the simultaneous
mapping of multiple water quality parameters, but the results of this work will
provide a transformative sensor for the broad range of large scale
observatories, such as the CZO, NEON, and proposed WATERS Network
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;