* 0854427
* Fundamental Studies of Novel SiC Nanoporous Materials for Separation Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Theodore Tsotsis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854427&lt;br/&gt;Tsotsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by
Professors Theodore Tsotsis and Muhammad Sahimi at the University of Southern
California to systematically investigate and further improve the technique of
pre-ceramic polymer pyrolysis to produce nanoporous SiC membranes and films,
which are both cost-efficient and industrially viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project we propose the study of SiC membranes which show the potential to
overcome some of the difficulties other membranes face, which have proven
unstable in the presence of O2 and steam at temperatures higher than 300C; these
are the conditions typically encountered in reactive separations for H2
production, and in fuel-cell applications. SiC is a promising material that has
high fracture toughness, good thermal shock resistance, and is capable of
withstanding high temperatures and corrosive environments. Our current research
with these materials focuses on the preparation of appropriate SiC membrane
supports, and the deposition on these substrates of thin nanoporous films by the
pyrolysis of pre-ceramic polymeric precursors. Our preliminary studies have
shown that using new types of PCS materials leads to the preparation of
hydrogen-permselective membranes. However, significant progress must still be
made before these SiC membranes become appropriate for practical applications.
In this project we will, therefore, systematically investigate and further
improve the technique of pre-ceramic polymer pyrolysis to produce nanoporous SiC
membranes and films, which are both cost-efficient and industrially viable. Our
emphasis will be on understanding the factors determining the ability of these
SiC materials to separate gas mixtures, based on differences in molecular
mobility and molecule-pore surface interactions. We will proceed along two
paths: (1) the preparation and characterization of SiC membranes, and the
computational modeling of their molecular structure; and (2) the measurement and
simultaneous computer simulation of sorption and transport of mixtures through
these membranes. Coupling experiments and simulations will facilitate efforts to
relate the membrane's molecular structure with its transport properties, and
separation efficacy. This, in turn, will enable progress toward the long-term
goal of first-principle molecular engineering and design of improved materials
for adsorption and separation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
provide a valuable educational experience and training for the graduate and
undergraduate students involved, in that it will provide them with the
opportunity to prepare and characterize a novel class of new materials, and to
learn a host of state-of-the-art computational and experimental techniques. The
urban setting of USC affords the opportunity to work with a variety of 2-4 year
colleges in the area. Our plan is to recruit qualified undergraduates as summer
interns, and potentially as incoming graduate students. We plan to disseminate
the results of our work through peer reviewed publications, presentations at
technical meetings, and by makings all reports available on the Web. We will
also take advantage of the ever evolving undergraduate curriculum program at
USC, which emphasizes vertically- and horizontally-integrated degree projects
consisting of emphasis-specific experimental/laboratory modules associated with
each core Chemical Engineering course. The PI?s envision integrating research
findings and aspects of their work as the degree projects in the Reactor
Analysis, Transport Phenomena, and Separation courses. The proposed novel SiC
membranes show good potential for reactive applications for the production of
hydrogen and for fuel-cell applications. In addition to focusing attention on an
important class of materials, this project will also generate fundamental
insight, which will impact the knowledge-base of the broader field of transport
and reaction in nanoporous media, and is likely to catalyze new thinking and
rapid new advances in the area.