* 0854924
* U.S.-France Planning Visit:  Thermal Transport at the Critical Point of a Fluid
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Eldred Chimowitz, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2010
* USD 6,824.00

OISE-084924 U.S.-France Planning Visit: Thermal Transport at the Critical Point
of a Fluid &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a collaboration between
Dr. Eldred Chimowitz in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University
of Rochester and Dr. Pierre Carlés, a faculty member in the Mechanical
Engineering Department (within the Laboratory of Thermal Systems) at Pierre et
Marie Curie University in Paris, France. This proposal will fund a visit to Dr.
Carlés lab for Dr. Chimowitz and a Ph.D student or post doctoral researcher from
the University of Rochester to develop a collaborative research proposal dealing
with thermal transport phenomena near the critical point of confined fluids. The
U.S team has expertise in molecular simulation of dynamic transport properties
near the critical point of fluids. Professor Carlés is one of the leading
scientists in this area and has unique expertise in the physics of critical
phenomena applied to transport in fluids, as well as knowledge and experience
with experimental techniques in the field of nanocalorimetry. A better
understanding of heat transfer in the critical region of fluids could, in
principle, provide novel technological ways to use near-critical fluids as
efficient coolant fluids, in important applications ranging from cooling
microelectronic systems to ?green building? climate control technology.
Scientific breakthroughs in these areas could have far-reaching technological
benefits in the energy field where discovering new materials or processes for
efficient heat transfer help to satisfy a clear and present national need. This
award is supported jointly by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;