* 0854324
* Catalytic Nanodiode
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Eduardo Wolf, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 390,438.00

0854324 Wolf, Eduardo E.

The objective of the proposed work is to nanofabricate a catalytic diode as a
model of a metal-oxide supported catalyst with the added capability to alter the
electronic properties at the metal-support interface by application of an
external potential. We propose to use IR spectroscopy to probe the effect of the
electric field on the CO-metal surface bond. Depending on the IR results, we
propose to measure the activity and selectivity as a function of applied voltage
for one of two probe reactions: CO oxidation and hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene.
The catalytic nanodiode will be characterized with solid and surface analysis
techniques to determine a correlation between electronic properties and
catalytic activity. The novelty of the catalytic diode as a model catalyst is
that it enables to study the effect of an external electrical field that has not
been investigated in catalysis before. This will permit to elucidate separately
the effect of electronic properties at the metal semiconductor boundary from
compositional and crystallite size effects. We also propose to perform first
principles molecular simulations of an analog of the junction to further
understand the effect of the external field on electronic properties.

The intellectual merit of this project is the investigation of a new concept of
a model catalyst in which the activity of a metal-oxide interface will be
altered by an external voltage. The results obtained will be the first
investigation of this effect in catalysis and they will improve our
understanding of the electronic effect in catalytic activity at metal-support
interfaces, which although known for many years, had eluded a correlation with
catalytic activity. The proposed studies will be transformative and of
fundamental nature, since the model catalyst is costly to fabricate and has
limited surface area. Nonetheless, we expect that the knowledge gained in these
studies will permit design new improved metal catalysts supported on oxides. The
results could also be relevant to other technologies involving junctions such as
solar cells and solid state sensors.

The broader impact of the proposed research rests upon its multi-disciplinary
character including electrical engineering, advanced nanofabrication techniques,
kinetics and catalysis, as well as computational chemistry. To further aid the
professional growth and diverse learning experience for students of
underrepresented groups, support is given for the Minority Engineering Program
at Notre Dame (www.nd.edu/-mepnd) for participation in hands-on experiments. The
research results will be disseminated through presentations in national meetings
and publications in scientific journals in the area of catalysis,
nanofabrication and computational catalysis. In addition to the existing Web
pages of each investigator, a web page is under construction to publicize the
work under the direction of the lead PI and collaborators in combustion
synthesis in catalysis, and the work proposed here once definitive results are
obtained. In addition, we propose to extrapolate what we learn about electronic
effects in the nanodiode and apply it in the preparation of real metal-oxide
supported catalyst. We expect that these results will bring transformative
knowledge to the design of more active and selective catalysts.

The fundamental insights gained in the proposed work from the combined expertise
of the PI's in catalysis and co-PIs in nanofabrication and computational
chemistry will benefit society in its potential use in critical technologies
impacted by catalysis such as energy and in the chemical industry.