* 0854556
* The Tolowa (TOL) Athabaskan Lexicon and Text Collection Project: Recording the Last Speakers of the Tolowa Dee-ni' Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Janne Underriner, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2012
* USD 294,573.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Tolowa Dee-ni' language, a member of the Pacific Coast Group of the
Athabaskan language family, is spoken today in and around Smith River,
California. It is on the verge of death, with only three speakers remaining, two
of whom are quite elderly. These speakers represent the final opportunity to
gain insight into what was once a diverse, vibrant linguistic community. With
all other members of its Pacific coast dialect chain already moribund, these few
speakers represent the only remaining representatives of an entire sub-group of
the Athabaskan language family: the Oregon subgroup of the Pacific Coast branch.
Thus there is an urgent need to document the speech of the living Tolowa
speakers. Existing documentation of the language is limited; recordings as well
as various texts are essentially inaccessible to both the linguistics community
and the tribal community. The successful completion of the research will benefit
the Athabaskan and the broader linguistics community as well as the Tolowa Dee-
ni' tribal community. The project is designed as a collaboration of Smith River
Rancheria, the University of Oregon and the Del Norte County Unified School
District. The project will provide needed data which will enable the Athabaskan
linguistics community to better understand the Athabaskan verb, tonogenesis
within the family, and the place of the Pacific Coast Athabaskan sub-branch
within the broader family; support the Tolowa language and culture preservation
and restoration efforts of the Smith River Rancheria by developing a Tolowa
lexicon with accompanying sound files; and it will support the instructional
needs of teachers of Tolowa through developing a Tolowa lexicon and a text and
video corpus. This project will increase the existing corpus of Tolowa data, by
making both the data collected in the project and that generated by the
transcription of existing texts available to a wide audience in electronic and
print forms. Making available an extensive database of Tolowa text and lexicon
will ensure that a thorough analysis of the phonology, morphology, syntax,
semantics, and pragmatics of the language can now take place. Additionally, a
better understanding of how Tolowa relates historically to the Athabaskan
language family, as well as developments within Tolowa itself, such as
intonation and tone will be researched. This project will for the first time
provide the funding to take inventory of existing recordings, creating a
searchable database with speaker names, time indexes, and summaries of what is
on each recording. Recordings made during the course of this project will also
be incorporated into this catalogue, thus providing a comprehensive record of
all recorded materials in the possession of the Tribe.

Language and culture are intrinsically linked. The preservation of a well-
defined culture depends upon the preservation of the language. This is a
critical time for the documentation and preservation of Tolowa Dee-ni'. With
only three fluent speakers remaining, the language teeters on the brink of
extinction. The Tolowa people are literally one generation away from losing
their language. The project is designed to assist the members of the Rancheria
to prosper through the continued stabilization of their distinct language, life
ways and culture through language documentation and making materials about the
Tolowa Dee-ni' Athabaskan language available to the tribal community. Further,
providing an extensive base of documentation about the language, long awaited by
the Athabaskan linguistics community, will provide a better understanding of the
family as a whole. If linguists are to understand how the Athabaskan family fits
into the broader mosaic of North American linguistics and cultures, the Tolowa
language is essential. Digitizing previous materials will ensure that earlier
linguistic work on Tolowa will be archived for future use and training tribal
members on how to create archival-quality recordings and manage large amounts of
linguistic data will empower the tribal community to continue documentary and
archival efforts beyond the end of this project.