* 0854097
* Collaborative Research:  Direct Exploration of New Nanoscale Structures using a Microfluidic Chip Integrated with Cryo-TEM
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Anubhav Tripathi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 189,400.00

0854097 Tripathi

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Intellectual merit

This nano related collaborative research program develops a new device
integrating a microfluidic chip with a controlled environment vitrification
system (CEVS) to understand self assembly of organic and inorganic
nanostructures in important, but previously unexplored regimes. Cryogenic
transmission electron microscopy will be used to directly image nanoscale
structures that are formed under the highly controlled conditions that are
characteristic of microfluidics. Using the first version of such an integrated
system, we have already uncovered a new structural pathway for a micelle-vesicle
transition that has important implications. The specific aims of the proposed
research are:

(1) Design and develop a new microfluidic chip-cryo-TEM setup to enable short
time (sub-second) sample screening. The new design will automate sample delivery
and eliminate the blotting step used to thin the sample prior to vitrification.
This change will be transformative as it will allow one to explore
nanostructures formed in new temporal regimes that are vital for a fundamental
new understanding of several important physical processes, two classes of which
will be investigated in this work.

(2) Explore the early stages of structure formation (preceding nucleation) in
inorganic systems and how the structural evolution can be controlled by polymers
understanding precursor structures is essential for progress in the field of
biomineralization as well as for the development of new hybrid materials and
additives used in water treatment (for example, encrustation inhibitors for
seawater desalination).

(3) Determine transition states and dynamics of structural evolution in
surfactant systems. This work will lead to a better comprehension of fundamental
properties that affect microstructures in soft colloidal systems, eventually
allowing more precise control of the final properties of these materials.

Broader impact

The impact of this research will be broad, ranging from surfactant self-assembly
to materials science. In terms of long range applications, the work could also
assist in developing drug delivery techniques and water treatment.

This research expands a strong collaboration between a microfluidics group at
Brown University and a soft matter group at URI with a polymer physics/crystal
growth group at BASF, working at Harvard University through the BASF/Harvard
initiative. The graduate students working on this project will be involved in
experimental design and fabrication and key experiments that provide new
fundamental understanding of processes that also have significant applications.
Given the typical reliance on expensive commercially available analytical
devices, this range of experience will be unique. Material from this research is
directly relevant for two courses taught at URI and Brown, and will be
incorporated into coursework as it becomes available. The PIs will develop an
educational program that demonstrates key features of microfluidics and the
thermodynamics and kinetics of self-assembling systems for high school and
undergraduate students, with the goal of raising and maintaining their interest
in science and engineering. Using both Browns and URIs offices for minority
student development, graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups will be sought for this project.