* 0854735
* Influence of thin-fluid-film effects on surface characterization with dynamic atomic force microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Santiago Solares, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to develop
fundamental understanding of the effect of probe-sample thin-fluid-film forces
on the accuracy of dynamic atomic force microscopy (AFM) images acquired in
ambient air. In particular, the work will quantify the impact of environmental,
imaging parameter and chemical composition variables on the emergence of imaging
artifacts, such as multistability, whereby up to an infinite number of images
can be obtained for the same sample, probe and set of imaging parameters in
tapping-mode AFM. The project relies on imaging and spectroscopy AFM experiments
to be conducted under controlled environmental conditions with standard and
customized probes, scanning tunneling microscopy and transmission electron
microscopy experiments, and atomistic, continuum and nonlinear dynamics AFM
simulations. Deliverables include a catalog of quantitative relationships
between the parameters governing thin-fluid-film probe-sample forces and the
accuracy of the acquired topographical images, multi-scale modeling and analysis
tools, demonstration and validation via hardware, documentation of research
results and engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research will aid in the correct interpretation of AFM
experiments performed on a variety of nanostructures commonly used in high-
impact technologies such as MEMS/NEMS, biotechnology, microrobotic surgery, drug
design, tissue engineering, etc., where accurate topographical measurements are
critical and could impact the well-being of human beings. Additionally, the
application of theoretical and experimental nanoscale science to specific
research problems will contribute to the education of the next-generation
workforce. This will take place in the short term through enrichment of an
existing multi-scale simulation course, through research internships for high-
school seniors participating in the University of Maryland (UMD) Pre-College
Program and through short research projects for undergraduate students enrolled
in the UMD Inventis Academy of
Leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;