* 0854136
* Fate and Transport of Metal-Based Nanoparticles in the Subsurface
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Linda Abriola, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854136&lt;br/&gt;Pennell
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the rapid development of nanotechnologies over the
past decade, our current understanding of nanomaterial fate and transport in the
environment remains quite limited. For example, it is not known how most
engineered nanomaterials will interact with soil matrices, whether or not their
transport can be modeled as colloidal particles using classic particle
filtration theory, or how unsaturated conditions impact nanoparticle transport,
retention and persistence in natural soils. Although some effort has been
devoted to investigate the behavior of carbonaceous nanomaterials in the
environment, a very limited number of studies have focused on the transport of
metal-based nanoparticles, a particularly important class of nanomaterials
because of their potential toxicity and widespread use in personal care
products. For this reason, the proposed research will focus on three
representative metal-based nanomaterials; nano-silver (Ag), nano-titanium
dioxide (TiO2), and nano-manganese oxide(s) (MnOx). The research program is
designed to couple detailed laboratory experimentation with mathematical
modeling to elucidate mechanisms governing the fate and transport of metal-based
nanoparticles in quartz sands and natural soils. To achieve this goal, the
research is structured around four specific tasks, (1) characterization of
metal-based nanoparticle suspensions and soil properties, (2) measure the
transport and retention of metal-based nanoparticle under water saturated
conditions, (3) measure the transport of metal-based nanoparticle under
unsaturated conditions, and (4) develop and validate mathematical models for the
prediction of metal-based nanoparticle transport and persistence in subsurface
systems. Particularly novel aspects of the research plan include the
consideration of surface coatings and emulsifying agents commonly used in
sunscreens and cosmetic products containing TiO2 and the use of force-volume
microscopy to image nanoparticles deposited on sand grain surfaces. Information
gathered from each task will be integrated to advance our fundamental
understanding of the mechanisms governing metal-based nanoparticle transport in
porous media, with the ultimate goal of developing a numerical simulator that
can be used to predict the transport behavior of engineered nanoparticles in the
subsurface based on known input parameters. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research lies in two areas critical to the safe and sustainable
development of nanotechnologies; (1) advancement of our fundamental
understanding of metal-based nanomaterial fate and transport in porous media and
(b) development and validation of mathematical models that can be used to
simulate nanoparticle transport in the subsurface. The unique coupling of
experimental studies and mathematical modeling proposed in this work provides
for rigorous validation of conceptual models of nanomaterial behavior in
unsaturated and saturated porous media, and will culminate in the development of
numerical simulator capable of predicting nanomaterial fate and transport over a
range of conditions that might be encountered in natural systems. We anticipate
that the experimental parameters and mathematical models developed in this work
can be adapted to predict the fate and transport of other nanomaterials (e.g.,
ferroxane) in subsurface systems. The fundamental knowledge of nanoparticle
retention in porous media can also be used to model the performance of
filtration technologies for treatment of drinking or waste water containing
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential component of the project will
be the incorporation of education initiatives into the research and
instructional activities of the investigators, with the goal of extending the
impact of acquired knowledge beyond the traditional framework of journal
publications and conference presentations. This goal will be achieved through
the following initiatives: (a) the inclusion of undergraduate students
conducting integrated experimental and mathematical modeling research, (b) the
development of interactive, multi-media instructional tools, and (c) recruitment
of female and underrepresented minority students. The instructional materials,
consisting of tutorials, illustrative case studies and modeling tools, will be
released on a dedicated web site so that students and instructors alike can
explore processes that govern the fate and transport of metal-based
nanoparticles in terrestrial environments.