* 0854922
* Strong Field Coherent Control: Interpreting Control Dynamics and Measuring Wave Functions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Thomas Weinacht, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 419,063.00

This research program is developing the understanding of how strong field laser
pulses can be used to control molecular dissociation and applying this
understanding to characterizing non-equilibrium molecular wave functions. We are
moving from demonstrations of control in atoms and simple molecules toward a
quantitative understanding of molecular control and extending control to multi-
electron systems. We aim to fuse wave function measurement with strong field
laser control in order to see how the subtle features of molecular wave
functions which we can characterize affect the chemically relevant dynamics
(i.e. bond breaking and formation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
continually seeks to integrate teaching and research and impact a large range of
participants. People involved in the research include undergraduate students
(visiting students through the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates
program as well as students at Stony Brook University), local high school
teachers (through the NSF Research Experience for Teachers program), graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows and visiting scholars. Of the five PhD students
in the group, three are women. The PI recently developed and taught a new
graduate course closely coordinated with the research program, focusing on a
time domain approach to atomic and molecular physics and coherent control. The
group has developed close collaborations with two theory groups, emphasizing
qualitative and quantitative interpretations of their measurements through
detailed calculations and exposing the students in the group to both experiment
and theory firsthand. The work is inherently multi-disciplinary, and encourages
students to develop knowledge and interests at the boundary between physics and
chemistry. It also provides excellent technical and scientific training in the
enabling areas of optics, ultrafast laser technology, vacuum hardware, data
acquisition hardware and computer programming.