* 0854863
* Investigating the puzzle of scalar mesons in QCD and their connections to nonperturbative  Higgs dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Amir Fariborz, SUNY Institute of Technology Utica-Rome
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides travel funds and computational resources toward the project
objective of investigating the properties and the quark substructure of the
scalar meson below two gigaelectronvolts and their impacts on related issues in
low-energy Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). A well-known, and quite puzzling,
aspect of the lightest scalar mesons is that there seems to be a reverse mass
ordering of states containing strange and non-strange quarks: the putative
K_0^*(800) meson (with a strange quark) is lighter than the a_0(980) meson
(containing solely non-strange quarks). This has led to the speculation that
these scalar mesons are predominantly tetraquark, and not quark-antiquark
states.

The research will involve comparing different approximation schemes in strongly
coupled regimes and interpreting exotic states in terms of diquarks and tetra
quarks. The approach will be the method of effective field theories coming from
chiral Langrangians whose parameters will be determined from experimental data
found in the Particle Data Group publication from SLAC. Partial wave amplitudes
that have been constructed from experimental data will be used to determine the
usefulness of the diquark approach as well as different unitarization schemes.
Using these methods the properties of the low mass scalar mesons will be better
understood theoretically. The broader impacts are that it is hoped by better
understanding the lower energy scalar mesons one will get some insight into the
non-perturbative Higgs dynamics in the Standard Model. It is also hoped that
this analysis can be helpful in understanding the decay of heavier mesons by the
BaBar collaboration. The PI will make his research accessible for the
undergraduates at his institution to take part in various aspects of his
research project.