* 0854946
* II-NEW: MIMO Software Defined Communication Testbed for UWB Radio and Free Space Optics
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Timothy Kurzweg, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2013
* USD 609,646.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software Defined Radio (SDR) offers an
ideal platform for research and development with wireless communications
systems. While there have been numerous successful SDR efforts, none of these
platforms have the capability to implement high data rate radio frequency
ultrawideband (UWB) (multicarrier and impulse radio) and wireless optical
(diffuse and line-of-sight) communications systems. Software Defined Radio, and
more broadly ?Software Defined Communications? (SDC) (i.e., implementing
software defined concepts using propagation media beyond radio) can be enhanced
by multiple input multiple output (MIMO) signaling techniques. However, until
now, the technology did not exist to demonstrate these systems in prototype
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SDC testbed leverages modular FPGA hardware
to form a reconfigurable baseband processing system. In addition, modular
transceivers are being constructed to implement UWB multicarrier, UWB impulse
radio, line-of-sight optical, and diffuse optical modalities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational components of this project fosters
technical innovation and design among undergraduate students and encourages high
school outreach. Undergraduate students at all levels benefit from projects
developing or using the SDC Testbed. The developed testbed is being incorporated
into demonstrations for high school students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main contribution of this project is the realization
of a software defined testbed for rapidly prototyping high speed wireless
networks. The impacts of such a system are vast, but most significantly, this
system enables a large variety of different wireless architectures to be
prototyped. A project website enables the dissemination of information about the
testbed architecture and insights from these prototypes.