* 0854522
* Collaborative Research: A WATERS testbed to investigate the impacts of changing snow conditions on hydrologic processes in the western United States
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James McNamara, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 225,598.00

0854522 / 0854553 McNamara / Goodwin

The altered spatiotemporal distribution of winter snowpack is perhaps the single
greatest ongoing and future climatic impact in the western United States. The
planned WATERS network must be designed to address the present and potential
hydrological impacts of this disturbance. This proposed WATERS testbed project
aims to address the hydrologic impacts of changing snowpack regime in western
mountains using the Middle Snake Hydrologic Observatory, formed by partnering
the Reynolds Creek Experimental Watershed (RCEW) with the Dry Creek Experimental
Watershed (DCEW) on opposite sides of the Snake River Plain near Boise, Idaho.
The premise of this proposal is that understanding the hydrologic impacts of
climate change in the semi-arid mountains of the western US requires
understanding the relationships between snow distribution, landscape properties,
and soil moisture dynamics. Their central question is: How will earlier snowmelt
and upward migration of the rain/snow transition zone affect spring soil drydown
patterns in complex terrain? They will evaluate this question using a space for
time substitution approach. Specifically, they propose that future impacts of
climate-induced changes in snowpack spatiotemporal distribution on soil moisture
dynamics can be deduced by evaluating current differences across elevation
gradients. The key question will be addressed with three specific objectives,
with an additional objective to synthesize and integrate the project with
community research: 1) determine the physiologic and climatic controls on the
spatial and temporal distribution of snow and the rain/snow transition; 2)
determine the hillslope-scale linkages between snow and soil moisture dynamics
across elevation gradients; 3) develop a coupled snowmelt/soil moisture dynamics
model to test theories against observations; and 4) coordinate and synthesize
community research in the MSHO.

They contend that hydrologic observatory networks will be challenged with
leveraging funding sources and providing value-added resources to projects led
by externally funded scientists. They suggest that observatory networks must be
designed to facilitate community science by providing long-term baseline
hydrologic information coupled with focused measurements designed for maximum
benefit of teams working on integrated research topics, and providing resources
to teams of experts that will add value with leveraged funding for specific
projects. The RCEW and the DCEW, are ideally suited to demonstrate this
community science concept. Both sites have core ongoing hydrometeorological
observations along elevation gradients, and both host numerous externally funded
projects related the proposed key question. The PIs will address each objective
above by capitalizing on core measurements, leveraging existing funded projects,
and adding new measurements with this project. By integrating and supplementing
studies along elevation gradients, they will demonstrate how hydrologic
observatories can be used to facilitate community science efforts to address
this critical water resource problem.

The proposed project is closely based on many concepts outlined in Science,
Education, and Design Strategy for the WATer and Environmental Research Systems
Network, known as the SEDS document. The proposed experiments and observations
on the changing snowpack are designed according to the gradient concept outlined
in the SEDS document in a set of clusters and catchments. The changing snowpack
has been identified as a key hydrologic problem in nearly all documents
published by WATERS, CLEANER, and CUAHSI. The proposed project follows the
WATERS Network conceptual design principles by integrating multiple
observatories (RCEW and DCEW), using CUAHSI cyberinfrastructure, applying new
sensor technology, integrating new modeling strategies with observations,
building collaboration between universities and federal agencies, and
implementing education and outreach programs. In addition to testing and
demonstrating WATERS concepts, this project will contribute to a greater
understanding of climate change impacts in the western United States.