* 0854203
* Study of Molecular Diffusion in Zeolites by Time-Resolved Microscopic Laser Refractometry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Junhang Dong, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 301,785.00

0854203 Dong

Microporous zeolitic materials are attracting growing interest in developing new
generation of high efficiency catalysts, adsorbents, and membranes. The
molecular diffusivity under confinement in the zeolitic pores is a key factor
affecting the selectivity and rate of reaction and separation. However, large
discrepancies and sometimes even qualitative differences exist in diffusivities
measured by various macroscopic and microscopic methods which operate by
distinct mechanisms under different physical conditions. This has seriously
impeded the theoretical advancement and the realization of rational design of
zeolite catalysts, sorbents and membranes.

Objective: The goal of this project is to understand molecular diffusion under
non equilibrium conditions using a new microscopic laser refractometry approach,
which is realized by a unique zeolite thin film fiber integrated micro device.
The diffusivity measurement is based on ultra sensitive and real time monitoring
of the zeolite refractive index variation with the diffusion caused change in
sorbate concentration distribution. The specific technical objectives of
research include: (i) to establish the experimental methodology for the new
microscopic laser refractometry measurements and develop physical and
mathematical models for diffusivity computation from the experimental optical
information; (ii) to investigate the fundamental causes of the anomalous
discrepancies among diffusivities obtained by existing macroscopic and
microscopic techniques; and (iii) to understand the concentration and
temperature dependences of molecular diffusivities forselected molecules
including strongly adsorbing large aromatics and weakly adsorbing small gases of
which the diffusivities are still controversial in the scientific community.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research aims to resolve the issues of
seriously discrepant molecular diffusivities in zeolites that have posed
fundamental barriers to the realization of rational design of new generation
microporous catalysts and membranes and optimization of reaction and separation
processes. The project will also clarify the diffusivities for a number of small
molecules of which the diffusion are difficult to be measured by existing
techniques. These small molecules include H2, CO2, CO, CH4, and He which are of
unprecedented importance in the current global endeavor to produce H2 from coal,
natural gas and biomasses by catalytic conversion and molecular separation.
Achieving the goal of this research relies on the establishment of the new laser
refractometry approach that is realized by a physically and functionally
integrated zeolite thin film fiber micro device. The new method allows both
microscopic and macroscopic measurements with simultaneous in situ monitoring of
zeolite structural changes while avoiding the major limitations of the existing
techniques. The unique zeolite fiber device can operate in wide ranges of
temperature and concentration inaccessible to the existing microscopic and
macroscopic methods. The new method possesses ultrahigh detection sensitivity
(e.g. <10-7 bar increment for toluene vapor) and temporal resolution (i.e.
continuous monitoring at 1 us-1 observation frequency). Thus, it is capable of
studying the effect of observation time scale on the microscopic measurement
results and determining the transport diffusivity as a function of concentration
by continuous measurement with small step staircase changes in concentration.
Also, the thin film refractometry approach intrinsically avoids the influence of
external surface resistance when performing macroscopic measurement and the
problematic adsorption heat effect can be eliminated. The findings by the new
method will be assessed by comparing with parallel macroscopic experiments and
molecular simulation works and results of NMR and QENS measurements in the
literature.

Broad Impacts: The broad impact of this project is both scientific and
educational. The obtained knowledge of zeolite(host) adsorbate(guest) dynamic
interactions is fundamentally relevant to many other nanoporous systems such as
microporous H2 storage materials, nanotubes, and biological molecular transport
channels. The understanding of optical properties of guest host systems is also
valuable to the frontier areas like optical chemical sensors, photocatalysts,
and novel optoelectronic components. A direct contribution will be made to the
chemical engineering undergraduate education by establishing a new experiment of
optical measurement of molecular diffusivity in microporous zeolite for advanced
ChE Lab courses. Molecular diffusion in microporous media is important to many
contemporary chemical technologies but is inadequately addressed in ChE
undergraduate curriculum especially in lab courses. This effort will greatly
improve this situation.