* 0854584
* Accessing mineral surfaces: A role for chemotaxis?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Mandy Ward, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2011
* USD 80,521.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Microbes that use minerals as energy
sources are frequently found colonizing appropriate mineral surfaces. How these
microbes access the surfaces of these minerals is a fundamental question that
remains unanswered. Results of a recent study by the principle investigator (PI)
suggested that chemotactic responses to metals (i.e. the ability of bacteria to
move up gradients of metal ions) could facilitate mineral surfaces colonization.
However, this research has called into question the experimental approach used
in this study. Here, investigators propose to readdress the role of chemotaxis
in mineral surface accessibility using the dissimilatory metal-reducing
bacterium Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 as the model organism. Specifically, they
will use a more suitable chemotaxis assay for analyzing behavioral responses to
Fe(II) and Fe(III). In addition, because Fe(III) (hydr)oxides are highly
insoluble, they will investigate the role of chelating agents on chemotactic
responses to Fe(III). The results of this study will answer a fundamental
question relating to the biogeochemistry of microbe-mineral interactions. Their
results will be shared with members of the Shewanella Federation at biannual
meetings, with members of the bacterial chemotaxis community at the Bacterial
Locomotion and Signal Transduction (BLAST) conference, and with geochemists at
the annual AGU meeting. The rapid dissemination of these results will stimulate
discussion and maximize the impact of our research. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The interdisciplinary nature of the microbiological sciences encourages a life-
long commitment to learning that is central to the PIs research and educational
plans. The PI promotes scholarly excellence by teaching microbiology and
molecular biology as rapidly evolving and cross-disciplinary topics to
engineering students. The PI?s interest in how microbes locate optimal
environments for growth fits particularly well with this plan, allowing the
incorporation of the PI?s research into many class lectures and laboratory
sessions. As part of a combined research and educational plan, the PI has set up
molecular biology facilities in the Engineering School at Johns Hopkins
University. These facilities are made available to faculty, post-doctoral
fellows, graduate students and undergraduate students who wish to perform
research, or participate in the Molecular Biology for Engineering Applications
class, which the PI offers each year. Educating engineers in aspects of modern
molecular biology is essential for a society interested in improving public
health and protecting the environment. The PI?s research and educational plans
have consequently improved the infrastructure at Johns Hopkins University in a
way that will benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;The PI is also involved in an outreach
program, Women in Science and Engineering (WISE), which involves collaboration
with the local Garrison Forest High School, and introduces female high school
students to science and engineering research, with the intention of engaging
their interest and impacting their future career decisions. Encouraging more
women to consider becoming engineers is essential for increasing the diversity
of talent that will be required by future generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;