* 0854153
* Cyclic Strain and the Aortic Valve Endothelium
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* James Warnock, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,872.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854153&lt;br/&gt;Warnock&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart
valve disease is the third most common form of cardiovascular disease and has
shown a steady rise in incidence over the past 20 years. The only option
currently available to treat this condition is open-heart surgery. Therefore,
there is a critical need to understand the mechanisms of disease initiation and
progression to aid in the development of alternative therapies. The aim of this
study is to further the fundamental knowledge of the aortic valve endothelium
and ascertain how cyclic strain can instigate valvular pathogenesis. This will
be one of the first studies to examine the relationship between cyclic strain
and endothelial activation. Other research has focused primarily on the role of
shear stress. To accomplish the objective, an ex vivo biaxial strain bioreactor
will be developed that can subject aortic valve tissue to simulated
physiological and pathological strains. The first goal will be to use the
bioreactor integrated with a confocal microscope to characterize endothelial
morphology, and cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions. The second goal is to
identify signaling pathways that are activated in endothelial cells following an
increase in cyclic strain. This will be done using liquid chromatography tandem
mass spectrometry (2-D LC MS2) combined with computational biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mississippi has the highest incidence of heart disease and
obesity in the U.S. Effective disease prevention can only be made possible
through public education. To this end, the Mississippi State University (MSU)
student based organization, Bulldogs for Heart Health (BH2), was formed with the
mission to improve heart health throughout the state; student members of BH2
visit schools and educate students and parents about the state's heart disease
crisis, encourage positive lifestyle changes, present realistic healthy food
options, and teach a simple and effective exercise regimen. The long-term goal
is to improve the quality of life in Mississippi by creating healthier, more
active citizens and to reduce the prevalence of childhood
obesity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mississippi is predominantly a rural state, with
~37% of the population being African-American, a group under-represented in
science and engineering fields. Consequently, researchers in Mississippi have
the opportunity, privilege, and responsibility to create educational
opportunities that empower individuals from this under-represented population.
Warnock and Thibaudeau, both tenure-track faculty at MSU and active researchers
with strong commitments to education, are experienced in the integration of
research and education. Both have served as faculty mentors and have had active
research projects involving high school and undergraduate researchers (50%
African American) and work collaboratively with faculty/staff/students to
involve young researchers in interdisciplinary research in the sciences and
engineering. The educational and outreach components of the project include
training of more than eight undergraduate and post-undergraduate scholars and
providing opportunities for students from under represented groups.