* 0854766
* Effects of Topography on Turbulent Fluxes in Stable Boundary Layers Using a New Generation Large-Eddy Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fernando Porte-Agel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anna Hallar
* 08/31/2013
* USD 349,065.00

Prediction of regional-scale fluxes of momentum and heat in atmospheric
simulation models (e.g., numerical weather prediction and climate models) is
subject to substantial errors associated with our limited ability to account for
the combined effects of subgrid-scale topography and atmospheric stability. In
particular, enhancement of turbulent fluxes due to topographically-induced form
drag and gravity waves cannot be properly captured by commonly-used similarity-
based parameterizations, which are strictly only valid for boundary layer flow
over homogeneous flat surfaces. In order to produce physically realistic results
these models require stability corrections, which are "inspired in model
performance" and have little or no scientific foundation. In this project, a
novel combination of wind tunnel experiments, field measurements and large-eddy
simulations (LES) will be carried out to gain physical insight concerning the
complex interactions between natural topography and stably stratified
atmospheric boundary layer turbulence. First, a framework will be created to
evaluate the performance of the new generation LES (including recent advances in
tuning-free dynamic subgrid-scale models) over complex terrain. The new-
generation LES will then be used to simulate stable boundary layers over
different topographies to obtain high-resolution 3-D transient information
needed to study the physics governing land-atmosphere interaction. Multiscale
wavelet analysis will be used to quantify the dominant scales of interaction
between topography, atmospheric stability and turbulent fluxes. This will be
aimed at developing physically-based modifications to similarity theory that
include relevant temporal and spatial scales associated with both topography and
thermal stratification. These results have the potential to substantially
improve the parameterization of regional-scale fluxes and, therefore, the
accuracy of weather and climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the research lies in its use of a unique and comprehensive combination
of wind tunnel experiments, field measurements, state-of-the-art large-eddy
simulation techniques, and statistical tools needed to better understand the
effects of topography on turbulent fluxes in stable boundary layers. The
research has the potential to shed new light on our understanding of, and
ability to parameterize, land-atmosphere interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts include substantial improvement in the parameterization of
atmospheric boundary layer fluxes and, as a result, improved accuracy of
atmospheric simulation models. A new web-based educational tool will be
developed to take advantage of the educational potential of
visualizations/animations of large-eddy simulation fields. The new tool will be
used in undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the principal investigator
as well as outreach activities for high school students. Furthermore, two
graduate students will be mentored as research assistants and will also
participate in the development and implementation of the educational tool.