* 0854329
* Collaborative Research:  Process-Based Statistical Interpolation Methods for Improved Analysis of WATERS Test-bed Observations and Water Quality Models
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* William Ball, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 252,193.00

0854329 / 0853765 &lt;br/&gt;Ball / DiToro &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chesapeake
Bay is a prime example of how complex hydrodynamics, biogeochemistry, and
varying inputs from a large watershed can lead to uncertainty about the impacts
of human activities on a crucial environmental, economic, and social resource.
Better scientific understanding and engineering management of such systems
requires carefully integrated approaches that make maximum use of all available
observations and modeling tools, not only for better predictions of future
impacts, but also for better understanding of past and current observations. In
this context, and also in the context of planning and designing sampling
programs, the development of new methods for 4D (i.e., space and time)
interpolation of existing observational data is a critically important need for
environmental observatories. This research will help meet this need by taking
advantage of a rich resource base that has been established over many decades of
Chesapeake Bay research and most recently through a prototypical Chesapeake Bay
Environmental Observatory (CBEO) that has been established as a potential node
for the NSF-supported WATERS Network. Objectives of the currently proposed
research are to develop, test, and apply better statistical models for the
interpolation of water quality observations that make more effective use of the
process understanding captured in currently available hydrodynamic and water
quality models. More specifically, the work will generate new approaches for
statistical interpolation of observations by using process-based "metrics of
influence" (as opposed to distance) for defining the correlation structure that
informs interpolation (i.e., kriging). The alternative metrics of influence to
be tested include travel time, water age, and tracer proportion, all generated
through runs of well-established and calibrated Chesapeake Bay hydrodynamic and
water quality models. Model-based understanding will also be used to explore
possible cross correlations among water quality parameters, as obtained over
different time intervals and historical environmental conditions. After their
development and thorough evaluation, the new interpolation methods will be
applied toward exploring: (1) hypoxia development over a historical data record,
and (2) causes for continuing inconsistencies between deterministic model
predictions and observed temporal and spatial trends in water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly developed process-based interpolation
methods are expected to overcome many of the difficulties commonly encountered
in using kriging in flowing water bodies. The integrated analysis of
comprehensive observational data sets with both statistical and process-based
models will take maximum advantage of the strengths of each approach, which
include uncertainty estimation and predictive ability, respectively. The
application of these methods to pressing science questions on Bay hypoxia will
demonstrate their merit. Overall, the work will further evaluate and demonstrate
the power of environmental observatories to transform our use and understanding
of current and historical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation of better
tools for analyzing and understanding hypoxia will have far reaching impacts on
the management of the Chesapeake Bay. Currently, interpolation tools are used to
quantify the extent of Bay waters not meeting water quality criteria, and
process models are used to predict impacts of management activities, such as
TMDL development. Improvements to both types of tools and integrated use of the
two will allow better understanding and prediction of water quality degradation
and thus help target the most effective management options. All of the personnel
on this project have worked collaboratively with EPA's Chesapeake Bay Program
and are thus able to bring these improved tools to Bay managers. The conceptual
approach should also prove to be equally valuable at any location where well-
developed process-based simulation models are available. The findings will be
disseminated through national and international scientific meetings, through
publications in peer reviewed journals, and by making the new methods available
through the CBEO node on the WATERS network (as maintained through the San Diego
Supercomputer Center). This research is interdisciplinary and collaborative
across two universities, including both graduate and undergraduate students.
Impact on K-12 education will be achieved through collaborations that assist an
on-going educational program at the University of Maryland which uses
interactive educational modules to teach middle-school students about the issues
surrounding "dead zones" (hypoxia) in surface waters.