* 0854129
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Cell Reorganization on Deformable Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Alvin Yeh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 01/31/2013
* USD 305,279.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854129&lt;br/&gt;Kaunas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;Most cells generate intracellular forces that are transmitted to, and countered
by, forces in the extracellular matrix. This mechanical force balance is
necessary for maintaining both mechanical and biochemical cell equilibrium, i.e.
homeostasis. When this balance is disturbed, the cell cytoskeleton reorganizes
in an attempt to reestablish homeostasis. A relevant example of this
reestablishment of equilibrium is the alignment of cells and their actin stress
fibers perpendicular to the direction of cyclic matrix stretch. Arterial
endothelial cells, which are elongated and aligned with the vessel axis in most
of the arterial tree, lack such alignment at regions prone to atherosclerosis.
The Principal Investigator has previously shown that cyclic stretching of
endothelial cells induces activation of JNK - a signaling protein involved in
regulating pro-atherogenic gene expression - but that JNK activation subsides as
cells and their stress fibers align perpendicular to stretch. Other studies,
both in vitro and in vivo, support a relationship between cell alignment and an
anti atherogenic cell phenotype; however, the mechanism remains obscure. The
goals of this project are to 1) develop a mechanical model that incorporates
actin turnover and actin-myosin interactions to describe the dynamic
relationships between deformations in the matrix and associated reactive
reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton; and 2) test and refine the model using
traction microscopy, femtasecond laser ablation, and microscopy of live cells
expressing fluorescently-labeled actin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model
developed during this project will provide a novel and comprehensive framework
for understanding the roles of mechanical stretch and cytoskeletal remodeling on
cell mechanics, signal transduction, and cell function. This effort will result
in an unprecedented capability to model the dynamic changes in the actin
cytoskeleton that occur in response to diverse spatial and temporal patterns of
stretch. Further, a quantitative model will result in an improved ability to
reinterpret existing data, as well as generate new experiments to elucidate the
mechanisms of stretch-induced cytoskeletal reorganization. Importantly, this
project will provide the foundation for models of signal transduction where the
inputs are mechanical stimuli, rather than biochemical ligands. The proposed
model provides a tool to understand how the mechanical properties of adherent
cells change with time through cytoskeletal remodeling. Such knowledge will
provide guidance toward the use of mechanical stimuli to regulate cell function
in tissue engineering, surgical decision-making, and prognosis of cardiovascular
disease. The model will be broadly disseminated by providing public access to
the model software and incorporating the concepts developed in this project into
undergraduate and graduate courses. Further, the proposed project will provide
additional opportunities for undergraduate and graduate research, including
students from underrepresented groups, in the laboratory of the Principal
Investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;