* 0854288
* Using two-photon polymerization for the fabrication of 3D matrices for cell migration studies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 05/31/2013
* USD 380,000.00

0854288&lt;br/&gt;E. Mazur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Biosensing
and Bioengineering/CBET program supports work by Professors Eric Mazur and David
Mooney at Harvard University to study the role of material architecture and
physical properties in 3D cell-cell interactions and motility using a two-
photon fabrication technique. Using two-photon polymerization to fabricate 3D
matrices, they study cell adhesion and migration in three dimensions. Cell
migration research is taking intriguing new turns and emerging studies are
revealing marked differences in the way that cells migrate in two versus three
dimensions. Such studies are important to understand a variety of physiological
and pathological processes such as progression of cancer, metastasis, and tissue
regeneration. The main goal of this proposal is to develop a synthetic three-
dimensional extracellular matrix (ECM) that permits independent and precise
spatial control of biochemical and biophysical cues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, they will develop two-photon polymerization
system to fabricate three-dimensional matrix with varying physical and chemical
properties. They will then perform a systematic study on cell migration by
varying several parameters of the ECM in a controlled way. The effects of pore
size and shape, mechanical-stiffness, adhesion peptide concentration of the ECM
walls, degradation of the matrix on cell motility, and adhesion will be studied.
This approach will allow them to have a precise, independent control over
architecture as well as various adhesion and mechanical parameters at a
micrometer and submicrometer scale to study their role in cell migration in a
systematic manner. Finally, the proposed work will demonstrate the broad
applicability of this approach to study various cell and tissue processes in
isolation in order to address novel problems in biology.