* 0854350
* US-Chile IRES:  Integrating Ecological Sciences and Environmental Ethics for Biocultural Conservation in the Temperate Sub-Antarctic Region of Southwestern South America
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Ricardo Rozzi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project, funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5),
invites students to participate in a research, education and conservation
program that incorporates a novel integration of ecological sciences and
environmental ethics. Coordinated by US and Chilean partners, including the
University of the North Texas (UNT), the Chilean Institute of Ecology and
Biodiversity (IEB) and the University of Magallanes (UMAG), this project
introduces three key innovations: 1) a focus on a unique high latitude area,
comparatively less studied than tropical and other lower latitude regions of the
Americas; 2) the integration of science and philosophy through field work; and
3) multicultural scientific perspectives by working in small US-Chilean research
teams. The specific foci of field experiences will be at the watershed/ecosystem
level, allowing diverse studies of i) hydrological and biogeochemical cycles,
ii) biodiversity assessments, iii) indigenous ecological knowledge and socio-
cultural perspectives on biodiversity, and iv) conservation linked to education
and ecotourism programs of biocultural diversity in southern Chile. This
research-conservation experience will take place mainly at the Cape Horn
Biosphere Reserve (CHBR), one of the world?s most pristine eco-regions, and will
introduce students to the links between social and ecological systems and
conservation at local, regional, and global scales. Students will participate in
the implementation of biocultural education and ecotourism in the biosphere
reserve and other Chilean long-term research sites. In addition, by developing
international experiences with the Ecological Society of America's Strategies
for Ecology Education, Development and Sustainability (SEEDS) program at the
southern end of the Americas, this project will help diversify the cadre of
students who will be prepared to address eco-social problems and conservation
challenges effectively.