* 0854800
* US - Latin America Workshop:  ICFA 2010 Workshop on Instrumentation in Particle Physics; Bariloche, Argentina, January 11-22, 2010.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 29,300.00

Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-
Madison&lt;br/&gt;OISE-0854800&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S-Argentina award
will support a workshop on Instrumentation in Elementary Particle Physics that
will be held in January 2010 at the Instituto Balseiro in Argentina. Co-
organized with Dr. Xavier Bertou from the Institute Balseiros Center for Atomic
Physics, the award will support ten students and junior researchers from the
U.S. and will partially support ten students from developing countries in Latin
America. Additionally, the workshop could help U.S. researchers cultivate
collaborations with Latin American researchers currently developing high-
altitude arrays in Venezuela and Bolivia. Connections with these facilities
would be beneficial for future research and educational collaborations between
the U.S. and Latin America. Interactions at the workshop could facilitate the
development of international research collaborations in high energy
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will involve laboratory experiments
designed to demonstrate workshop material and to promote further interaction
among students and junior researchers. Laboratories will discuss applications of
silicon detectors and ring imaging Cerenkov Detectors. Top researchers from
Latin America and the U.S. will lead the workshop sessions and will discuss
areas for future research collaboration.