* 0854167
* Fate of Biosolid Derived Organic Contaminants in Soils and Effects on Soil Microbial Communities
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Claudia Gunsch, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,775.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854167&lt;br/&gt;Gunsch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wastewate
r treatment processes do not efficiently remove all types of contaminants. The
accumulation of these contaminants in biosolids is a growing concern because
approximately 50% of biosolids in the United States are currently land-applied.
Thus, there is potential for these pollutants to become mobilized in the
environment following land-application of biosolids and cause adverse
environmental effects. The principal objective of this proposal is to
characterize the chemical fate of several organic contaminants, of various
physicochemical properties, in soils and plants following biosolid land
application. Furthermore, this project will explore microbial community dynamics
and changes in denitrification function resulting from this process.
Denitrifiers are key to nitrogen cycling and are linked to primary productivity
and carbon decomposition. As such, denitrifying community dynamics are a good
indicator of microbial function in soils. The contaminants chosen for this study
are: 1) triclosan (a bactericide found in personal care products); 2)
nonylphenol (a detergent/surfactant); 3) naproxen (pharmaceutically active
compound a.k.a. Aleve) and; 4) two types of brominated flame retardants (BFRs).
The working hypothesis of this project is that the rate of biosolid application
will affect not only the contaminant fate, but impact microbial community
structure and function. A series of experiments will be carried out in batch
reactors and specially designed environmental chambers to test this hypothesis.
At the conclusion of this study several metrics will be calculated to evaluate
biosolid land application on environmental and soil health. These include: 1)
soil retention factors of each contaminant ; 2) bioavailability of contaminants
to plants cultivated in the soils; 3) the plant biomass production; and 4) by
determining the threshold concentrations of each contaminant that is responsible
for a significant microbial shift in microbial community structure and a 10%
decrease in denitrification rate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve
to further establish and strengthen collaborations between junior Faculty in the
Pratt School of Engineering and the Nicholas School of the Environment at Duke
University. This research will also enable both graduate and undergraduate
students participating in this project to work in an interdisciplinary research
team and gain valuable training. In addition, the PIs will continue to develop
and implement an outreach program ("Scientists and Engineers for the Future")
aimed at introducing underrepresented minority students in middle school to
science and engineering so that they may make educated career decisions. The PIs
are currently working with several middle school science teachers to develop
work plans which integrate the students' curriculum with innovative hands-on
activities representative of the biological sciences and environmental
engineering. The PIs hope this outreach program will help these students make
informed choices about career possibilities in science and engineering.