* 0854779
* Quantum Gravity in Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Ali Chamseddine, American University of Beirut
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 06/30/2013
* USD 155,774.00

The most challenging problem in theoretical physics is the unification of the
laws of quantum physics with Einstein's general theory of relativity. The ideas
in this direction that have been pursued most forcefully are superstring theory
and noncommutative geometry. These two approaches are intimately related.
Noncommutative geometry has provided a new framework to study spaces which could
not be handled by the standard methods of Riemannian geometry. It provides a new
perspective in the study of gauge theories and is a promising candidate to
describe geometries at Planckian energies. The main focus of this proposal is to
study the nature of space-time at subplanckian scales, determining the dynamics
and finding connections between superstring theory and noncommutative geometry.
It is essential to find the noncommutative space-time whose limit is the product
of a continuous four-dimensional manifold times a finite space that reproduces
the standard model. Also to be invesigated will be the functional integral for
chiral Dirac operators in the random matrix approximation, deforming space-time
with continuous parameters, heat kernel methods to find boundary terms for the
spectral action, adding an inflaton, dilaton and axion, the behavior of spectral
actions in presence of singularities and nonperturbative evolution of the
dynamical fields at scales of the order of the planck length. Topological five-
dimensional gravity, regular BPS solutions with cylindrical symmetry, and exact
solutions for the bigravity system will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact :
Due to its interdisciplinary nature, this work, on the frontiers of
noncommutative geometry and string theory, will be of benefit to both physicists
and mathematicians. The American University of Beirut (AUB) plays a very
important role in promoting the American educational system in the Middle East.
Historically, the emphasis was on liberal education. The new aim is to provide
in addition a vibrant environment for the promotion of research. The launching
of the Ph.D. program in theoretical physics in October 2008 is a step in this
direction and will hopefully attract students of high caliber from other
universities in the Middle East. &lt;br/&gt;