* 0854373
* Design of Safer Carbon-Based Nanomaterials: The Impact of Surface Modifications on Toxicity and Environmental Fate and Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 330,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Design of Safer Carbon-Based
Nanomaterials: The Impact of Surface Modifications on Toxicity and Environmental
Fate and Transport&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Julie Zimmerman
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Yale University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
No: CBET- 0854373&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study is to develop the
fundamental understanding necessary to design carbon nanotubes with reduced risk
to human health and the environment. Knowledge to support this goal will be
gathered through biotoxicity testing of well-characterized pristine and
functionalized carbon nanotubes, both single-walled carbon nanotubes, SWCNTs,
and multi-walled carbon nanotubes, MWCNTs. The modified CNTs will then be
evaluated for stability under representative environmental conditions, and those
CNTs that undergo a transformation in environmental conditions will be
reevaluated for toxic characteristics. Completion of the proposed work will
involve the following tasks: (i) synthesis of CNTs, (ii) surface
functionalization of CNTs, (iii) characterization of CNTs, (iv) evaluation of
CNT biotoxicity, (v) characterization of environmental transformations of CNTs
in aquatic systems, (vi) aggregation of CNTs, (vii) analysis of the impacts of
changes resulting from environmental conditions on toxicity, and (viii)
consideration of policy implications. They will synthesize well-defined SWCNTs
and MWCNTs. In addition to the testing of pristine CNTs, they will test a range
of functionalizations that result in CNTs with enhanced solubility and a range
of polarities. These include amino, hydroxyl, carboxy, sulfonate, alkyl, and
pyrrolidinyl functionalized CNTs, as well as fluorinated SWCNTs, the most
densely functionalized CNTs known to date. Careful characterization of the
synthesized and functionalized CNTs is critical for the formation of meaningful
conclusions from the biotoxicity studies. They will use advanced
characterization tools to obtain information about the CNT purity and physical
and chemical properties, including Raman, FTIR, and Near IR fluorescence
spectroscopy; TEM, TGA, and zeta potential measurement. They will then test the
biotoxicity of the pristine and functionalized CNTs to gain insights into the
role of CNT chemical and physical properties on their toxicity. Once released
into the aquatic environment, functionalized CNTs will undergo chemical and
physical transformations. They will investigate the stability of the chemical
functionalizations under environmental conditions and the impact of these
transformations on CNT biotoxicity. Finally, the implications of the results for
policies regarding the design of safer CNTs will be discussed. The results from
this study will provide information on (i) surface modifications to CNTs that
result in reduced or no toxicity, and (ii) the stability of these modifications
in environmental conditions for long-term protection of human health and the
environment. Ultimately, the information will be used to design the next
generation of CNTs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research demonstrates the
potential for an increase in the recruitment and retention of women and
underrepresented groups in science and engineering courses and majors when the
type of issues this project is focused on are introduced into the curriculum. It
is anticipated that similar trends will be observed at Yale University, which
already graduates the highest percentage of female undergraduate engineering
students in the country. While this project will serve as a source of research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well as be integrated
into existing courses at Yale, they also have a unique and innovative
contribution to broaden the impacts of this project. Together with staff and
associated students at Yale?s Peabody Museum of Natural History, the project
team will be working to develop an age appropriate module for their School
Programs for grades 7-12 on sustainability to include components on green
product design and environmentally benign manufacturing. Through this
experience, these students would gain a better understanding of the challenges
associated with designing and developing products and processes that meet
environmental, economic, and social goals as well as the role of consumers in
the system.