* 0854537
* Rationally design bimetallic nanocatalysts for 1D nanomaterial synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Valerie Leppert, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 01/31/2014
* USD 263,653.00

0854537 &lt;br/&gt;Lu, Jennifer &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview: 1D
nanomaterials, nanotubes and nanowires, offer exciting properties resulting from
radial quantum confinement. The microscopic scale along the axis provides an
intrinsic path to "communicate/manifest" these properties. Despite rapid
progress, there is a considerable gap between sought-after applications and
synthesis. To address this long-standing roadblock in the course of bringing
nanotechnology to fruition, we are proposing a research project of using
bimetallic nanocatalysts to achieve controllable synthesis. Nanocatalyst
properties can be tuned rationally and continuously by stematically adjusting
the ratio and chemical composition to probe the interaction between
nanocatalysts and vapor precursors. A catalyst design guideline to enhance
selective growth by synchronizing material incorporation with diffusion and
precipitation will be set forth. A rigorous investigation of 1D nanomaterial
growth will be conducted to test our central hypothesis - synergetic interaction
between nanocatalysts and vapor precursors can be achieved by tailoring
solubility and compound formation tendency using bimetallic catalyst systems
with two distinct catalyst species. Bimetallic nanocatalysts with continuously
varied properties will be synthesized by adjusting the molar ratio of catalyst
and cocatalyst species, allowing a systematic study of nanocatalysts in 1D
nanomaterial growth for the first time. New types of high-contrast diblock
copolymers will be used to synthesize bimetallic nanocatalysts. These block
copolymers will selfassemble in solution to form micelles with the block
composing the core, capable of sequestering a wide range of metal species.
Controlled self-assembly and metal sequestration processing will be established
to yield uniform bimetallic nanocatalysts with tunable chemical composition.
Empowered by these highly engineered nanocatalyst systems, a systematic
investigation of the role of nanocatalysts in growth will be undertaken for
unveiling the growth mystery. To harness controllable synthesis soon-to-be
acquired a novel three-dimensional architecture will be directly fabricated. The
scientific and technological significance of this new and unique platform will
be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merits: A general synthetic strategy
for creating nanocatalysts of any type with controlled size and composition
paves a path for understanding the growth mechanisms using the catalytic vapor
deposition techniques. The greatly advanced knowledge of catalyst functions in
growth will culminate in&lt;br/&gt;a new catalyst design paradigm for
significantly enhancing 1D nanomaterial synthesis controllability. The proposed
block copolymer approach is fully compatible with IC fabrication, nanocatalyst
arrays can be readily created on substrates. The ability to generate small and
highly active nanocatalysts, extremely small 1D nanomaterials can be directly
synthesized on device substrates for enabling revolutionary devices, such as
nanowires with extremely high ZT for energy harvesting and ultrahigh sensitivity
nanowires as bioactuators. The proposed novel 3D building block which contains
undisturbed 1D nanomaterials arranged in parallel in a 3D configuration will
inspire new device concepts. The successful outcome of the proposed work will
greatly contribute to the advancement of 1D nanoscience and nanotechnology. Our
expertise in nanocatalyst and 1D nanomaterial synthesis and free access to
state-of-the-art equipment, provide a solid scientific foundation and necessary
infrastructure for the proposed project. The PI's project management skills
accrued over 10 years working in two leading industrial research Labs(IBM and
Agilent) offer the necessary ingredients to conduct this interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The impact of creating a simple
but powerful strategy to create nanocatalysts will contribute to the broader
field of catalysis, e.g. biomass conversion, greenhouse gas decomposition and
oxygen reduction in fuel cells. Greatly advanced knowledge in 1D nanomaterial
growth will not only guide the controllable synthesis of a broad range of
existing 1D nanomaterials but also will facilitate the creation of new material
systems and the discovery of new properties as a consequence. Following the
funding of the proposal, the PI will create a brand new research area in
nanocatalysis at the newly commenced UC campus in Merced. A lab module will be
set up and incorporated into "MSE 126 Nanofabrication". Through an experiential
process with nanocatalyst synthesis and 1D nanomaterial growth and
characterization, students' interest in nanoscience and nanotechnology will be
stimulated. The PI will make an explicit and concerted effort to close the
education gap by actively recruiting minority students to work in her lab for
their senior capstone projects. This highly interdisciplinary research program
will offer both undergraduate and graduate students training that cuts across
fields and prepares them to be at the scientific and technological forefront and
will inspire others to follow.