* 0854931
* Collaborative Research: CI-ADDO-NEW: Research Repository for Model-Driven Software Development (REMODD)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Betty Cheng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2014
* USD 188,934.00

The primary objective of the project is to develop and deploy a repository that
supports the sharing and transition of model-driven development (MDD) experience
and knowledge to a broad community of researchers, practitioners, and educators.
MDD research focuses on developing techniques and technologies that enable
generation of dependable software from abstract models. The Repository for Model
Driven Development (ReMoDD) will contain documented MDD case studies, models
illustrating good and poor modeling practices, and educational material. The
ReMoDD platform will provide interfaces and interchange mechanisms that users
and tools can use to retrieve and submit artifacts. MDD researchers can use
ReMoDD artifacts to evaluate research results, and to perform comparative and
empirical MDD studies. Practitioners and students can use the resource to gain
better understanding of MDD practices and techniques, while educators can use
ReMoDD to share teaching experience and materials. The development of ReMoDD is
a collaborative effort involving teams from Colorado State University (CSU) and
Michigan State University (MSU). The teams will interact with the MDD community
to collect and evaluate candidate ReMoDD artifacts. An Advisory Board of leading
MDD researchers and practitioners has been established to ensure that ReMoDD
becomes a useful and sustainable community resource.