* 0854118
* Optical Characterization of Nanoscale Thermal Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0854118&lt;br/&gt;Cronin&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to measure and develop an understanding of nanoscale thermal transport phenomena
using optical, non-contact measurement techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
study, micro-Raman spectroscopy will be used to measure heat flow in nanowires,
nanotubes, and graphene. The temperature profile along individual suspended
nanostructures will be determined with sub micron spatial resolution from the
calibrated downshifts in the Raman spectra. Temperature gradients will be
created by laser irradiation, micro-fabricated heaters, and by running high
electric currents through the nanostructures themselves. These optical, non-
contact methods 1.) eliminate the effect of thermal contact resistance and
thermal shorting through the substrate, 2.) differentiate between diffusive and
ballistic phonon transport, and 3.) enable time resolved measurements to be
performed with nanosecond resolution. By measuring the heating and cooling times
of suspended nanostructures, their thermal diffusivity will be obtained. These
measurements will provide reliable values for the thermal contact resistance and
the thermal conductivity of nanostructures with unprecedented precision and
accuracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional approaches for measuring thermal
transport do not provide reliable results on the micron and nanometer scales
because of the large temperature drops across the contacts, which cannot be
determined or excluded from the measurement. The proposed optical methods are,
therefore, more suitable for measuring nanometer scale thermal transport than
conventional techniques. Furthermore, the non contact, non destructive nature of
these techniques enables further characterization of the same individual
nanostructure by other means, such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and
electron transport measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
novel measurement techniques will quantify several thermal parameters that have,
so far, eluded current state of the art nanoscale thermal transport
measurements, such as heat generated per incident photon of laser light. These
techniques also allow us to investigate several nanoscale thermal transport
phenomena that remain poorly understood and have only been theoretically
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Understanding thermal
transport in nanostructures is important for designing and optimizing high speed
electronics. This is essential for extending Moore's law over the next 5 to 10
years. Results from the proposed work will enable thermal engineering on the
nanometer scale to provide realistic thermal management solutions for extremely
high power density circuits. Improved thermoelectric materials that exploit the
low dimensionality could significantly impact our energy dependent economy by
recovering electricity from waste heat. The novel techniques developed in this
proposal can be readily applied by many other scientists and engineers working
in the field and will likely lead to innovations in other fields of science and
technology. The outreach program to Los Angeles area high school teachers will
introduce underrepresented students to the results and, more importantly, the
excitement of this research and other cutting edge research at universities in
the Los Angeles area. Research projects for undergraduate students and the new
curriculum, which integrates creativity into a science based course, will
produce skilled and knowledgeable students able to address the next generation
of challenges in nanotechnology.