* 0854712
* RUI: Theoretical Investigations of Lorentz Symmetry
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Robert Bluhm, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 125,980.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this proposal is to conduct
theoretical investigations of Lorentz symmetry and to search for new and
improved tests of Lorentz violation that can be conducted in high-precision
experiments. Lorentz symmetry is a key component of both special and general
relativity theory and is an underlying foundation in the Standard Model of
particle physics. It is also tied to the matter-antimatter symmetry known as
CPT, which predicts that particles and antiparticles have equal masses, charge
magnitudes, and magnetic moments. Many investigations of physics at the Planck
scale (such as in the context of string theory) suggest that Lorentz symmetry
might not hold exactly.&lt;br/&gt;One possibility is that Lorentz symmetry might
be spontaneously broken. Since Lorentz symmetry can be tested with exceptional
precision in a number of low-energy experiments in atomic and particle systems,
these experiments can provide a testing ground for new physics arising from the
Planck scale. The goal of this proposal is to search for new signals of Lorentz
Symmetry breaking while also investigating the theoretical implications of
spontaneous Lorentz breaking. There are a number of broader impacts that this
project will have. As an RUI proposal it will strengthen the research
environment in the physics department at Colby College and will aid in an on-
going college-wide initiative to integrate research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates will be trained in doing research in
theoretical physics. Students will have the opportunity to work on this project
during the academic year, and some will be hired as research assistants during
the summer. A continued emphasis will be placed on encouraging students who are
members of underrepresented groups to participate in this research. Students
will be able to present the results of their work at research conferences.
Undergraduates working on this project will be more likely to go on to graduate
programs in the physical sciences and engineering. This project will strengthen
institutional ties between the physics departments at Colby College and Indiana
University. Dissemination of the PI?s results will include scientific channels,
articles and presentations for the general public, and continued interaction
with local and national media.