* 0854210
* Multi-Scale Investigation of the Role of Surface-Active Agents in Gas Hydrate Formation Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Alexander Couzis, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 01/31/2013
* USD 304,120.00

0854210&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Naturally-occurring methane hydrates
have attracted a lot of public attention because they provide enormous potential
as a future energy source. Gas storage in the artificial clathrate form is a
safe and economical option, safe because the slow release of gas from a
container of hydrate reduces explosion hazards, and economical because the gas
storage density at 40 bar is comparable to a compressed gas at 200 bar. On the
other hand, hydrate plugs formed inside processing lines are a nuisance to gas
and oil industries. A critical obstacle to accelerating or retarding hydrate
formation is a lack of understanding of the multi-scale interactions between gas
hydrate particles and surface-active agents during hydrate formation. To
contrast these interactions, methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) hydrate
systems will be investigated because surface-active agents generally accelerate
CH4 hydrate formation but do not affect or even hinder CO2 hydrate formation.
Three sequential stages of hydrate formation will be analyzed at different
length scales: nucleation (&lt;100 nm), initial growth (&gt; 1 ìm), and layered
&amp; agglomerated growth (&gt; 1 mm). Differential scanning calorimetry will be
used to quantify the effect of surface-active agents on gas hydrate nucleation
by statistical measurements of phase-transitions. The different stages of
hydrate growth will be investigated by confocal and transmission electron
microscopes to understand how surface-active agents differently affect CH4 and
CO2 hydrates in terms of hydrate crystal sizes and porosities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: An important hypothesis to be tested is that the
adsorption of surface-active molecules onto the hydrate surface rather than
their micellization in bulk phase is the main reason for accelerating and
inhibiting gas hydrate formation. The adsorption mechanisms to be studied as
part of the proposed research will lead to a fundamental understanding of the
role of surface-active agents in achieving different morphologies and formation
rates of gas hydrates in terms of the microscopic observations. Novel neutron
scattering studies of the microscopic, interfacial structure will clarify the
configuration and functionality of surface-active agents at the oil-hydrate-
water interface. This knowledge on hydrate morphologies and interfacial
phenomena will be connected to the macroscopic, scale-up experiments of bulk-
phase reaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The fundamental
understanding of the active role of surfactants and hydrate inhibitors enables
controlled self-assembly of liquid-phase water molecules into solid gas
hydrates. This understanding can be utilized for fast gas hydrate formation
needed for safe natural gas storage and CO2 sequestration, while it can also be
used for the investigation of an economical alternative to the 1 billion dollars
per year spent on methanol as a hydrate inhibitor. This research will be
performed by a close collaboration of two institutions, a Ph.D. granting school
(CCNY) and an undergraduate liberal-arts college (Hamilton). The PIs will engage
underrepresented high school students via existing programs and will actively
involve undergraduate students and graduate students via a summer research
exchange program between the two institutions. They will investigate gas
hydrate-aided CO2 separation from flue gas to incorporate the thermodynamic,
kinetic, interfacial science/engineering, and design aspects of this process
into the undergraduate and graduate classes at Hamilton and
CCNY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by two CBET programs:
Interfacial Processes and Thermodynamics; Process and Reaction Engineering