* 0854345
* Growth of Ultra Thin Metal Alloy Films
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* John Ekerdt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

0854345&lt;br/&gt;Ekerdt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program investigates
the growth of ultra thin (less than 9 nm) amorphous metal films on amorphous
substrates. Chemical growth methods will be studied that include chemical vapor
deposition and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. Guided by first-
principles calculations, this research will examine the role of alloying
elements, such as phosphorus, boron, silicon and tin on stabilizing an amorphous
microstructure in ruthenium, cobalt, nickel and palladium films. The goal is to
force an amorphous structure at the minimum alloy concentration so that the
metal properties are retained. The research will focus on chemical and physical
methods to increase the nucleation density or to alter the course of film
assembly to realize continuous films that are 2-4 nm thick. Changes will be made
to increase the defect density of the substrates and experiments will also
explore selective surface passivants to block reaction on the growing metal and
force additional nucleation on the substrate. The research objectives are an
understanding of the enabling reactions and processes that will lead to the
thinnest possible continuous film, and to an ultra thin film with amorphous
character. The program of work will involve film growth and characterization
studies and it will involve surface studies to elucidate how the precursors
interact with the substrates as the ligands and substrates are modified. The
research leverages the expertise and experimental infrastructure at the
University of Texas to grow and characterize films and to study surface
reactions. Bonding and reactions at the substrate surface and at the film
interface will be explored. Film composition and chemical bonding will be
followed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, secondary ion mass spectrometry
and low energy ion scattering spectroscopy. A full complement of
characterization facilities will be used to study the films, including spectral
ellipsometry, atomic force microscopy, X-ray scattering spectroscopy, and high
resolution electron microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Metal
films find applications in sensors, optics and microelectronics, and as the
critical dimensions or size of the applications and systems decrease, the metal
films thickness also must decrease to tens of atomic diameters at most and must
have a specific microstructure. This program seeks to describe how films form,
with an emphasis on nucleation and island coalescence, the evolution of
interfacial layers that bind the film to the substrate, how properties of bulk
materials scale with thickness, and precisely how short range order is preserved
as the film thickness approaches thicknesses that are 5- 15 times the
characteristic dimension of the Veronoi polyhedra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts of the Proposed Research This research is motivated in general by the
central role ultra thin metal films on amorphous substrates have in applications
such as electrodes, sensors, optics, thermal barriers, and diffusion barriers.
This program seeks to explore the role and nature of short-range-order in the
formation and stabilization of ultra thin amorphous metals. Further this program
addresses and seeks to describe the interfacial and surface reactions that
affect the evolution of the films as it transforms from nucleated islands to a
coalesced, continuous film. Issues of nucleation and growth are common to both
amorphous and polycrystalline films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
directly support the training of graduate students and indirectly provide
opportunities for undergraduates to participate in open-ended research projects.
The PI and the graduate student will develop an exhibit that will help explain
the revolutionary and current devices that motivate this research, sensors and
microelectronics, and introduce these concepts to the general public and to
precollege students. They will present it and display it through a variety of
University of Texas sponsored venues, such as the annual UT Open House and the
Texas Memorial Museum.