* 0854023
* GOALI: Engineering an In Vitro Assembled Corneal Stroma
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Thomas Koob, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 329,846.00

0854023&lt;br/&gt;Matthews&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: The
investigators seek to develop an in vitro assembled corneal stroma for eventual
use as a replacement tissue to aid the visually impaired. The work is motivated
by the ability to assemble collagen fibrils derived from Cucumaria frondosa into
mimics of corneal stroma, a technique which already exists within the team.
Extension of this ability to mammalian materials is an overarching goal. The
research outcomes expected from the proposed work center around defining the
principles by which the collagen scaffolds of extracellular matrices (ECMs) and
connective tissues may be assembled for application to tissue engineering.
Despite the vast amounts of data available on the mechanical properties of the
macroscopic constructs formed by collagen, little is known of the mechanics at
the level of the collagen molecule or fibril. These properties will be measured,
as well as the interactions between the proteoglycan components of the relevant
ECM, providing the information needed to rationally design in vitro equivalents
of the tissue. Mechanically matching the materials used in the construction of
the stroma to those of the native system will be done at the macromolecular and
macroscopic scales. Through this university-industrial collaborative research
project with MiMedx, Inc., the team has access to collagens and to a wealth of
experience in collagen assembly and applications to tissue engineering.
Additionally, the industrial collaboration provides a streamlined mechanism by
which the research outcomes will be translated into patient oriented products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is threefold.
1. For the first time, the mechanics of and interactions between the
constituents of collagenous tissues will be systematically and comprehensively
explored on multiple length scales, providing a complete picture of how the
mechanical properties of filamentous self-organizing systems, in particular type
I collagen, are derived. 2. The results will resolve the important question of
how load is supported within collagenous tissues. 3. The results also will
resolve how the collagen hierarchal forms are established and maintained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: 1. The results themselves will benefit
those endeavoring to a. develop biomimetic materials for connective tissues, b.
develop materials for use as scaffolds in tissue engineering, and c. rationally
design self-organizing, three-dimensional systems constructed from nanoscale
building blocks. 2. The work is highly interdisciplinary, and as such draws
students with interest in biomedical engineering, material science, physics,
biology, and biochemistry. The ability to recruit students from underrepresented
groups is enhanced by this breadth. 3. The laboratories consist of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. These students will have the
opportunity to work jointly in an academic and an industrial setting. 4. An
outreach project has been established in which the principal investigator
provides young students (K-12) within the US and abroad the opportunity to
participate in research experiments by remotely accessing the instrumentation
from their own classroom. 5. A new interface for the atomic force microscope is
being developed which will allow the visually impaired to perform force
spectroscopy experiments. 6. Finally, the material under study has tremendous
potential for societal benefit in its applications as a cornea replacement.