* 0854105
* New Molecularly Imprinted Polymers with Significantly Enhanced Properties for Chemical and Biological Analyses and Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Spivak, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 288,353.00

0854105&lt;br/&gt;Spivak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One monomer molecularly
imprinted polymers (referred to as 'OMNiMIPs'), synthesized from novel
crosslinking monomers developed in the PI's group, exhibit fundamental
differences that give rise to new and enhanced properties versus traditionally
formed molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs). First, the use of one monomer
ultimately affords a higher loading capacity per gram of polymer, which can
improve applications such as solid phase extraction and analytical separations.
The increased rebinding capacity of OMNiMIPs could lead to applications beyond
current limits of MIPs, such as high capacity removal of target compounds in
solid phase extraction, environmental clean-up, or protein-purification
strategies. We are currently investigating the underlying principles that are
responsible for the high capacity and selectivity of OMNiMIPs. The higher
capacity also affords higher performance for imprinting several different target
compounds simultaneously, facilitating assays and separations of multiple
analytes. This could be important for assays on mixtures of different compounds,
such as the analysis of pharmaceutical formulations or solid phase extraction of
an array of different molecules. In addition, novel chiral OMNiMIPs appear
capable of imprinting racemic mixtures, providing an easier route to chiral
stationary phases. This would eliminate the need for enantiopure templates,
normally required for traditional MIPs. Last, OMNiMIPs will be hybridized with
conjugated polymers to provide a material that can generate a fluorescence
signal upon binding the target molecule, which is useful for sensors and other
detection strategies. An important theme for the research described in this
proposal is to utilize molecular control of the monomer starting materials
toward optimizing macroscopic properties (e.g. loading capacity and selectivity)
of OMNiMIPs. The heart of this proposal is the design, synthesis and evaluation
of new crosslinkers for the OMNiMIP process that will maximize the performance
of these materials for the applications described above. Using the molecular
structure of successful crosslinkers as lead compounds, analogs with rational
changes will be evaluated for improvements in structure-property relationships.
This proposal describes the fundamental development of new MIP materials that
both improve performance and are capable of unique applications that have not
been available from this technology in the past. It is important to determine
the optimal crosslinker structures as quickly as possible in order to provide
researchers worldwide with the best materials for their applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For society, the promise of molecular imprinting is the
detection of medical and environmental toxins, detection and neutralization of
national security target compounds, tailored catalysts, and separation media
that will serve the health and advancement of mankind in numerous ways. These
broader impacts of molecular imprinting will be enhanced in several ways by the
development of OMNiMIPs for novel applications such as those described above.
While the development of these materials should be seen as a major practical
outcome of this research, these studies will also contribute to the fundamental
understanding of the underlying principles of the OMNiMIP effect and how these
differ from traditional molecular imprinting approaches. Furthermore, the
development of OMNiMIPs has stimulated numerous collaborations with researchers,
both nationally and internationally, resulting in many interesting studies
toward the increased performance of these materials for current and new
applications. OMNiMIP research has also provided opportunities for
undergraduates and a high school student to participate in cutting edge research
and present their results at conferences. The real credit for the success and
fun of OMNiMIP research belongs to the diverse group of graduate students and
post-doctoral fellows who have engaged themselves in the day-to-day problem
solving that has made this research flourish. Our group is talented and draws
evenly from underrepresented groups that are mentored well here at LSU. Their
training in molecular imprinting and OMNiMIPs continues to present opportunities
that interface important chemical disciplines naturally, providing an
interdisciplinary education that will enhance their competitiveness in the
current and future marketplace. The people and the research in this overall
program will reach the broader community in Louisiana, especially younger
generations, through public lectures and presentations with the goal to improve
their awareness and interest of basic science and technology.