* 0854299
* Documentation of Northern Cheyenne Sacred Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Karyl Eaglefeathers, SUNY Empire State College
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,284.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present award (NSF #0854299) builds
on an earlier pilot project (NSF #0756035) which provided intensive linguistic
training for the PIs and allowed for the filming of the traditional sun dance
ceremonies and the recording of the accompanying sacred language of the Northern
Cheyenne. Under the current award, the language will be transcribed and analyzed
to determine special features of the sacred language and how it differs from the
everyday Cheyenne language. There are a few field recordings of sacred songs
that have been made over the last 115 years and they will be examined to
determine persistence and change in the sacred language that is expressed in
these songs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sacred language is a specialized component of
many indigenous languages, transferred from adult to adult and used within the
context of philosophical discourse, prayer, and ceremony. With the decline of
Native languages, many North American tribes' sacred language is no longer in
use and has never been documented. The Northern Cheyenne sacred language is
still vital and in use by a shrinking number of fluent speakers, but it has not
been documented. This is a rare opportunity for fieldwork in full collaboration
with an elite group of fluent ceremonial men and women. This small but prominent
speaker community, numbering about 20, has been instructed throughout their
adult lifetimes by their ceremonial elders who, in turn, learned from their
ceremonial instructors. They have put aside long-held mistrust, forged through
years of historic struggles, in order to fully document this sacred language
which is so crucial to the preservation of Cheyenne culture. Fluency in Cheyenne
is the platform for learning the sacred language, and the fact that all fluent
speakers of the everyday Cheyenne language are above the age of fifty means that
this moribund language will likely be gone in a generation. The field audio and
video recordings with accompanying field notes will be deposited in the Archives
of Traditional Music, Indiana University, where all but about 10% of the
collection, the most sensitive cultural information, will be available for
educational use.