* 0854338
* The Formation of Channels, Gullies and Sediment Waves by Turbidity Currents: A Navier-Stokes Based Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

Meiburg&lt;br/&gt;0854338&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish a
novel framework for analyzing turbidity current/sediment bed interactions based
on the Navier-Stokes equations, rather than the depth-averaged shallow water
equations employed to date. The study focuses on the linear stability framework
to provide insight into the formation of channels, gullies and sediment waves by
turbidity currents. Accompanying Direct Navier-Stokes simulations will be
carried out as well. Fundamental progress in this area will enhance prediction
of the architecture of sediment deposits, thereby leading to more effective
exploration strategies for deep-water hydrocarbon reservoirs. The study builds
on a preliminary investigation by the PI into the formation of streamwise
channels by turbidity currents. Specifically, a novel instability was shown to
occur if the shear stress imposed by the unidirectional turbidity current base
flow decays more rapidly with the distance from the sediment bed than the base
flow sediment concentration. This investigation is based on the hypothesis that
this newly discovered linear instability mechanism also applies to streamwise
perturbations. Thus, fundamentally important questions arise regarding the
convective or absolute nature of streamwise instabilities, along with their
potential for giving rise to linear and nonlinear global modes. Based on the
novel Navier-Stokes approach, these issues will be investigated as functions of
the governing parameters. The applicability of the anticipated results to deep-
water sediments will be evaluated by a close collaboration with Dr. Ben Kneller,
Professor of Petroleum Geology at the University of Aberdeen and with Dr.
Lesshafft at Ecole Polytechnique, for questions on questions of linear
stability. Rather than averaging, the Navier-Stokes approach will resolve flow
and sediment structures within the current, and thereby allow for the study of
feedback mechanisms between the three-dimensional perturbation velocity and the
sediment concentration field. Resolving these issues will provide insight into
the spatio-temporal evolution of the vast sediment deposits at the bottom of the
world?s oceans caused by phenomena such as sediment waves, ripples, dunes and
antidunes. The advanced understanding of coupled turbidity current/sediment bed
dynamics will improve strategies for the exploration of deep-water hydrocarbon
reservoirs, for reduced drilling, and for improved recovery rates, thereby
resulting in large financial savings and a reduced environmental impact. This
research will furthermore train undergraduate and graduate students in
computational linear stability analysis and scientific computing.