* 0854991
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Stability and Algorithm Analysis in Compressed Sensing
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Jeffrey Blanchard, Blanchard               Jeffrey        D
* Fellowship Award
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 12/31/2010
* USD 108,777.00

0854991 Blanchard

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Jeffrey D.
Blanchard to work with Dr. Michael E. Davies at the University of Edinburgh in
the UK.

Compressed sensing is a cutting edge field of applied harmonic analysis and
electrical engineering that determines the minimum number of measurements
required to capture all the information content contained in a signal. Due to
physical constraints, most signals of interest have low information content
compared to the signal length. This low information content is translated to an
assumption of sparsity, that the signal has relatively few nonzero coefficients.
Contrary to the well-known Shannon sampling theorem, compressed sensing has
determined that sparse signals can be reconstructed from far fewer linear, non-
adaptive measurements. In fact, the number of measurements can be proportional
to the information content provided the signal reconstruction algorithm is
nonlinear. A primary tool for signal reconstruction in compressed sensing is
l1-minimization, a tractable linear programming problem. The restricted isometry
property (RIP) has provided sufficient conditions on the measurement ensemble
such that l1-minimization will stably reconstruct sparse signals. When the
measurements of a sparse signal are contaminated with noise, the reconstruction
is stable if it produces a sparse approximation to the signal with error
proportional to the noise. A geometric interpretation of the measurement
ensemble has provided a necessary and sufficient condition for l1-minimization
to reconstruct the signal. However, this geometric interpretation does not
produce provably stable signal reconstruction. RIP is too restrictive, and
empirical investigation supports stable signal recovery more in line with the
geometric interpretation. The principal investigator (PI) will perform stability
analysis from the geometric point of view to shrink this theoretical void.
Necessary and sufficient conditions on the size of the faces of a poly-tope
associated to the measurement matrix will be formulated to ensure stable signal
reconstruction from l1-minimization. The research proceeds by identifying
measurement ensembles satisfying these conditions. Alternative nonlinear
algorithms have been developed which have reduced computational burdens yet
still stably recover sparse signals. These algorithms have also been
successfully studied using generic measures of sparsity such as RIP. As in the
case of l1-minimization, the theory remains far from observation due to the
method of analysis not being tied to the behavior of the algorithm. Following a
similar research direction, the PI will perform analysis of a hybrid algorithm
that forces l1-minimization to act like one of the alternative algorithms. By
analyzing the step by step approximations produced by each algorithm, the PI
intends to establish provable connections between the theories of
l1-minimization and alternative nonlinear algorithms.

This research will be conducted at the University of Edinburgh with Professor
Michael Davies of the School of Engineering and Electronics. The PI will be
embedded with Prof. Davies research group with scientists from electrical
engineering, mathematics, optimization, and medical physics. The PI will also be
affiliated with a European Union project on sparse approximation and compressed
sensing. The interdisciplinary team and European consortium will provide the PI
unmatched research experiences and opportunities for international
collaboration. Prof. Davies work in medical imaging and compressive radar
provide an opportunity for immediate implementation of results. These
experiences will help prepare the PI for a successful academic research career
in the United States and continued international collaboration.