* 0854944
* FRG:  Collaborative Research:  Characters, Liftings, and Types:  Investigations in p-adic Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jiu-Kang Yu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 08/31/2012
* USD 121,834.00

The local Langlands conjectures can be viewed as offering two important kinds of
connections---first, between the same matrix group, taken with coefficients in
two different fields; and second, between two different matrix groups, taken
with coefficients in the same field. The conjectures offer an explanation for
why the representation theories of real and p-adic, and even of adelic, groups
are so similar. The price of this uniformity is that, often, one may no longer
speak of individual representations, but rather of finite collections of them
(called L-packets). These are expected to encode both number-theoretic (via
Galois groups) and algebro-geometric (via many avenues---for example, the theory
of stable distributions) information. For some families of representations, the
investigators already have clear expectations for what the L-packets should be,
but they cannot yet prove that their expectations are correct. For other
families, there is not even a reasonable conjecture for what the answer should
be. The theory of real groups suggests yet another rewarding perspective, from
the point of view of symmetric spaces. For p-adic groups, the serious study of
harmonic analysis on such spaces is just beginning to be developed, in large
part by the investigators, and the analogues in this setting of the local
Langlands conjectures are far from clear. The part of the local Langlands
conjectures dealing with functoriality also suggests that the investigators
should be able to transfer representation-theoretic information between
different matrix groups. A classical realization of this is the theory of
lifting, where representations of matrix groups over a large field are related
to those of the same group, but with coefficients taken in a smaller field. Most
progress in this area has been via somewhat ad hoc methods, but the answers have
invariably turned out to be related to natural constructions arising in the
symmetric-space setting.

Representation theory, broadly understood, has its origins in two classical
problems. The first, investigated by Fourier in the 19th century, was an attempt
to understand complicated physical processes, such as heat diffusion, by
representing them as combinations of simpler processes. The second, initially
studied by Frobenius, Schur, and others, was an attempt to understand the
structure of a finite collection of symmetries via an associated polynomial
known as its group determinant. The surprising fact that the solutions to these
two problems are related has turned out to be just the earliest instance of a
family of deep and far-reaching connections that have been formalized in a
collection of conjectures known collectively as the (local) Langlands
conjectures. The depth and broad reach of these conjectures---for example, they
encompass a large part of the celebrated recent proof of the centuries-old
Fermat's Last Theorem---has meant that progress has so far been relatively slow.
This project brings together a group of mathematicians from a broad variety of
related backgrounds, whose combined expertise can be expected to allow
significant progress both on these conjectures and on related results in
representation theory and harmonic analysis.