* 0854148
* The Structure and Dynamics of Thin Film Liquid-Vapor Systems in Microgeometries
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Kenneth Breuer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 03/31/2014
* USD 300,460.00

CBET-0854148&lt;br/&gt;Breuer&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A three year program will be
conducted to study the structure and dynamics of evaporation in micron-scale
systems. We plan to explore the manner in which liquid-vapor systems behave in
confined geometries with typical scales of 0.1 - 20 microns where the role of
the transitional zone between the bulk meniscus and the adsorbed liquid film
becomes dominant. Of particular interest will be the description of the role of
the thin liquid transition film that leads the bulk liquid phase and has been
demonstrated to contribute significantly to the overall heat and mass transfer
in small systems. The effects of fluid and surface chemistry, geometry, and the
presence of fluid additives will be systematically explored. Novel experimental
techniques will be used to measure velocities and temperatures in the 200 nm
near the liquid-solid interface, as well as to directly measure the thickness of
the thin liquid film on the solid substrate as it evolves. Measurements of fluid
velocities and evaporation rates will be taken and compared with theoretical and
numerical predictions for similar systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The behavior of two-phase systems in microgeometries, and in particular,
the character of the thin liquid film on a smooth surface continues to be a
problem of critical importance and one in which there is active debate in the
heat transfer and fluid mechanics literature. As microengineering continues to
push towards smaller scales, the characterization and modeling of the physics of
these thermal transport problems becomes more relevant and challenging. High-
quality experimental data are critical in providing guidance to models and
numerical experiments in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results obtained during this research will help guide design and analysis for a
wealth of micron-scale heat transfer systems (heat pipes, capillary pumped
loops, etc.) that can be used in a multitude of applications such as chip
cooling, thermal control in micro-systems, space power applications, etc. The
project will support the training of one graduate student to work closely with
the PI. The project will also involve an undergraduate student. We will also
continue to build on our successful history of recruiting under-represented
groups (through the Leadership Alliance), and will leverage and participate with
the Brown University MRSEC outreach program, for example by working with the
K-12 Teacher Training Program and high school student Research Experience
Program. Lastly, we will continue to work with media producers (such as NOVA and
Discovery Channel) in the development of science programming for a wide
audience.