* 0854010
* Rheology of Lyotropic Nematogenic Nanorod Dispersions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Virginia Davis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 07/31/2011
* USD 71,000.00

Davis&lt;br/&gt;0854010&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to determine the
rheological behavior of model lyotropic nanocylinder (e.g. nanorod, nanotube,
nanowire) dispersions. Rheological characterization of lyotropic nanocylinder
dispersions has only recently been made possible by improved, larger scale,
synthesis techniques and increased understanding of dispersion thermodynamics.
This research will determine 1) how effective rheology is at elucidating phase
behavior, 2) the sensitivity of rheological characteristics to temperature above
the percolation threshold, and 3) the effect of shear on microstructure. The
primary model system investigated will be single-walled carbon nanotubes in
aqueous DNA. This system was chosen because of the growing interest in using DNA
to both disperse nanotubes and to produce multifunctional materials. In
addition, inorganic nanocylinders in small molecule solvents will be
investigated; inorganic nanocylinders have significant potential for use in
electronic devices, solar panels, and sensors. The motivation for this research
is threefold. First, understanding nanocylinder dispersion rheology and phase
behavior is the next step in the ongoing evolution of liquid crystalline
science. Based on well-established theories for the phase behavior of rods in
solution, nanocylinder dispersions should form lyotropic liquid crystalline
phases. However, nanocylinders with long lengths, high aspect ratios,
significant rigidities, and attractive interactions make them significantly
different than 'rod-like' polymers and other previously investigated systems.
Second, protocols are needed for establishing the liquid crystallinity of
nanocylinder dispersions. While the rheological signatures of lyotropic liquid
crystalline polymer solutions are well known, it is not clear if nanocylinder
dispersions will exhibit these same characteristics. Third, there is growing
interest in the bottom-up assembly of nanorods into large-area aligned
structures. Just as understanding the rheology and phase behavior of liquid
crystalline polymers enabled advanced materials such as bullet proof vests,
understanding the rheology and phase behavior of nanorod dispersions is likely
to facilitate the development of processes for producing highly aligned
macroscale structures from nanoscale building blocks. This research will also
benefit the development of future scientists and engineers. The undergraduate
and graduate student researchers participating in this research will gain
experience that is applicable not only to nanotechnology, but also to the
numerous fields that employ well-trained rheologists. Research findings will be
incorporated into the PI's 'Macroscale Assembly of Nanomaterials' course which
is available by streaming video. In addition, the PI will develop an outreach
module for middle school students who attend Auburn's science and engineering
camps and continue her efforts to facilitate diversity.