* 0854560
* Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Active Sites for Selective Heterogeneous Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Alexander Katz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2013
* USD 245,641.00

0854560 Katz

Emerging applications of heterogeneous catalysis require the development of new
materials that i) afford high catalyst selectivity and activity at the
relatively low temperatures required to avoid background degradation reactions
of critical chemical intermediates, and ii) function without
leaching/degradation in aqueous and harsh organic solvent environments. This
work addresses the pressing needs in (i) and (ii) above via the design and
synthesis of heterogeneous catalysts consisting of multifunctional organic
active sites. The organic component of these active sites inherently lends them
to being hydrolytically stable while simultaneously providing tailorability of
molecular structure for control of function.

The intellectual merit of this research is to implement emerging concepts in the
synthesis of organic acid and base active sites as relevant precursors for
highly selective, active, and robust heterogeneous catalysts, which consist of a
hybrid organic-inorganic material. The work specifically exploits the
confinement of catalytic sites on the surface of silica and control reactivity
of the resulting confined functional groups using calixarenes as an
organizational scaffold and confinement entity.

Upon calixarene grafting, lateral metathesis polymerization of anchored
calixarenes on the inorganic-oxide surface synthesizes a robust two-dimensional
crosslinked polymer consisting of immobilized catalytically active sites. This
polymer is insoluble and is therefore expected to be leach-proof even under
severe solvent environments, such as those involving high temperatures and
aqueous solvent systems. Preliminary experiments aimed at demonstrating proof of
concept are geared towards demonstrating robust and highly selective aldol
condensation activity, a reaction that is key to fine chemicals and biorefining,
in a variety of solvent environments using a recoverable catalyst, as well as
the synthesis of enantioselective acid-base bifunctional catalysts based on this
concept.

These goals require the development of confined calixarene active sites
containing acidic functionality, as well as sites containing base, which are
attainable using procedures recently developed by our research group. Acid
active sites will be investigated for reactions relevant to biorefining such as
transesterification and ester hydrolysis. We further develop approaches to
pattern the surface of an inorganic oxide, using silica as a model inorganic-
oxide, with two disparate chemical functional groups, because methods of site
isolation discovered during this process are likely to be generally applicable
to other catalytic systems of relevance to other transformations, such as those
involving supported metal and inorganic-oxide nanoparticles.

The research activities broadly impact the training of future scientists in
catalyst design and synthesis, with specific emphasis on structural
characterization and functional assessment of hybrid organic-inorganic catalysts
with designed nanoscale structure and connectivity. The training of graduate and
undergraduate students will have special emphasis placed on the recruitment of
female and minority students. Outreach activities include a K-12 component, with
a focus on encouraging Pacific Islander minorities to pursue study of the
chemical sciences and engineering, through inspirational research presentations
to high-school students on the topic of future directions and challenges in and
research while simultaneously providing a demonstration of how scientific
discoveries can be used for creating new technology and understanding.