* 0854425
* A Synthetic Approach to Active Site Deconvolution in Supported Cr Catalysts for Olefin Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Susannah Scott, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2013
* USD 541,311.00

0854425 Scott, Susannah L. The goal of the project is to develop a unified
framework for understanding and controlling the ability of supported metal oxide
catalysts used in olefin transformations, specifically olefin metathesis and
polymerization, to self-activate in the presence of the substrate. The activity
profiles and product distributions for well-defined model catalysts will be
correlated with sites of well-defined geometrical and electronic structure.
Ultimately, knowledge of active site structures will facilitate the re-
engineering of these catalysts by allowing the selection of combinations of
sites to generate a desired product distribution, for example, polymer molecular
weight and branch content. Furthermore, elucidation of catalyst activation
mechanisms will indicate strategies to make the activation more efficient.

Intellectual Merit The goal of this project is to solve a longstanding and
complex problem in a very successful class of industrial catalysts. Phillips
catalysts for olefin polymerization (CrOx/SiO2) were discovered half a century
ago, and their remarkable ability to self-activate in the presence of olefin has
been the subject of much speculation ever since. Until the nature of the active
sites is known, it is unlikely that we will be able to determine how they are
formed or why this catalyst is so effective at reviving deactivated sites.
Related catalysts containing supported group 6 metal oxides of Mo and W are also
self-activating, but they promote olefin metathesis rather than polymerization.
The proposed approach to determining how self-activation occurs combines
synthesis of individual, well-defined active site candidates with analysis of
the multiple active sites present on the heterogeneous catalysts. Experimental
approaches will be integrated with computational modeling of reaction mechanisms
to identify key transition states. The PIs propose to probe initiation
mechanisms and match activity profiles and product distributions of the
component active sites in the heterogeneous systems with those of structurally
well-defined sites.

The synthetic approach to active site investigation is complementary to the
combinatorial approach to catalyst discovery. Once interesting catalyst
formulations are identified and optimized by screening (parallel or otherwise),
further improvements depend on the ability to manipulate active site structure.
Identifying the structural features that control reactivity by synthesizing
model compounds has long been a successful strategy in homogeneous catalysis.
The extension of this strategy in heterogeneous catalysis can be accomplished by
combining expertise in organometallic synthesis, surface science,
kinetics/mechanistic analysis of complex systems and catalyst modeling and
evaluation.

Broader Impacts Heterogeneous polyolefin catalysts are multifunctional materials
with the ability to oligomerize, polymerize, copolymerize, terminate and
reactivate, creating polymer resins with desirable combinations of physical
properties. In parallel, recent advances in the synthesis of single-site
catalysts have led to polymers with very low polydispersities, as well as
elegant mechanistic studies of polymerization mechanisms. The complexity of the
heterogeneous catalysts is enabling in both its flexibility and its diversity,
and therefore deserving of the same systematic investigation in order to fully
realize its benefits.

Execution of this project requires strong skills in both chemical engineering
and chemistry. Graduate students will develop a deep understanding of both
fields as members of an interdisciplinary research team. They will learn to
appreciate and implement the strengths of each discipline's approach to problem-
solving. Students will also experience the close connection between
computational and experimental modeling of active sites. Technical success in
this work provides a powerful justification for interdisciplinary training of
catalysis researchers.