* 0854678
* Search for  Deviations from Newtonian Gravity at Micron Scale (a continuation proposal)
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Aharon Kapitulnik, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2013
* USD 764,096.00

This award supports an experimental program to probe deviations from Newtonian
gravity at distances on the order of 25 micrometers as predicted by theories of
physics beyond the Standard Model of fundamental particle interactions. A
cryogenic helium gas bearing is used to rotate a disc containing a drive mass
pattern of alternating density under a small test mass mounted on a
micromachined cantilever. Any mass-dependent force between the two will produce
a time-varying force on the test mass, and consequently a time-varying
displacement of the cantilever. This displacement is read out with a laser
interferometer, and the position of the drive mass is simultaneously recorded
using an optical encoder. Comparison of the measured force to predictions from
finite element analysis yields bounds on new gravity-like forces which could
signal new physics. The experiment uses several novel techniques to overcome
some of the challenges associated with the necessary precision measurements that
could prove to be useful in similar experiments or other areas. These include
radiation pressure to cool a micromachined cantilever, the combination of
encapsulated Micro-Electrical-Mechanical-System (MEMS) sensors with an
integrated cryopump, the use of a macroscopic gas bearing as a general-purpose
low-temperature motor, the methods of simple and precise fabrication of
intermediate-scale metallic structures, and some of the techniques of
dimensionally stable planarization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the Standard
Model successfully unifies the electromagnetic, the strong and the weak
interactions, it ignores gravity. This poses a great mystery in fundamental
physics: why is even this most feeble subatomic force, i.e. the weak force, so
much stronger than gravity? Modern theories that attempt to answer this question
predict modifications to Newton's law at much longer length scales, up to 1
millimeter. The technology used in this experiment is at the cutting edge of
micro-fabricated devices.