* 0854769
* Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* John Perdew, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2013
* USD 460,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education
motivated in part by the desire to improve the accuracy of density functional
theory as practiced in condensed matter physics and quantum chemistry. The PI
describes a "ladder" of approximations for the exchange-correlation functional
in which the first rung is the local spin density approximation and the second
rung is the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). These standard
approximations do not enable electronic structure calculations with chemical
accuracy. In particular, they do not accurately describe strongly correlated or
strongly spatially inhomogeneous densities, polarizabilities of long-chain
molecules, or highly excited states. The PI proposes to address these problems
through work on several projects, including improvements to (third rung) meta-
GGA methods, refinement of (fourth rung) hyper-GGA methods, and generalization
of the (fifth rung) Singwi-Tosi-Land-Sjoelander function to the spin-polarized
case. This research involves the education of graduate and undergraduate
students and the professional development of postdoctoral fellows.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education with
a long-range goal of improving the chemical accuracy of how density functional
theory calculates the electronic properties of materials. The density functional
theory of Kohn and Sham is the most widely-used method of electronic structure
calculation in both condensed matter physics and quantum chemistry. To calculate
the nuclear framework, ground state energy, and electron spin densities of an
atom, molecule, bio-molecule, solid, surface, or nanostructure, it is only
necessary to solve self-consistent quantum mechanical one-electron equations.
The results would be exact if the exchange-correlation energy as a functional of
the electron density were known exactly. Because no exact exchange-correlation
energy functional is known, many different approximate functionals have been
developed, and the PI has been an internationally recognized leader in this
effort. The different approximate functionals are typically grouped into several
major categories depending on the complexity of the functional express. These
categories have been denoted by the PI as a ladder of approximations to the
exchange-correlation energy, on which higher rungs are more complex and more
accurate, with the development of higher rungs potentially leading to the more
reliable computer design of new materials, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, devices,
and processes. The current award supports the development of advanced
functionals up through the fifth rung, including chemical effects not present in
widely available functionals. This research involves the education of graduate
and undergraduate students and the professional development of postdoctoral
fellows.

