* 0854046
* Thin-film flows over topographically patterned surfaces: Free-surface characteristics, atomization, and cleaning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2009
* Howard Stone, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 10/31/2009
* USD 238,680.00

0854046 &lt;br/&gt;Stone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid flows over rough surfaces constitute an important
and challenging class of problems in fluid dynamics with both industrial
applications and natural examples. Many materials and products have a surface
texture by design or one that evolves due to natural erosion. The geometric
features of the surface texture may be random, with only limited correlations
between surface features or made through a machining process with a pattern or
structure for decorative reasons, for frictional control, or to improve the
adhesive/frictional properties of the surface. The velocity field near a
textured surface depends on the texture amplitude and wavelength of the pattern
and the thickness of the fluid film. This texture-scale velocity distribution is
critical to many processes, such as coating with thin films, surface cooling,
cleaning, and drying. The PI will perform systematic experiments and develop
theoretical models to explore liquid thin-film flows where the film thickness is
comparable to the largest characteristic dimension of the depth of the surface
texture. Here three-dimensional effects are significant, and also we focus on
phenomena where some aspects of the flow include inertial effects. Flows driven
by jet impact on the surface, such as is important in many coating and cleaning
processes, will be emphasized. Such flows are important to understand and
describe for applications such as atomization in fuel combustion. The study will
thoroughly examine new experimental observations, such as the polygonal jump
occurring in flow over a rough surface, in contrast to the familiar circular
hydraulic jump obtained on a smooth substrate. As another example, polygonal
free sheets are precursors to atomization. The PI anticipates uncovering general
principles for manipulating thin-film flows using topographic features of a
patterned substrate. A systematic experimental study of the physicochemical
properties of the fluids and flow parameters, as well as the geometric features
of the micro-textured substrates on coating flows, and related sheet flows will
be will coupled with modeling and simulations appropriate to the free-surface
motions. The PI will continue to involve undergraduates in research, including
working with students from underrepresented groups who have participated
regularly in the PI's research group the past six years. Several of the research
themes will provide demonstration material for the PI's outreach efforts
involving public lectures such as the yearly holiday lecture created by the PI
for children and their parents (now starting its 8th year), and science
demonstrations for local public school students and teachers.