* 0854226
* Engineering Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Materials for the Conversion of Solar Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Cherie Kagan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 299,600.00

CBET-0854226&lt;br/&gt;Kagan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid organic-inorganic
photovoltaics (PVs) promise one of the best architectures for the low-cost
fabrication of high efficiency solar cells to make future solar technology cost-
competitive with that of traditional energy resources. Hybrid materials combine
the low-cost, large-area processing notable of organic materials and the
tunable, optical and electronic properties found in nanoscale inorganic
materials. The central scientific challenge to hybrid PVs, is to understand not
just the constituents properties, but to explore the fundamental interplay of
organic and inorganic components that dictates charge generation, separation,
and collection efficiencies that impact the conversion of solar radiation into
electricity. The objective of this proposal is to chemically and electronically
manipulate the organic and inorganic components and their interface and
architecture to develop the fundamental understanding necessary to tailor the
flow of energy and charge in hybrid semiconductors and fabricate high-
performance, low-cost solar PVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
focuses on the synthesis of new solution processable precursors to red-
absorbing, photostable, high-mobility, organic semiconductors that are designed
to mix with semiconductor nanocrystals, nanorods, and nanowires to form organic-
inorganic hybrids by low-cost methods. Optical spectroscopy, electrical
measurements, and electrochemistry will be used to probe the fundamental
electronic and optical properties of the organic and inorganic components and
the interfacial electronics important in solar energy conversion. These
optoelectronic properties will be correlated with detailed structural studies
and with the characteristics and efficiency of fabricated organic-inorganic
solar cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the proposed research program
will develop models for organic-inorganic composites key to harnessing the
unique, tunable physical and chemical properties of organic and nanostructured
materials and their combinations that are applicable to a range of optical,
electronic, and optoelectronic devices. In addition to supporting an
interdisciplinary graduate PhD education, the project will be used to develop an
undergraduate laboratory module on organic-inorganic hybrid photovoltaics.
Undergraduate senior design students will take advantage of the research program
in solution-processable hybrid materials to learn about new materials and
processing in the context of energy applications by developing ink-jet printed
solar cells. Solar cells fabricated by PhD, Masters, and undergraduate students
in the lab will be assembled into demonstrations. The demonstrations will be
taken to local K-12 and to provide as kits to teachers in Penn RET programs to
disperse to their classrooms more widely, and to educate the community about
science and engineering and more broadly about energy issues and technological
solutions for sustainable energy resources.