* 0854343
* Using Pulsed-Field Gradient Spin-Echo NMR to Determine Permeation Mechanisms in Human Stratum Corneum
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Annette Bunge, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 06/30/2013
* USD 320,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0854343 Bunge

The goal of this research is to study how lipophilic chemicals penetrate through
the outermost layer of human skin, which is called the stratum corneum. The
stratum corneum is a thin (20 to 40 um thick), composite membrane containing
layers of flattened, dead skin cells called corneocytes surrounded by lipid
(oily) molecules that are also organized into layers. The stratum corneum
controls the rate at which many chemicals enter the body through the skin.
Chemicals can penetrate the stratum corneum by two different paths: (1) through
only the lipid layers, or (2) through the corneocytes and lipid layers in
series. The prevailing opinion in the skin literature is that chemical
penetration is restricted to the lipid layers alone, although no direct proof
for this presently exists. Moreover, most arguments offered to support the claim
that transport is through the lipid layers exclusively are equally applicable to
the case of permeable corneocytes. The results of this research will provide
direct evidence to answer the question: Can chemicals penetrate the stratum
corneum through the corneocytes?

The model chemical chosen for study, 2-(trifluoromethyl) benzonitrile, was
selected to simulate chemicals that can penetrate the skin to produce either
therapeutic or toxic effects in humans. The diffusion of this molecule in the
stratum corneum will be studied using a method called pulsed-field gradient
spin-echo nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). This method measures translational
molecular motion (i.e., diffusion) over short periods of time (i.e., millisecond
to seconds). It also provides information about restrictive boundaries over
short distances (i.e., 0.1-100 um), which will be used to distinguish diffusion
through corneocytes and the lipid layers. Although this method has been used
widely to study colloids and solid-state engineered materials, its use in the
study of biological membranes has been limited.

The new data generated in this project will improve our understanding of
chemical permeation mechanisms in the stratum corneum, including how it changes
with variations in water content. If diffusion within the corneocytes is shown
to be a significant route for the absorption of lipophilic chemicals in human
skin, the paradigm of skin science will shift, which will change existing
strategies for transdermal drug delivery, treatment of skin diseases, and
methods for predicting absorption of toxic chemicals through skin. The
scientific challenges of using pulsed-field gradient spin-echo nuclear magnetic
resonance to study diffusion in a composite medium like the stratum corneum
arise in many other materials, both biological and non-biological, and the
techniques used here will be applicable to these systems as well.

The proposed studies of diffusion in the stratum corneum will be used to train
graduate and undergraduate student researchers in the fundamentals of chemical
transport in heterogeneous membranes and in applications of the pulsed-field
gradient spin-echo nuclear magnetic resonance technique to materials from either
biological or engineered systems that contain multiple phases. Women and other
underrepresented minorities will be actively recruited into the project, which
is designed to develop strong communication and organizational/management skills
through experiences that are uniquely available in a research environment. In
collaboration with an existing and successful outreach program at the Colorado
School of Mines, the research team will develop educational modules on the topic
of barrier membranes for elementary, middle and high school students and
teachers.

