* 0854223
* Fundamentals and Implementation of Oxide Anodes for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Scott Barnett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0854223&lt;br/&gt;Barnett&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal
is to explore new anode materials that will allow solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs)
to work directly with a range of practical fuels, including hydrocarbons,
gasified biomass, or coal. SOFCs are of particular current interest because of
their ability to produce electricity efficiently and with minimal pollution, but
commercialization has been inhibited by the relatively high initial cost of the
fuel cell power plants. SOFCs with the new anodes will enable considerable
simplification of the power plants, especially reduction in the hardware used to
convert the fuel to hydrogen and to remove fuel impurities. The resulting cost
reductions should help speed the widespread introduction of fuel cell power
plants. The project will include fundamental studies to determine and understand
the properties of the new anode materials, as well as fabrication and electrical
testing of SOFCs with the new anodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The specific anticipated broader impacts are as follows: (1) A
graduate research student will be recruited and trained, increasing the pool of
experts in the areas of fuel cells, electrochemical devices, and
energy/environment; (2) Undergraduate students will be actively recruited and
engaged in research; (3) A high school teacher will be recruited under the
research experience for teachers (RET) program, not only to participate in
research but to bring demonstrations and experiments into the classroom; (4)
Timely research developments on electrochemical energy systems will be
incorporated into the Materials Science and Engineering curriculum; (5)
Energy/environmental ideas and issues will be broadly disseminated to the public
by participating in Chicago Museum of Science &amp; Industry initiatives on
interactive museum displays related to energy and the environment; and (6) The
introduction of cost effective fuel-flexible SOFCs would improve fuel-to-
electricity efficiency, reduce pollution, and help enable CO2 sequestration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was supported by the Energy for
Sustainability Program of the CBET Division of the Engineering Directorate and
the Ceramics Program of the Division of Materials Research (DMR) of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.