* 0854646
* CAREER: Biochemical and Structural Characterization of Intramembrane Proteases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Iban Ubarretxena-Belandia, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 03/31/2011
* USD 868,684.00

From bacteria to humans, essential molecular signals control multiple aspects of
cellular behavior. Recently, a universal signaling paradigm, termed regulated
intramembrane proteolysis, (RIP) has been discovered. In RIP, membrane proteins
are cleaved in their intramembrane regions resulting in water-soluble signals.
These signals relocate within the cell or to the extracellular media and act as
modulators of cell metabolism and development. The intramembrane cutting enzymes
constitute a novel class of integral membrane proteins. The goal of this
research is to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying RIP by focusing on a
ubiquitous intramembrane protease family called Rhomboids. The work will be
divided in three fronts: (I) biochemical study of the factors that regulate
Rhomboid intramembrane protease activity; (II) identification of the features
that distinguish good substrates from bad ones and determine the precise
location of the cleavage site; and (III) elucidation of the three-dimensional
structure of Rhomboid to allow interpretation of functional data in structural
terms. To achieve these goals, biochemical and biophysical approaches will be
used in combination with structural techniques such as high-resolution electron-
cryo microscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance and X-ray crystallography.

Broader impact: The City College of New York has a substantial proportion of
underrepresented minority and new immigrant students. The outlined
multidisciplinary research will draw and train graduate and undergraduate
students from the general areas of biology, chemistry and physics with a drive
to understand biological processes in detail. These students will gain
experience in membrane protein research and be trained in the principles and
applications of modern structural biology in general, and of electron cryo-
microscopy in particular. A graduate course in electron cryo-microscopy of
macromolecular assemblies will be developed and offered every year, under the
leadership of the New York Structural Biology Center, and open to the New York
City graduate student community.