* 0854554
* Measuring the thermal conductivity of graphene
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Chun Ning Lau, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2012
* USD 314,730.00

0854554&lt;br/&gt;Dames&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to perform the
first comprehensive experimental study of the thermal conductivity of graphene,
the atomically-thin sheets of carbon that make up graphite.
&lt;br/&gt;Excitement regarding thermal aspects of graphene are two-fold. From
the fundamental perspective, graphene has a unique electron dispersion relation
which enables study of "massless", pseudo-relativistic, quantum particles. From
an applications perspective, graphene's superb electrical and thermal
properties, and prospects for wafer-scale processing, make it a strong candidate
to transform the era of post-silicon microelectronics. Graphene is expected to
have very high thermal conductivity, approximately 4000- 5000 W/mK, but only
very recently were the first data published to support such expectations, in a
study using Raman spectroscopy. The objective of the present research is to
experimentally quantify the following essential phenomena, none of which have
been measured previously in graphene: the effects of temperature, sample size
and thickness, surface conditions, electron vs. phonon contributions, ballistic
vs. diffusive transport, and thermal contact resistance. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Three complementary experimental approaches will be taken: (1) a novel
heat spreader method measures the heat transfer along a graphene sheet encased
between dielectric layers, thereby mimicking microelectronics applications and
also yielding the thermal contact resistance, (2) a self-heating method using
suspended graphene is simple to fabricate and interpret, but is restricted to
diffusive transport, and (3) a microfabricated sensors method is also based on
suspended graphene, and works for both ballistic and diffusive transport.
&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on the PIs' existing collaboration and
preliminary results, and their respective strengths in thermal measurements of
nanostructures (Dames) and graphene deposition and electrical measurements
(Lau). By conducting experiments over a large parameter space, the results are
expected to constitute the first comprehensive experimental study of graphene's
thermal conductivity, thus resolving the many conflicting theoretical
predictions which may disagree by up to an order of magnitude. To build
confidence in the measurements, the methods can be cross-checked against one
another, and this will also provide valuable comparison for the initial Raman
measurements in the literature. The experiments will detail the relevant thermal
properties, including thermal contact resistance, that are essential to evaluate
graphene's performance in possible microelectronics applications. Thus, this new
knowledge has the potential to transform the fundamental understanding of heat
transfer in atomically-thin films, the ways in which these films are measured,
and their applications in industry. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Considering the
tremendous importance of heat dissipation in modern microelectronics, a
comprehensive study of graphene's thermal properties will be critical for its
application in post-Si device technology, resulting in a broad positive impact
to society. Additionally, an integrated education plan will exploit UC
Riverside's position as the most diverse UC campus and a national leader in
graduating underrepresented minorities. This interdisciplinary research brings
together undergraduate and graduate students from Physics and Mechanical
Engineering. The research results will be disseminated broadly, in journals, at
conferences, and in courses. More uniquely, the results will be incorporated
into UC Riverside's Summer Physics Academy, a workshop program for high school
science teachers: Each teacher with be provided with a simple kit for their
classroom, to build creative, human-scale analogues of the nanoworld. Each kit
will include documentation and a million-scale representation of various
nanomaterials including DNA, carbon nanotubes, and graphene, as well as scaled
material samples to convey the tremendous heat-carrying capacity of graphene as
compared to conventional materials like aluminum.