* 0854934
* Integrable Systems, Operator Determinants, and Probabilistic Models
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Harold Widom, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2015
* USD 300,286.00

The main activity of the project is the analysis of limit laws for certain
stochastic growth models/interacting particle systems and magnetic spin chains:
the asymmetric simple exclusion process (ASEP) and the quantum-mechanical
Heisenberg-Ising spin chain. The objective is to use the techniques of
integrable systems, combinatorics, operator theory, and asymptotic analysis to
understand, and to derive new results for, these probabilkistic models. One of
the basic problems of ASEP is the study of height (or current) fluctuations, in
particular to classify various limiting distributions that arise. It is
conjectured (KPZ universality) that the fluctuations are universal for a large
class of growth models. The PI and Craig A. Tracy established KPZ universality
for ASEP with step initial condition, a result that required some new
combinatorial identities. The project proposes the study of other initial
conditions, in particular Bernoulli initial condition, which would require a
better understanding of the combinatorial identities. For the Heisenberg-Ising
model the focus will be on the dynamics of domain wall growth. The method will
entail a novel use of the Bethe Ansatz that avoids the awkward spectral theory
of the Heisenberg-Ising Hamiltonian.

The project would have broad impact in other areas of mathematics and
science.The ideas and techniques coming from random matrix theory and integrable
systems have had an impact on such diverse subjects as probability, statistics,
biostatistics, number theory , condensed matter physics, and engineering. In
particular, the ASEP model has applications in nonequilibrium statistical
physics and biological systems. In fact, the T(otally)ASEP was introduced in the
late 1960s as a model of ribosome motion along mRNA. The understanding of the
limit laws that arise, in particular the underlying reason for their ubiquitous
occurrence, will have great value in these areas. These universal distributions
were first discovered and computed in the mathematical literature and have since
found many applications. It is fully expected that elucidation of these laws in
ASEP will further impact the applied areas -- not only to create new techniques
to solve long-standing problems in the above-mentioned fields but also to
proviude new and unexpected applications.