* 0854237
* We Still Live Here - âs nutayuneân
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Anne Makepeace, Anne Makepeace Productions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Keren Rice
* 04/30/2011
* USD 25,000.00

With support from the NSF/NEH Documenting Endangered Languages Program, this
project focuses on the development of a documentary film that chronicles the
return of the Wampanoag language, indigenous to Cape Cod and Martha's Vineyard.
This Algonquian language has remained unspoken for more than a century. Since
2000, when Jessie Little Doe received her Master's degree in Linguistics from
MIT, the Wampanoag communities of Mashpee and Aquinnah have been bringing their
language back from the dead. This is the first time an American Indian language
with no native speakers has been revived in this country.

Accomplished film maker and PI, Anne Makespeace, is working in conjunction with
the Jessie Little Doe and the Wampanoag community to bring this story of
reviving language through documentary records to the public. The film, Âs
Nutayuneân, which is expected to reach millions of viewers during its PBS
broadcast, will enlighten the public about the importance of preserving
indigenous languages, and at the same time serving as a model for native
communities seeking to re-discover, document, preserve, and revive their own
languages. The project will broaden the participation of many Native American
communities that are seriously underrepresented, inspiring many to begin or
continue learning and documenting their languages, and to partner with scholars
who can help them reach their goals.