* 0854719
* SGER: Proof of concept on using spliced leader to study dinoflagellate gene expression in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Senjie Lin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 10/31/2010
* USD 138,000.00

Intellectual merit: Dinoflagellates are second only to diatoms in abundance and
the potential of carbon fixation in the ocean, are essential for growth of reef-
building corals, and are the most important contributors to harmful algal
blooms. Despite extensive laboratory and field experiments, knowledge of
dinoflagellate growth and interaction with the environment and other organisms
in natural marine ecosystems is still very limited because research results from
manipulated experiments (laboratory and field) often do not explain
dinoflagellate dynamics in nature. The ability to measure in situ gene
expression for a natural dinoflagellate assemblage amidst other co-existing
organisms would increase understanding of dinoflagellate-associated
oceanographic processes without experimental manipulation. Recently, the
investigator has identified a dinoflagellate-specific trans-spliced leader
sequence (DinoSL). These findings strongly suggest that DinoSL can be used to
isolate dinoflagellate mRNA from a mixed RNA sample contributed by many
organisms, which would facilitate studies of dinoflagellate-associated
oceanographic and ecological processes. However, the concept has not been proven
with systematic evaluation, and there is skepticism about whether this technique
will be 1) specific for dinoflagellates and 2) universal for all mRNAs from the
dinoflagellate nuclear genome. Proof of the suitability of the DinoSL-based
technique will provide a new tool for dinoflagellate oceanographic research,
alleviating technical obstacles for dinoflagellate studies to examine the
potential of carbon fixation, grazing, stress, response to climate change,
competition with other phytoplankton, growth, and contribution to coral growth
in the natural environment. In this project, the investigator will construct and
sequence cDNA libraries using DinoSL as the selective primer for dinoflagellate
cultures, pure and mixed with other phytoplankton, and verify that only and all
dinoflagellate genes will be isolated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: If
successful, this project will bring about an innovative tool for dinoflagellate
research with far-reaching implications for future oceanographic studies.
Furthermore, the investigator plans to use Symbiodinium microadriaticum, an
endosymbiont essential for reef growth, as a model organism. If the proposed
concept is proved, the DinoSL-based technique will be immediately applicable to
research on this and other dinoflagellate species. Furthermore, this project
will generate a substantial data set for the S. microadriaticum that will be
useful for future research.. Furthermore, the proved concept may become an
addition to the aquarium exhibit the investigators are working on with Mystic
Aquarium. This exhibit will include an introduction to harmful algal blooms, how
dinoflagellates contribute to them, how dinoflagellate toxins impact the
ecosystem and public health, and how dinoflagellate genomes regulate these
activities. In addition, information obtained in this study may be added to the
Encyclopedia of Life (EoL) online pages on dinoflagellates.