* 0854322
* Exploring the Relationships between Gene Regulation and Microbial Ecology for the Sustainable Production of Microalgae-base Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Jordan Peccia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 04/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0854322&lt;br/&gt;Jordan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread adoption of
alternative liquid biofuels has the potential to mitigate CO2-caused climate
change, boost local and national economies, and increase national security.
Using microalgae-derived lipids as biofuel feed-stocks has documented advantages
in production rate, land use, and CO2 sequestration over the more developed
liquid biofuel alternatives, including ethanol and plant oils. The efficient
application of this technology requires the incorporation of core bioprocess
engineering concepts, including gene regulation and microbial ecology, into
microalgae-based biofuel reactor design. The goal of this proposed research is
to link gene regulation with microalgae function to design and produce robust
mixed consortia microalgae reactors that maximize volumetric lipid content.
Specific objectives include the following: (i) sequence genes involved in
microalgae lipid production and build gene expression microarrays, (ii)
determine the effects of CO2 concentration, pH, and other environmental
conditions on the gene regulation and ability of microalgae to synthesize
lipids, (iii) investigate process conditions that select for lipid producing
microalgae stains in reactors using unsterile feed solutions, and (iv) integrate
the experimental work with an evaluation of the environmental and economic
impacts of producing biofuels from microalgae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The potential sustainability of microalgae fuel production, coupled with
the limited knowledge of how to design and operate efficient, robust CO2 uptake
and lipid synthesis systems, provide a strong rationale for investigating
microalgae genetics and microbial ecology. The major outcome of this research is
fundamental and applied information that directs the design, stable operation,
and sustainability of microalgae-based biofuel reactors. Beyond these tangible
outcomes, the proposed work is designed to make fundamental contributions toward
this developing industry. These include producing gene sequence information and
bioinformatics tools to enable further gene expression or genetic engineering
research, providing a basis to understand how algal populations evolve under
realistic microalgae biofuel reactor conditions, and ensuring the sustainability
of the process by incorporating economic issues into microalgae biofuel
technology development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project
promotes teaching and training through involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students in research. Students from a broad cross section of disciplines will
become involved in a multi-year project to design, operate, and test a variety
of research hypotheses on two continuously operated, unsterile microalgae
reactors. In addition to providing long term information to inform the research
section of this proposed work, the project will span six different courses and
is expected to produce a campus-wide opportunity for student involvement in
alternative biofuel development, regardless of the student's course of study.