* 0854979
* Label-Free Protein Arrays Based on Linear Dendron Macromolecular Layers and In-Situ Real Time EC-SPR-AFM Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Rigoberto Advincula, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854979&lt;br/&gt;Advincula&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteo
mics has contributed to advances in understanding fundamental biological
phenomena and the detection and curing of diseases. Protein microarrays enable
large amounts of data and quantitative studies for proteomics. However, these
are not optimized for investigating fundamental and complex properties of
proteins in real time. This is especially relevant with the increasing use of
microarrays for enzyme characterization, anti-body specificity, understanding
gene function, and drug development. In a transformative approach, this proposal
will focus on a new series of molecules based on electropolymerizable
polyethyelene glycol linear dendron layers for protein capture arranged as a
layer by self-assembly Langmuir-Blodgett techniques and patterned on a surface.
By putting together three analytical techniques: electrochemistry, surface
plasmon resonance, and atomic force microscopy in a single instrumental set-up,
it is possible to have live and real-time analysis methods for programmed
proteomic studies, giving greater understanding to the physical, chemical, and
electrical potential properties of biochemical recognition events in proteins.
Together with the combined multi-instrument mode studies and dip pen nanoscale
lithography, this will enable unprecedented control for proteomics array studies
from micron- to nano-scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The most
widely used methods for multiple protein biomarkers include mass spectrometry,
western blotting, gel electrophoresis, lipid bilayers, and immunological assays.
However, none of these techniques are well-suited for the analysis of a large
number of samples or the simultaneous detection of many targets within an
individual sample. This has been largely addressed by the use of microarrays
which enable high amounts of proteomic data screening in areas such as disease
diagnosis and drug discovery. Although protein microarrays have been used to
detect a variety of clinically interesting proteins, a number of challenges
remain in terms of protein properties, verification by simultaneous analytical
techniques, and the absence of variable control in protein conformation-function
studies. Fluorescence imaging, and label-free surface plasmon resonance imaging
and atomic force microscopy methods have been used for these studies. On the
other hand, electrostatic potential control and electrochemical methods for
probing protein structure and activity have not been combined with these
methods. By using a single platform instrumental set-up, it will be possible to
take advantage of the high data arraying with highly quantitative surface
analytical techniques. By employing the self-assembled electroactive
polyethyelene glycol linear dendrons, it will be possible to limit adsorption,
control tethering sites, direct the orientation, and clustering of probe sites
or proteins without inhibiting stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact.
The study and screening of common proteins, enzymes, hormones, food proteins,
and other peptides with pharmacological significance are relevant to fundamental
science and medicine. While commercial arrays and bioassays have been reported,
the challenges for state-of-the-art proteomics methods remain. If successful,
this project will allow significant advances for improved research in array
platforms and eventual commercialization of devices. This will improve the
ability to detect and cure diseases at a faster rate. A more important broad
impact is in the simultaneous training of students and researchers with
expertise in materials synthesis, surface analysis, instrument development, and
bioengineering. Each project aspect brings a unique perspective to research
problems and enhances critical thinking and skills development. To this effect,
two graduate students and an undergraduate student will be directly trained and
mentored by the principal investigator in the combined materials and
bioengineering program. Results will be made know through publications,
seminars, presentations to conferences, and collaborations. Collaborations will
be made with researchers at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, University of Houston and several companies to take advantage of
device developments and applications in proteomics. Lastly, the investigator has
shown commitment for the last 15 years on outreach towards under-represented
minority and women students including high school mentoring, a priority that
will be pursued in this project.&lt;br/&gt;