* 0854752
* Superconductor-Insulator Transitions in Disordered Ultrathin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue experiments
that probe superconductor?insulator (SI) transitions in simple two-dimensional
metallic systems. These transitions are believed to be continuous quantum phase
transitions (QPTs). The QPT is an important paradigm in contemporary condensed
matter physics. A QPT, in contrast with a thermally driven phase transition,
occurs at zero temperature with the ground state being changed in response to
the variation of an external parameter. The fluctuations associated with QPTs
are quantum mechanical rather than classical. Measurements at nonzero
temperature in the critical regime can reveal these quantum fluctuations and can
be used to characterize them. Other systems exhibiting QPTs include two-
dimensional electron gases, compounds with strongly correlated electrons, and
certain cold atom systems. The experiments that will be pursued will answer open
questions regarding the nature of physical models governing SI transitions tuned
with external parameters such as disorder, dissipation, charge density, and
magnetic field, the nature of the insulating state, the influence of material
properties, and the nature of the critical region, where new physics often
emerges. The investigations will include measurements of transport and magneto-
transport, electrical noise, the Nernst effect, and the electronic
compressibility at the transition. The work requires advanced tools of
experimental science including nanofabrication and ultra-low temperature
physics. This project will support the education of PhD students and
undergraduates in a manner that is excellent training for scientific careers
from academia to high technology industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum mechanics is the theory describing the
sub-microscopic world. Of contemporary interest is the nature of its role in the
macroscopic world. Thermodynamic phase transitions are transitions between
disordered and ordered phases. Their microscopic mechanisms are always quantum
mechanical. In such transitions the macroscopic behavior, in particular the
spatial and temporal fluctuations of the degree of order found near the
transition, is classical. Quantum phase transitions are transitions between
disordered and ordered phases, occurring at absolute zero. Instead of
temperature, they are controlled by changes in external parameters such as
magnetic field, pressure or charge density. In contrast with thermodynamic
transitions, their fluctuations are quantum mechanical, and they persist at
nonzero temperatures thus allowing their study. This project is focused on the
investigation of the simplest quantum phase transitions, superconductor-
insulator transitions in two-dimensions. The experiments that will be pursued
will answer open questions regarding the macroscopic quantum fluctuations
associated with these transitions and explore new physics that emerges near the
transitions. The work has implications for other areas of research as quantum
phase transitions occur in two-dimensional electron gases, compounds with
strongly correlated electrons, and certain cold atom systems. The proposed
experiments require advanced tools of experimental science including
nanofabrication and ultra-low temperature physics. This project will support the
education of PhD students and undergraduates in a manner that is excellent
training for scientific careers from academia to high technology industries.