* 0854462
* Micropatterned Thermoresponsive Nanocomposite Hydrogel Surfaces with Self-Cleaning Behavior
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mariah Hahn, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854462&lt;br/&gt;Grunlan&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
temperature controlled activation of micro nano structured nanocomposite
hydrogel materials to produce temperature controlled self cleaning surfaces.
Cyclical changes in temperature will activate these nanocomposite hydrogel
micropillars by switching them back and forth from a water swollen to deswollen
state. This activation process will lead to pronounced and rapid changes in
surface properties ultimately allowing surfaces to rid themselves of adherent
biofouling species such as cells. The proposed microstructured nanocomposite
hydrogels may be particularly useful to design self cleaning implanted biosensor
membranes or other surfaces whose performance is compromised by biofouling.
Enhancing temperature activated self cleaning will be accomplished by a two
pronged approach utilizing both material design and micropatterning design
components. The investigators will prepare novel nanocomposite hydrogels
consisting of poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm) hydrogel matrices and
variable levels of colloidal polysiloxane nanoparticles. PNIPAAm hydrogels are
known to become more hydrophobic when they reversibly switch from a water
swollen to a shrunken (deswollen) state at temperatures above the volume phase
transition temperature (VPTT) of ~35 °C. Such temperature activated changes in
surface hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity have been shown to disrupt the adhesion of
adsorbed cells and proteins. In preliminary studies, variable polysiloxane
nanoparticle levels were used to tailor the temperature dependent surface
properties of PNIPAAm hydrogels. These nanocomposite hydrogels demonstrated
superior mechanical strength but did not alter the VPTT (conveniently near body
temperature) compared to pure PNIPAAm hydrogels. For each unique composition,
nanocomposite hydrogel microstructures (e.g. micropillars) will be prepared and,
as a result of their size scale, should produce fast switching surfaces in which
changes in hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity are very pronounced compared to their
planar (i.e. non micropatterned) analogues. Tailoring nanocomposite hydrogel
composition and microstructure topography will ultimately result in surfaces
which could quickly and drastically respond to changes in temperature and hence
undergo temperature controlled self cleaning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project on design of robust self cleaning
surfaces which combat biofouling has the potential to enhance the performance
life time of many commercial devices equipment. Specifically, surfaces designed
in this study have the potential to make long term implanted biosensors (e.g.
for glucose monitoring) a clinical reality. This research will also reveal the
role of polysiloxane nanoparticles and micropillar topography in tailoring the
self cleaning properties of PNIPAAm hydrogels. Beyond the advancements in
research, this work will effectively train undergraduate and graduate students
in a broad, multi disciplinary research program consisting of materials design
characterization, microfabrication of soft nanocomposite materials, and its
direct application to self cleaning. The multidisciplinary nature of this
research will provide a unique training environment for both graduate and
undergraduate students from biomedical engineering, electrical engineering, and
chemical engineering departments at Texas A&amp;M University. Dr. Melissa
Grunlan (PI; Dept. of Biomedical Engineering) will guide the efforts to design
and synthesize planar nanocomposite hydrogels and characterize their material
properties. Dr. Arum Han (Co-PI; Dept. of Electrical Engineering), an expert in
nano microfabrication for bio applications, will focus on the preparation of
micropatterned surfaces via various photopolymerization and imprint methods
using the materials developed in Dr. Grunlans lab. Dr. Mariah Han (Co-PI; Dept.
of Chemical Engineering) will provide expertise in cell release studies.
Throughout the duration, feedback will be provided by combined weekly group
meetings to explore the best material surface topography combinations for
optimal temperature activated self cleaning behavior and efficient
microfabrication. This research will strengthen the existing partnership between
three departments and effectively utilize resources of the PI, Co-PIs, and
university centers. We will actively recruit pre doctoral candidates from under
represented groups by their participation in summer Texas A&amp;M University
sponsored programs and directed studies throughout the school year. Various
aspects of the proposed work will be taught to undergraduate and graduate
students enrolled in courses taught by the PI and Co-PI.