* 0854174
* Variable Geometry Spray Fuel Injection: Investigating its Effects on Combustion Efficiency and Emissions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Gregory Buckner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

0854174 Fang

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research is studying the science of variable-geometry sprays (VGS),
specifically as it affects combustion efficiency and pollutant production in
fuel injection for compression-ignition engines. At the heart of the study is a
novel laboratory-based injector designed to control the fuel spray cone angle
and the fuel flow rate independently throughout the injection process. This
technology will enable detailed studies of the effects of spray geometry on the
mixing and combustion processes. At present, such a study would require the use
of several fixed fuel injectors, and would be limited to those geometries that
are readily available. Studies of dynamic injection profiles are currently only
possible in simulation. By optimizing the fuel distribution within the piston
bowl, unburned hydrocarbons will be significantly reduced, and new combustion
modes such as HCCI combustion will become possible for broader operating
regimes.

A prototype injector will be used to study the effects of the spray-cone angle
variation on air-fuel mixing, ignition, combustion, and pollutant formation. The
injector features a movable pintle inside a specially shaped nozzle, producing a
hollow-cone spray with a wide variation in spray angle (70 to 160 degrees)
smoothly variable throughout the injection process. Spray and combustion tests
will be conducted in an optically accessible, constant-volume combustion
chamber. This chamber will provide realistic compression-ignition engine
combustion conditions and will use state-of-the-art instrumentation to measure
mixing, NOx, soot, and other pollutant species in the mixture. Laser diffraction
techniques will be used to measure transient fuel droplet size, while
shadowgraph and Mie-scattering images will show the distribution of liquid and
gaseous fuel in the chamber. Natural flame luminosity imaging will be used to
capture the ignition and combustion flame structure. Two-color pyrometry will be
adopted to quantitatively measure the soot concentration and flame temperature
distributions. An emission analyzer and a Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer
system will be used to analyze the product species, particularly, the pollutant
emissions. The studies will demonstrate the effectiveness of variable geometry
sprays on air-fuel mixing enhancement, and the effect of the improved mixing on
ignition, combustion and combustion products as compared to fixed geometry
sprays.

The proposed research will also create an interdisciplinary collaboration and
further the educational development of graduate and undergraduate students.
Because generating public interest in research is critical to recruiting the
next generation of engineers and scientists, the injector technology will be a
featured technology of the North Carolina State University (NCSU) Middle School
Engineering Camp. Each summer, this program invites 60 middle-school students to
spend a week participating in fun, inquiry-based activities that reinforce the
application of science and engineering concepts and problem solving.