* 0854208
* Near-net Shape Processing of Functionally Graded Structural Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Olusegun Ilegbusi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2013
* USD 260,789.00

The objective of this research is to optimize through mathematical and physical
modeling, a method for near-net shape production of porous structural materials
with accurately controlled properties. The method, pressure-assisted combustion
synthesis (PACS), combines conventional self-propagating high-temperature
synthesis and foaming in one operation. The research approach has theoretical
and experimental components. A multi-scale mathematical model of the process is
developed to quantify the microstructure-property relationship and establish the
parameter space for production of the desired microstructure. PACS is then used
to synthesize porous intermetallic material, utilizing the processing conditions
obtained from the mathematical model. The materials produced are subjected to
microscopy and mechanical testing, and the results are used to validate the
mathematical model, identify deficiencies and optimize the process. Deliverables
include modeling and analysis tools across dimensional scales, student
education, and documentation of research results in reports, journals, and
theses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, if successful, will provide a cost-
effective, energy efficient and environmentally benign method for producing
porous structural materials with desired microstructure and mechanical
properties. Example application includes optimization of the production of net-
shape biomedical structural implants to improve the outcomes of prostheses
procedures, reduce costs, reduce failure rates, and enhance the quality of life
of patients with prostheses. The methodology is also applicable to a wider class
of complex materials processes involving non-linear coupled transport-reaction
phenomena with moving interfaces. Many such processes are relevant to critical
defense and commercial needs for materials such as near-net shape monolithic
ceramics or ceramic composites for the High Speed Civil Transport combustors.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be engaged in the research, and will
benefit from classroom instruction and the multidisciplinary training in diverse
fields of materials processing, reactive engineering, thermal science and
numerical methods.