* 0854904
* II-New: High-Definition and Immersive Acquisition, Processing, and Display Equipment for Video Processing and Vision Science Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Wilson Geisler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 205,912.00

New, state-of-the-art video quality assessment (VQA) algorithms will be
developed that are explicitly designed for use on High Definition (HD) video
streams. These will be designed using perceptual criteria and taking into
account such human factors as head and eye position. An open database of raw
digital HD videos will be developed, along with multiple distorted versions of
each video and human subjective scores on the distorted videos. Since HD videos
are often resized for display on smaller screen, scalable VQA and IQA algorithms
will also be developed that will for the first time, be able to assess the
quality of images or videos, in a perceptually significant way that have been
scaled or resized from their original dimensions. The development of successful
HD Video Quality Assessment (VQA) algorithms that correlate highly with visual
perception will represent a major advance in video engineering. The construction
of an HD video quality database will be the first of is kind, and certainly
heavily accessed by researchers around the world. Prior work by this group on
non-HD VQA has resulted in some of the most-highly cited research in the image
processing field in the past 20 years. It is anticipated that publications from
this work will likewise be highly influential.&lt;br/&gt;The equipment and
developed algorithms will also be used as exemplars in the UT-Austin image and
video processing educational program. The equipment will be used to generate
numerous video processing teaching examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;