* 0854791
* Pattern Separation, Pattern Completion, and Encoding Dynamics in the MTL
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Craig Stark, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 04/30/2010
* USD 109,897.00

The ability to learn and retrieve information is essential to the success of our
efforts to effectively cope with daily life, and our individual collections of
long-term declarative memories serve to guide us through time by forming the
core of our personal identities. Further, as we age, long-term memory concerns
are the most common cognitive complaint and are key concerns in neurological
disorders. Understanding the neural mechanism that underlie declarative memory
is thus a core problem in neuroscience. With support from the NSF Craig Stark
and colleagues at Johns Hopkins University are making inroads into clarifying
the way in which memories are stored and accessed in the human brain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structures in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) (including
the hippocampus and the adjacent entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal
cortices) are known to play a critical role in the ability to learn and remember
facts and events. However it is not yet clear what the role is that each
structure plays and how the structures interoperate to give us this remarkable
ability to rapidly learn new information. In this project a total of ten
experiments will be conducted that will further our understanding of this
problem. The proposed experiments utilize a wide array of techniques in order to
provide converging and complementary evidence: functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) of brain activity in healthy volunteers, neuropsychological study
of patients with damage to the hippocampus, and cognitive behavioral measures on
healthy volunteers. In so doing, it will develop novel techniques for
integrating these sources of information and it will explore new paradigms and
new theoretical grounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided into three
Aims. In the Aims 1 and 2, the neuroanatomical basis for pattern completion and
pattern separation are examined. Pattern separation refers to the isolation of
two or more similar patterns of activity (things to be remembered) into
distinct, non-overlapping representations. Pattern separation is required
whenever one needs to separate similar pieces of information that might
otherwise interfere with each other (e.g., remembering that today, you parked
your car in Lot B, although you usually park your car in Lot A). Pattern
completion is pattern separation's complement. It refers to transforming an
incomplete, distorted, or otherwise degraded pattern of activity into a complete
pattern of activity based on your knowledge (e.g., while not having stored a
perfect memory of where you parked today specifically, filling in the partial
memory with details of Lot A...usually, but not always, correctly). Both are
critical to successful memory, as we must both isolate similar memories when the
differences are important and we must utilize the redundancy present in similar
memories to overcome noise and capacity limitations when the differences do not
matter. Computational models and evidence from animal studies have stressed
these competing computational properties and have used neuroanatomical
constraints to isolate a specific role for the hippocampus (or even a subregion
of the hippocampus) in pattern separation. In the third Aim, the dynamics of
single-item and associative memory encoding are explored using a backward-
masking technique. This technique has revealed a novel dissociation in
performance between single-item and associative memory. This project will
determine whether the dissociation is dependent on the MTL by testing how the
effect maps onto existing theories of memory such as the declarative /
nondeclarative and remember / know dichotomies and how it is influenced by
damage to the hippocampus and the rest of the MTL.