* 0854615
* Modeling Climate Variability and Change of the Greater Horn of Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Richard Anyah, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 09/30/2012
* USD 356,937.00

Multiple climate drivers at regional scales often interact with large scale
climate forcing to trigger, sustain, and even amplify extreme conditions.
Understanding the interactions and feedbacks between the two scales is important
for characterization of the dynamical and physical mechanisms associated with
regional climate variability and predictability. The Greater Horn of Africa
(GHA) is a unique region, replete with complex terrain and other surface
heterogeneities imposed by the presence of large inland lakes (Victoria,
Tanganyika, Malawi), The Great Rift Valley system, and high mountains
(Kilimanjaro, Kenya, Rwenzori), and as such provides a conducive setting for
interactions between large scale and local climate systems on various spatial
and temporal scales. This unique geographical setting therefore presents
challenges in quantitative understanding of cause-effect relationships between
regional climate variability and individual or combinations of processes. The
principal investigators (PIs) will conduct an extensive regional climate
simulation intercomparison to evaluate regional climate model performance over
the GHA subregion. They will identify and address some of the deficiencies in
regional climate models (RCMs) associated with suboptimal customization and
objective parameter adjustments that are critical in the adequate simulation of
certain aspects of the regional climate. They will also investigate, through a
suite of sensitivity experiments related to sea surface temperatures (SSTs) over
the equatorial Indian Ocean and land use patterns, the link between moisture
transport from Indian Ocean via the Turkana Channel Jet and climate patterns
over parts of western Ethiopia and Sudan, regions often ravaged by extreme
droughts. Finally, high-resolution regional climate change scenarios will be
developed to address issues of impacts assessment for the most important and
vulnerable systems in the region: water resources of Lake Victoria and the Nile
Basins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consequences and impacts of climate
variability and change on food production, water resources, and human health are
potentially more adverse over the Greater Horn of Africa than in any other part
of the world. This research will contribute significantly toward our
understanding of the interactions between mesoscale and large scale processes
influencing the multi-scale variability of GHA climate. By taking a
comprehensive audit of the weaknesses and strength of the performance of the
regional models, the PIs will be able to improve the physics parameterizations
based on observed local conditions of the regional climate. The societal
benefits that would accrue from improved sub-seasonal to inter-annual climate
prediction are enormous. Another important contribution of the project to the
needs of the GHA sub-region will be to help in capacity building, by training
one Ph.D. student. The PIs will also put their model inter-comparison results on
a public webpage where other scientists can access the information and make
suggestions for further improvement. In addition, they will reach out to the
major climate applications centers in the region such as the Intergovernmental
Authority for Development Climate Prediction and Applications Center (ICPAC) for
the GHA sub-region, located in Nairobi, so that they can establish a research-
applications collaboration for the purposes of effective dissemination of their
results.