* 0854967
* Excellence Empowered by a Diverse Academic Workforce: Chemists, Chemical Engineers and Materials Scientists with Disabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* David Benson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 220,022.00

Kristin Bowman-James and David R. Benson of the University of Kansas and Thomas
E. Mallouk of Pennsylvania State University are supported by the NSF Divisions
of Chemistry (CHE), Materials Research (DMR), and Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) and the National Institutes of Health
to organize a workshop on "Excellence Empowered by a Diverse Academic Workforce:
Chemists, Chemical Engineers and Materials Scientists with Disabilities." The
workshop will consider: (1) the legal obligations of academic institutions under
the Americans with Disabilities Act and other federal regulations, (2)
characteristics of people with disabilities that add value to science and
engineering departments, (3) the importance of mentorship for students and
faculty with disabilities, (4) recent advances in research on disabilities
education and assistive technologies, and (5) funding opportunities on
broadening participation from underrepresented groups in science, including
those with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disabilities can be apparent
(e.g., mobility, visual and often, hearing impairments) or unapparent and
undisclosed (e.g., learning/cognitive and mental health disorders). Academic
departments continue to have low numbers of faculty with disabilities making the
underutilization of the available talent pool of critical interest to the
chemical, materials science and engineering disciplines. The aim of this
workshop is to assist Departmental Chairs and policymakers in developing
perspectives that recognize and are sensitive to people with disabilities.