* 0854782
* Investigations in High Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* H. E. Anthony Duncan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 379,930.00

The proposed project will address the question of how experiments at current and
future particle accelerators, in particular the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
CERN, can help us understand the Standard Model of Particle Physics, electroweak
symmetry breaking and dark matter. Part of the planned project focuses on
theoretical models that can simultaneously explain the scale of electroweak
symmetry breaking and the nature of dark matter in the form of weakly
interacting massive particles. Different models and their potential experimental
signatures will be compared, in order to develop model-independent analysis
techniques. The proposed research work, while theoretical in nature, will be
directly beneficial for the experimental LHC collaborations. The other part of
the project focuses on effective field theory applications for heavy quark,
collider, and gravitational physics. In particular developing an effective field
theory for calculating low-x physics and the use of an effective field theory
for gravity to investigate questions of interest to LIGO and LISA. The broader
implications of this proposal are that this project examines several fundamental
issues including questions of direct phenomenological relevance to present and
future generations of particle accelerators. The issues studied will have a
direct bearing on the interpretation of results from these facilities. The
proposed project is well suited for the participation of students at different
levels, allowing them to acquire knowledge and skills in theoretical physics,
mathematical methods, computer programming and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;