* 0854812
* Toward Detection of Gravitational Waves with Enhanced LIGO and Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Peter Saulson, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 975,000.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) has achieved
design sensitivity and collected data at that sensitivity. Enhanced LIGO
(eLIGO), with some improvement in sensitivity, will begin to take data soon,
while construction of Advanced LIGO (AdvLIGO), whose improved sensitivity makes
highly likely the frequent detection of cosmic gravitational waves, is underway.
The Syracuse group will focus considerable effort on the rapid analysis of eLIGO
data, in support of the search for short bursts of gravitational waves. The LIGO
Scientific Collaboration's Burst Group has set a goal of producing vetted
candidate burst triggers in 30 minutes or less. The Syracuse group has been
charged with producing reliable data quality and veto information on a time
scale consistent with the overall analysis goal. This will enable the Burst
Group to recognize false triggers caused by instrument artifacts or
environmental disturbances, and thus to help in recognizing any genuine
gravitational wave signal that may be recorded. This work will also enable rapid
recognition of problems with the interferometers, so that they can be fixed
promptly. The Syracuse group will also carry out studies of the large-angle
light scattering from high quality mirror coatings that are under consideration
for use in Advanced LIGO or for near-term improvements to it by making use of a
table-top imaging scatterometer developed under prior support. Members of the
Syracuse group will continue to contribute to commissioning of the eLIGO
interferometers and expect to participate in work at the Observatories that adds
value to the Advanced LIGO interferometers. The Syracuse group will continue its
long history of training undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs. The
group will also continue to offer instruction to new members of our field
through the Summer School on Gravitational Wave Astronomy at the University of
Texas at Brownsville. The PI is developing a new course at Syracuse University
on Vibrations, Waves &amp; Optics that will make frequent integral use of
examples from LIGO technology along with other projects to share the excitement
of LIGO with the broader community.