* 0854465
* Gene delivery vectors inspired from the structure and assembly process of target-recognizing phage
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Chuanbin Mao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0854465&lt;br/&gt;Mao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene
therapy relies on the development of vectors that can carry therapeutic genes to
target cells. Non-viral vectors can avoid the safety issue inherent to the
viruses, but lack the capability of recognizing target cells and have low
efficiency of transferring gene into the target cells. This project will mimic
the cell-recognition capability of a nanoparticle-like virus called phage, which
can specifically infect bacteria and is non-toxic to human beings, to develop a
novel nanoparticle that can serve as a non-viral gene delivery vector.
Mesenchymal stem cells are used as a model cell type to test the capability of
the gene delivery into the target cells by the non-viral vector. This project
will integrate cell-targeting peptides and DNA-tethered inorganic nanoparticles
to form a composite nanoparticle with the cell-targeting peptides presented on
the nanoparticle surface by using a chemical process that mimics the assembly
process of the nanoparticle-like virus. Then the capability of gene transfer by
the resultant nanoparticles is evaluated by using a fluorescent reporter gene
for optically detecting gene expression. This transformative project will
develop peptide-modified inorganic nanoparticles that can deliver therapeutic
gene to mammalian cells. The technique developed in this project can be extended
to form nanoparticles that can deliver other cargos to mammalian cells. The
novel nanoparticles represent virus-mimicking non-viral vectors and can find
potential applications in treating diseases by gene
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have broader impacts on
bioengineering, materials science, chemistry, biology, and nanomedicine. It will
generate a new biomimetic strategy for developing target-specific nanoparticles
that can deliver genes and drugs to target sites for disease diagnosis and
treatment. It will provide insights into the biology of virus assembly
processes. The PI will integrate this project into the development of a new
bionanotechnology class and train graduate students to have multidisciplinary
skills. He will attract undergraduate students, community college and high
school students to participate in this project. He will also recruit Native
American students to work on this project and disseminate bionanotechnology
knowledge to minority students and the general public by collaborating with
local educators and state government agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;