* 0855324
* Interactions in Cold Rydberg Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* James Shaffer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 05/31/2013
* USD 421,000.00

The interactions between cold Rydberg atoms (T&lt;1mK) are being studied
experimentally using a unique collision imaging spectrometer and nonlinear
optical techniques. The study of coherent interactions between Rydberg atoms is
important for quantum computing, many-body physics, nonlinear optics at the few
photon limit, and other phenomena that rely on strong light-light interactions.
The results of these experiments will be compared to theory done by our research
group. The research program consists of 3 principal experiments. First, the
coherent excitation of macrodimers, molecules with internuclear separations
greater than 1 micron, is being investigated. Rydberg atom macrodimers have
unique properties that can be used to probe correlations in quantum gases over a
broad range of macroscopic distances and energy scales. Second, anisotropic
dipole-dipole interactions between Rydberg atoms in a polarizing electric field
will be studied experimentally and theoretically. This work will support the
other experiments in the proposal as well as other work in cold Rydberg gases
including that on quantum computation, ultracold plasmas, collisions, Rydberg
matter, and many-body phenomena. Finally, coherent interactions and excitation
of cold Rydberg atoms are being investigated using nonlinear optical techniques.
Energy degenerate 4-wave mixing in the time and frequency domains can probe the
coherence of Rydberg atom interactions in a cold Rydberg
gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports 2 graduate students. The research
program also enables undergraduate students who participate through the senior
capstone and the NSF-REU programs at OU. Our research group has been successful
with undergraduate research participation as demonstrated by the completion of
10 senior capstone projects and 11 NSF-REU projects over the last 7 years. To
help recruit new students to the project and teach the students working on the
project, the PI plans to include topics relevant to this research in the summer
course in advanced research topics that he has taught the last 5 summers on a
voluntary basis to faculty, graduate students and summer undergraduate research
students. The work is also be used to expand the SEES, Science Zone (K-12), and
Research Experience for Teachers (RET) outreach programs associated with our
departments Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC).