* 0855596
* The First Institute of Mathematical Statistics Asia Pacific Rim Meetings
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Runze Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2010
* USD 8,000.00

The Principal Investigator of this project is the scientific committee co-chair
for the inauguration meeting of a new Institute of Mathematical Statistics Asia
Pacific Rim meeting (IMS-APRM) series. This international conference covers all
of the most active research topics in statistics and probability. The focuses of
this conference are emerging challenging statistic and probability problems, and
data-analytic techniques to address scientific questions of disciplines such as
computational biology, financial engineering and industrial engineering, medical
research and social sciences. A distinguished feature of this international
conference is that it addresses of emerging statistical and probability problems
that arise from various scientific fields. It will be extremely useful to shape
the future directions of statistical research. The aim of this project is to
seek funding for junior researchers and graduate students in USA to participate
this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this conference series is to
bring together top and junior researchers and foster new collaboration among
researchers in Asia and Pacific Rim. The conference provides a focal venue for
the senior and junior researchers in both statistics and probability to gather,
interact and present their new research findings, to discuss and outline
emerging problems in their fields, and lay the ground work for fruitful future
collaborations, in particular, the collaborations among the young generations.
This conference is designated to serves advanced graduate students and young
researchers looking for new topics to work on, and experienced researchers who
hope to gain an overview of contemporary developments in statistics and
probability. In selection of the invited speakers, special attention was paid to
strike a subtle balance between gender, ethnicity as well as other under-
presented groups. This conference focuses on various challenging problems in the
frontier of statistics and probability. It is very helpful for shaping the
future directions of statistical research that addresses problems of high
societal impact.