* 0855337
* Statistical Properties of Interacting Many-body Systems and other Finite Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Steven Tomsovic, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2013
* USD 249,590.00

This project is concerned with the statistical properties of mesoscopic systems.
Both simple, few-degree-of-freedom systems and many-body quantum systems are
studied. Fundamental issues related to the advancement of classical,
semiclassical, and statistical methods are addressed, impacting a broad spectrum
of physical systems and providing a new approach to their understanding. The
author proposes to investigate: i) ground state fluctuations due to electron-
electron interactions; ii) analytic approximations to the Kolmogorov-Sinai
entropy in many-body interacting systems; iii) the possibility of using the
Herman-Kluk propagator in understanding localizing features and transport in
systems with mixed phase spaces; iv) the statistical properties of extreme
values of eigenstates; and v) fluctuations in classical sum rules. These
problems are approached through dynamical system theory, semiclassical,
statistical, and mean-field techniques that combine synergistically. The PI has
made a number of significant contributions to these fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There is both a strong connection to
experiments and a strong emphasis on multi-disciplinary studies. Techniques
developed in the context of so-called quantum chaos have been applied in
acoustics, nanophysics, nuclear physics, optics, and the study of many-body
systems. In turn, new ideas are flowing back into quantum chaos, acting as a
focal point for cross-fertilization of disparate research fields. Students show
a great deal of interest in chaos studies, and this helps attract/retain bright
students. Their classroom experiences incorporate some of the latest advances.
The research training of postgraduate associates and/or graduate students in
dynamical systems theory, statistical methods, and many-body physics prepares
them for a wide variety of future pursuits. A member of an underrepresented
group in physics will be supported as a Ph. D. student by this grant. Support
for this work leads to dissemination of ideas between many European, Asian,
former Soviet, and South American researchers.