* 0855212
* Nano: Collaborative Research: EMT : Toward Universal Bottom-Up Nanofabrication with DNA
* CSE,CCF
* 06/23/2008,09/30/2010
* Bernard Yurke, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2010
* USD 281,292.00

Background. One of the greatest contrasts between the biological organisms and
human technology lies in how they are constructed. Plants and animals grow from
the inside out, often from a single cell to an organism containing billions of
cells, each of which is built from molecular components that are manufactured
with atomic precision within the cell. In contrast, mankind's greatest
engineering marvels, such as airplanes and skyscrapers and computers, are put
together from the outside in, with components being manufactured in factories
and assembled piece by piece. This distinction is often referred to as "bottom-
up" vs "top-down" assembly in the biological "bottom-up" approach, the assembly
process is guided by the components themselves, while in the engineering "top-
down" approach, there is an entity conceptually above the object being built
that supervises and guides the manufacturing process. Human engineering has
mastered top-down methods to create systems of great complexity (but has not
extended them to the atomic and molecular scale) and has exploited bottom-up
methods for the synthesis of diverse molecular, polymeric and crystalline
structures (but has not created information-rich structures of great
complexity). Project Goals. Our goal is to demonstrate how bottom-up techniques
can create complex atomically-defined structures, as biology does, by embedding
information and computational processes within the molecules themselves. In
biological development, a program (the genome) uses biochemistry to guide the
growth process and determine the ultimate form of the organism. In the parlance
of computer science, a system that can be programmed to accomplish any task that
can be accomplished is called a "universal" system. A universal computer can be
programmed to perform any computation, while a universal constructor can be
programmed to carry out any construction task. Recent work has theoretically
shown that universal molecular self-assembly is possible and has experimentally
demonstrated that the approach shows promise, using DNA as a construction
material to create functional molecular devices so-called "DNA nanotechnology".
In this proposal, we aim to bring DNA nanotechnology to the point where
universal bottom-up self-assembly can be achieved well enough that immediate
technological applications can be demonstrated. Specific Aims. We aim to make
major advances both in our ability to program complex self-assembly logic and in
our ability to interface the DNA structures to chemically-, optically-, and
electronically-relevant materials. We will focus on four main goals, which span
the range from long-term fundamental work to near-term development: (1) self-
assembly of a template for a complex molecular-scale electronic circuit; (2)
programming the behavior of molecular walking motors to transport components in
nanofabrication tasks; (3) attaching carbon nanotube wires to create small
nanoscale electronic circuits; and (4) integrating bottom-up and top-down
fabrication by placing and orienting self-assembled components at target
locations on silicon wafers with functional electrical contacts. Uniquely, the
aims of this research require simultaneously development of two novel computing
systems: the first, inspired by biological self-assembly and development,
operates at the level of molecular machines and biochemistry, and will be
programmed to construct the second, composed of carbon nanotubes assembled into
nanoscale circuits, which operates at the electrical level like conventional
computing devices. Broader Impact. An important aspect of this project will be
the training of young scientists (undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdocs) capable of spanning the interdisciplinary subjects involved in this
work.