* 0855748
* Collaborative Research: An Ocean Observing System for the Bering Strait, the Pacific Gateway to the Arctic - an integral part of the Arctic Observing Network
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Ronald Lindsay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,224,449.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent measurements of
the Bering Strait throughflow fluxes find strong seasonal and interannual
variability, so far unpredictable ? the heat flux increase from 2001 to 2004 is
enough to melt an 800 km by 800 km area of 1 m thick ice, and the internannual
variability in freshwater is likely ~ 30%. Yet, understanding of what sets the
properties and variability of the throughflow is still rudimentary and our
ability to measure these fluxes accurately is constrained by lack of access to
the most nutrient-rich western half of the strait (which lies in Russian waters)
and difficulties in deploying instruments within the upper water column (due to
potential ice-keel damage to instrumentation), where stratification and coastal
boundary currents (especially the Alaskan Coastal Current in the eastern
channel) contribute significantly to freshwater and heat
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the significant role of Pacific waters in the
Arctic, quantifying the Bering Strait throughflow and its properties is
important to understanding the present functioning of the Arctic system, as well
as the causes and prediction of present and future Arctic change. This makes a
Bering Strait monitoring system a vital component of the Arctic Observing
Network (AON). Thus, this proposal is for an international project to:
&lt;br/&gt;1) measure the velocities and water properties of the Bering Strait
throughflow, and quantify oceanic fluxes of volume, freshwater, heat and
nutrients through the strait;&lt;br/&gt;2) design (and calibrate) an optimum
monitoring system for oceanic fluxes through the Bering Strait on daily to
interannual time scales, using in situ, satellite, and numerical weather
prediction results; and&lt;br/&gt;3) utilize the system design to improve and
extend previous Bering Strait flux estimates back several decades and provide
uncertainty estimates for all fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To obtain the
necessary data to design and calibrate an effective, efficient monitoring system
for the strait, the project focuses on a 3-year deployment (2010-2013) of an
8-mooring array, supported by annual CTD surveys, satellite data, and model
winds. The array includes upper and lower layer temperature, salinity and
velocity measurements in both channels of the strait and at one ?climate? site
to the north, and across-strait pressure measurements. Ship time and acquisition
of Russian working permissions are supported by NOAA. &lt;br/&gt;