* 0855769
* The Fundamental Study of UV Bonding Abrasive Tools with Application to the Semiconductor Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Ioan Marinescu, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 05/31/2013
* USD 399,174.00

The research objective of this award is to generate a greater understanding of
UV (ultraviolet) bonding in order to develop new abrasive tools that are more
efficient and environmentally friendly than current abrasive tools. This
research will investigate the interaction between abrasive, filler and UV-
curable resin during the UV curing process on both mechanics and UV light energy
translation. In order to meet the special needs of abrasive tools, modification
and reinforcement of the composite characteristics will also be investigated.
Specifically this research will (a) develop an optimized resin as the base of a
UV-curable bonding agent, (b) develop a UV light energy translation model to
analyze UV energy absorbing to the resin, (c) develop and optimize a model of
the composite including resin, abrasive and other fillers, to analyze and
predict the characteristics of the abrasive tools, and (d) validate and modify
the resulting models with abrasive processes experiments. Two unique apparatuses
for UV bonding of wire saw and for UV bonding of dicing blades will be designed
and assembled. The model will be validated using experimental results obtaining
using these two apparatus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project will
revolutionize the fabrication of abrasive tools for the semiconductor industry.
The project will enhance the performance and cost effectiveness of wire saw,
dicing and lapping, which are very important processes in semiconductor
industry. These applications can also be extended to different precision
engineering applications. Societal impact initiatives include summer research
activities for grammar and high school students and teachers in Northwest region
of Ohio. The project will create special opportunities for underrepresented
communities in greater Toledo area. Also, new collaboration activities in
education and research will be created between The University of Toledo and The
Zhejiang University of Technology in China.