* 0855381
* Surface Functionalization by Magnetic Field Assisted Finishing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Renwei Mei, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 359,958.00

The research objective of this award is to produce surfaces with characteristics
in the nanometer to micrometer range that enable desired functionality for
complex-shaped components. Surface generation will be realized using a magnetic
field to locally manipulate abrasives, which cause material removal and surface
deformation. This magnetic field assisted finishing (MAF) process will be
specifically applied to austenitic stainless steels due to their immediate
relevance to free-form biomedical applications, including knee implants. The
research agenda is divided into two primary tasks. Task 1 involves the
development of models for material removal and magnetic particle motion. When
considering the particle dynamics, effects such as the motion of the abrasive
particles in the magnetic field and the plowing/cutting forces between the
particles and surface will be incorporated into a discrete element simulation.
Task 2 includes the experimental validation of the model and a study of the
relationship between surface fabrication mechanisms and the resulting
tribological properties of free-form surfaces. The outcomes of these tasks will
combine to demonstrate the feasibility of MAF for surface
functionalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide a new fabrication technique for functionalized surfaces on
complex-shaped components. Surface functionalization has great potential for
enhancing the performance of biomedical technology and improving the quality of
life for sufferers of joint disease. The production of these functionalized
surfaces will advance understanding of the magnetic abrasive behavior, material
removal, final surface finish, and tribological performance, as well as their
interrelationships. The multi-disciplinary research plan will provide a
stimulating learning environment for both graduate and undergraduate-level
students. In addition, a new mentoring program for women undergraduates will be
implemented to develop relationships that lead to an improved support network.
This program will better engage women undergraduates in the university
engineering experience and enhance their long-term retention in engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;