* 0855052
* Atomic ensembles entangled by light for measurements below the standard quantum limit
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Vladan Vuletic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 06/30/2012
* USD 420,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Atomic clocks are the most accurate devices ever made by mankind, and have many
important technological applications. The best atomic clocks are currently
limited by quantum mechanical uncertainties, namely random fluctuations around a
well defined value that constitutes the clock signal. However, it is possible to
implement quantum mechanical correlations between atoms to reduce those
fluctuations, and improve clock performance. While modest improvements have
already been demonstrated in previously funded work, the work performed under
this grant will demonstrate an improvement in clock performance by a factor of
ten.

This research program funded by NSF could significantly improve the precision of
the emerging best clock technology, optical-transition atomic clocks. Those
clocks have the potential to reach a breathtaking accuracy of one part in ten to
the seventeenth, or 0.1 microseconds compared to the age of the universe.
Research and educational goals will be united by training graduate students, and
by integrating undergraduate students and exceptional high-school students into
the research effort. Particularly for undergraduate students, firsthand
experimental experience with quantum mechanical objects provides an important,
motivating and rewarding educational component. This program will contribute to
increase the participation of women (currently three of seven graduate students)
and minorities (currently one graduate student).