* 0855783
* Do Precipitation-Induced Shallow Landslides Occur under Unsaturated Conditions?
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Ning Lu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 07/31/2011
* USD 174,045.00

The socioeconomic impacts of natural landslides are enormous worldwide. In the
U.S., natural landslides result in the loss of life, as well as property and
environmental damages exceeding US$2 billion annually. Shallow landslides,
typically translational slope failures a few meters thick of unlithified soil
mantle or regolith, may dominate mass-movement processes in hillslope
environments. They are particularly destructive when they initiate or coalesce
to form debris flows. Shallow landslides and debris flows are commonly triggered
by intense precipitation or strong ground shaking and may affect extensive areas
during a single meteorological or seismic event. According to a recent survey,
about half of the 40 most destructive landslide disasters worldwide in the past
century resulted from prolonged or intense rainfall. Recent advances in the
scientific understanding of landslide initiation, particularly for those
landslides that occur under intense or prolonged precipitation in hillslope
environments around the world, indicate that the failure surface may be above
the water table and under nearly saturated conditions. The classic methodology
for landslide analysis assumes that earthen materials are either fully saturated
or completely dry neglecting the contribution of soil suction to the stability
of slopes. Thus this methodology is overly conservative and incapable of
accurately forecasting shallow landsliding. Recent advances in soil mechanics
have shed light on the state of stress in partially saturated soil masses.
Furthermore, physical evidence and scientific understanding in both geomechanics
and geomorphology all point to the likelihood that the failure surface of
infiltration-induced landslides may occur above the water table and under nearly
saturated conditions.

This project seeks further physical evidence and uses the new knowledge in
defining stress in partially saturated soil to identify the likelihood of
landslide initiation under partially saturated soil conditions. The overall
goals of this research are: to test the hypotheses that (1) landslides,
particularly shallow and translational slope failures under heavy precipitation
conditions, can occur above the water table; and, (2) that the failure occurs
when materials are nearly saturated and suction stress is reduced to nearly
zero. To test these hypotheses, we will: (1) measure the unsaturated hydrologic
and mechanical properties under laboratory settings, (2) conduct landslide
initiation tests using an intermediate-scale shallow landslide simulator, and
(3) implement a site-specific program for long-term, real-time monitoring for
shallow landslide occurrence, thus examining the validity of both hypotheses at
the field scale. By clarifying whether shallow landslides occur under saturated
or unsaturated conditions, this work provides a physical basis for answering the
important question regarding whether we need a new paradigm that includes either
soil suction or effective stress or both to predict shallow landslides.
Knowledge gained here is transformative to advancing the understanding of the
interactions among climate change, topography, and sustainable land use.

Mass movement due to shallow landslide initiation under heavy precipitation is
part of long-term landform evolution, and presents a great challenge for society
subject to climate change and evolving land use. Testing the concept of
effective stress variation above the water table for landslide initiation
analysis provides a sound physical basis for future predictive models and will
enhance our ability to predict and forecast shallow landslide hazard.
Collaboration with the USGS National Landslide Information Center ensures broad
dissemination via outreach activities targeted toward researcher, K-12 students,
and the general public. Integrating the research mission with an educational and
diversity mission via graduate and undergraduate student training, proactive
recruitment of underrepresented groups and incorporating the research activities
into existing courses ensure broad impact to a diverse audience of students,
researchers, and practitioners.