* 0855391
* Ultrafast control of Raman transitions using frequency combs: Prevention of decoherence
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Svetlana Malinovskaya, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is devoted to theoretical
studies of optical frequency comb interaction with molecules. The excitation of
two-photon Raman transitions will be investigated, induced by two pulse trains
with locked phase, and also by crafted femtosecond pulse trains. Possibilities
of selective excitation of predetermined Raman transitions will be investigated,
taking into account effects of decoherence. The objectives are to gain insight
into the mechanisms of pulse train interactions with matter, to learn about
factors that govern molecular state time evolution, and to develop new control
methods of molecular dynamics in the presence of fast decoherence. The
investigations will advance modern ultrafast control methods through discovery
of new quantum control mechanisms based on frequency comb interaction with
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will broaden areas of quantum
control applications, from detection of molecular species to imaging techniques
to quantum gates. Graduate students will get involved in the development of
theoretical models, programming, collecting and interpreting data of numerical
calculations. The research results will be incorporated into graduate course
material of a course "Methods of Quantum Control". Students enrolled in this
course will learn about advanced quantum control methods, based on latest
developments of laser technologies. The research experience and the course study
will broaden the opportunities for their career development. Collaboration with
experimental groups within the Department of Physics at Stevens Institute of
Technology will be initiated, aiming at exploring possibilities of new methods
of experimental realization.