* 0855814
* Collaborative Research:  Geodynamic Solutions for Seismic Observations of Iceland Hotspot-Ridge Interaction
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Robert Dunn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2014
* USD 327,483.00

Deep in the Earth, the hot rock of the mantle stretches and deforms like a
convecting fluid. Mantle convection is blocked by the overriding lithospheric
plates and causes essentially all volcanism on Earth, in particular, the
volcanism on islands that overlie unusually hot spots in the mantle. This study
addresses two major problems in geodynamics: the origin of the base of the
lithosphere and the nature of mantle convection at mantle ?hotspots?. Iceland is
a huge volcanic island that is formed by a hotspot where hot mantle is rising
beneath, and impinging on the lithospheric plates. The structure of the mantle
beneath Iceland is revealed in unprecedented detail by seismic waves that
traveled from distant earthquakes to be recorded on Iceland. The speed that such
waves traverse the mantle is slowed by excess temperature and the presence of
magma, and is different for different travel directions in regions where
convection preferentially aligns the minerals of the mantle. On the one hand,
the records on Iceland show evidence for a thick (&gt;150 km) and broad (&gt;600
km) layer of hot and partially molten mantle beneath Iceland, which suggests
that the hot mantle upwelling is being deflected at great depths by a
lithospheric base formed by a stratification in composition. On the other hand,
contradictory evidence is revealed by a clear directional dependence of seismic
wave speeds, which suggest that the upwelling mantle is being deflected at much
shallower depths by a lithospheric base formed by a stratification in
temperature. This study aims to resolve this contradiction by using numerical
models to simulate, in 3D, the mantle convection, magma generation, and
crystallographic alignment beneath Iceland. The investigators will then compute
seismic wave propagation through the model mantle structure and quantitatively
compare the predicted seismic records with the observed records. Tests of many
of such calculations with different mantle properties will be used to identify
the least and most likely conditions beneath Iceland. Determining the cause of
the lithosphere and the shallowest depths of mantle convection beneath Iceland
will advance our basic understanding of this system as well as other settings on
Earth and other planets with active convection and magmatism. &lt;br/&gt;