* 0855846
* I/UCRC for Thermal Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* David Schwam, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 02/28/2014
* USD 9,962.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Thermal Technology

0855846 Case Western Reserve University; David Schwam 0856012 University of
Michigan; Arvind Atreya Case Western Reserve University (lead institution) and
the University of Michigan propose a planning grant for a collaborative center
focusing on a range of topics including combustion, melting technologies and
advanced methods of waste heat recovery. The main research thrust of the
proposed Center will be to develop methods, materials and equipment for waste
heat recovery from process heating. While both universities have a well-
established reputation in the proposed area of activity, their capabilities are
to a large extent complementary rather than overlapping. UM is a leader in
combustion research while CWRU is prominent in materials processing and process
heating research.

The proposed Center has the potential to improve sustainability and
profitability of US manufacturing by developing new technologies that will
reduce energy consumption and pollution. Emphasis will be placed on partnering
with industry, other academic institutions and the national laboratories to
establish and carry out long-term research programs for achieving its
objectives. CWRU and UM undergraduate and graduate students will play a key role
in the activities of the Center. A pivotal role in dissemination of the results
will be played by professional associations including American Foundry Society,
Forging Industry Association and others.