* 0855352
* Patent Cartography: Improving the Process of Searching Through the Patent Thicket
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Gavin Clarkson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2011
* USD 178,220.00

This project will improve the process of patent search by combining
methodologies for measuring the patent space developed at the University of
Michigan School of Information with methodologies developed at IBM's Almaden
Research Center for browsing and exploring topics and concepts within a large
document collection. This combined methodology, called Patent Cartography, will
leverage multiple taxonomies, related terms, network analytics, visualization,
and user interaction to navigate, explore, and map the patent space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the rate of patenting has increased, so too has the
problem of patent thickets, or dense webs of overlapping intellectual property
rights that an organization must hack its way through in order to commercialize
new technology. In certain industries characterized by cumulative innovations
and multiple blocking patents, the existence of such densely concentrated patent
rights can have the perverse effect of stifling innovation rather than
encouraging it. A recent Federal Trade Commission report notes that in certain
industries, the large number of issued patents makes it virtually impossible to
search all the potentially relevant patents, review the claims contained in each
of those patents, and evaluate the infringement risk or the need for a license.
For many firms the only practical response to this problem of unintentional and
sometimes unavoidable patent infringement is to file hundreds of patents each
year so as to have something to trade during cross-licensing negotiations. In
other words, the only rational response to the large number of patents in a
given field may be to contribute to it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that 200,000
US patents are issued each year, with new patents issuing each week, any attempt
to analyze and comprehend the dynamic topology and interconnectedness of patent
space will almost certainly have to be based on information technology. The
process of patent search, however, has not progressed very much even with the
advent of searchable patent databases. Although automated, the patent search
process itself has not been reengineered and thus remains functionally similar
to the patent search process developed in the nineteenth century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While end-users do not have the necessary tools to conduct
exhaustive patent searches, professional patent searchers are overwhelmed with
an ever increasing workload driven by an increased awareness of the importance
of intellectual property. The need for effective end-user patent search
capabilities will only increase over time, yet the traditional search process
must be reengineered for that need to be met. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using sets
of existing professionally-generated patent searches, this project will compare
end-user searches conducted with existing tools with other searches conducted
with the new methodologies. Several different classes of end-users have been
identified, with different levels of previous knowledge and experience with the
patent system, and this project will compare the search results produced by each
class of user with the professional patent search results. At the conclusion of
the study, we will have not only a better understanding of the applicability of
Patent Cartography and visualization techniques to the process of patent search,
but also an understanding of the impact of familiarity and experience with the
patent system in harnessing the potential of Patent Cartography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the boundaries of document
retrieval beyond simple keyword and category search into multidimensional
analysis combining mixed initiative data and text mining with visualizations.
The project will also combine content and network analysis and evaluate
visualizations based on both proximity and dependency data. Search processes and
search strategies will also be examined in the context of large document
collections. The project will also develop models of task-based information
searching, which has been generally under-explored. Finally, the project will
develop an ethnographic account of the patent search process by observing patent
search experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend the scope of
research on searching, analyzing, and visualizing large document collections.
Patents are one exemplary form of large digital library repositories that
contain both structured and unstructured data to which these techniques can be
applied. Other sources include Medline, Research Abstracts, repositories of the
World Wide Web, and other enterprise repositories. This search process could be
leveraged in health care, life sciences, pharmaceuticals, market research,
competitive intelligence, knowledge discovery, and tracking technology maturity
and innovation to name just a few. &lt;br/&gt;