* 0855552
* Physics and Applications of high-density spin-polarized systems with long coherence time
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Dmitry Budker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 06/30/2012
* USD 534,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project investigates novel materials, paramagnetic atoms ablated into a
cryogenic buffer gas and nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color centers in diamond
crystals, that open a possibility for creating magnetic-field sensors with
unprecedented combinations of parameters: ultra-high sensitivity, compact size,
a broad range of operating temperatures, etc. The applications of these devices
range from the most fundamental physics, for example, the search for the reasons
for the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the Universe, to magnetic microscopy of
biologically relevant objects and nuclear-magnetic-resonance detection on lab-
on-a-chip microfluidic devices. The intellectual merit of the proposed work
consists of advancement of the current understanding of the mechanisms of spin-
decoherence of paramagnetic atoms in a dense buffer gas and NV centers in
diamond in a wide temperature range, as well as the development of techniques
for obtaining systems with ultra-long electron spin-coherence lifetimes. This
development will have a broad impact on the optics and atomic physics community.
The project draws from the areas of atomic, solid-state optical, and low-
temperature physics, cross-fertilizing these disciplines.

The other part of the broader impact of this experiment is through training
graduate and undergraduate students. The project allows for a unique combination
of a broad range of physics skills to be taught to students: cryogenics,
spectroscopy and optical pumping, atomic theory, solid-state optics, non-linear
optics, lasers, electronics, vacuum techniques, etc. In addition to expanding
modern cryogenic and optical physics facilities at Berkeley, it also provides a
basis for partnership between Berkeley and several other universities, both in
US and abroad (in Poland, Latvia, France, Australia, Russia, and Germany).