* 0855157
* CI-ADDO-EN:  A Second-Generation Architecture for WordNet
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Christiane Fellbaum, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2013
* USD 356,606.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work constitutes a significant
update of WordNet, a large electronic lexical database of English that is a
cornerstone of research and applications in computational linguistics, Natural
Language Processing, Knowledge Representation, Semantic Web applications and
that serves as the basis for numerous computational linguistics tools.
&lt;br/&gt;WordNet?s database is redesigned and converted from a text-based to a
relational (SQL) format to allow flexible and domain-specific extensions.
Specific tasks include the definition of an SQL schema, the development of an
ASCII-to-WordNetSQL table translation program, a searching interface and
additional format conversion utilities. Syntactic limitations on WordNet?s
lexicographer files and compiler are eliminated so as to allow long, variable-
length word strings and special characters found technical terminology. The
table-based SQL format is designed to allow a virtually unlimited number of
relations per word form or synonym set, both user-created and ?original? to the
Princeton WordNet. User extensions and modifications to WordNetSQL are
distinguished from those made ?domestically,? ensuring that development of the
core WordNet database remains independent of external updates, and that
WordNet?s large user community continues to have available a common, consistent
database against which automatic systems can be evaluated. We develp conversion
tools for WordNetSQL and other popular WordNet representations (RDF/OWL, Prolog,
XML). Maintenance of the Princeton WordNet lexicon and user support continue.
&lt;br/&gt;The major impact of the freely and publicly available WordNetSQL is
to enable flexible extensions by a broad and diverse user group to specific and
technical domains including biology and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;