* 0855294
* Harmonic Analysis and Elliptic Homogenization Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Zhongwei Shen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

This project aims to study a class of elliptic homogenization problems in
domains with non-smooth boundaries. The main focus will be on second order
elliptic equations and systems with rapidly oscillating periodic coefficients in
domains whose boundaries satisfy some geometric conditions (for example,
Lipschitz). The primary objective of this project is to gain a better
understanding of the boundary regularity properties of solutions by establishing
uniform estimates under physically realistic assumptions. Boundary value
problems in non-smooth domains have received extensive study in the last 30
years. However, very few results are known for elliptic equations and systems
with rapidly oscillating periodic coefficients, which arise in the theory of
homogenization. The dilation-invariant property of the family of elliptic
operators and that of the class of Lipschitz domains make problems to be
investigated very interesting and challenging. The proposed research lies at the
interface of harmonic analysis and partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many applied problems of elasticity, aero-
and hydrodynamics, and electro-magnetic wave scattering, the boundary value
problems for the partial differential equations are posed in domains whose
boundaries have faces, edges, and vertices. The class of Lipschitz domains is a
dilation invariant class which allows such roughness on the boundaries. The
results of this project will provide the mathematical foundation and analytical
tools for certain computational problems which involve rapid oscillating
microstructures. The grant will partially support graduate students as research
assistants. &lt;br/&gt;