* 0855455
* Quantum Cavity Optomechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jack Harris, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 07/31/2012
* USD 460,000.00

This work is aimed at bringing a micromechanical system into the fully quantum
regime, which would result in a breakthrough in the field of opto/nanomechanical
systems. It would greatly broaden our notion of which physical systems can
exhibit quantum effects and allow us to explore the physics associated with
quantum optics and mesoscopic condensed matter in an entirely new type of system
(i.e., mechanical), whose coupling to readout devices and the environment is
qualitatively different from present-day quantum systems. The project uses
ultrasensitive millimeter-scale membranes dispersively coupled to high-finesse
optical cavities. This coupling is strong enough to laser-cool the membrane to
its vibrational ground state, to observe the quantum back-action of displacement
measurements, and to produce squeezed light. At the same time this coupling can
be tuned to coax especially subtle quantum effects from the optomechanical
system; by realizing a strong "position squared" readout we will observe the
quantization of energy in the membrane's vibration and quantum jumps between the
membrane's energy eigenstates. These goals cover a wide conceptual range, but
they represent different facets of the same optomechanical coupling which can be
realized in a single device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These experiments are
relevant to ultrasensitive instruments in a variety of fields. Quantum limited
displacement measurements are relevant to astrophysical gravitational wave
searches, as is the production of squeezed light. Micromechanical devices cooled
to their ground state could serve as exceptionally sensitive detectors,
particularly when coupled to a readout capable of registering the devices'
individual quantum excitations. The conceptual simplicity of these systems,
combined with the possibility of using them to explore exotic quantum phenomena
on a macroscopic scale makes them appealing. The past few years have seen a
rapid increase in the number of students, postdocs, and PIs working in this
field, and an increased level of interest from scientific and general audiences.
This work will serve as an excellent basis for training undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral students in important scientific techniques, and will prepare
them for a wide range of careers in applied or fundamental research.