* 0855558
* Modeling Multi-fluid and Gravitational Dynamics of Compact Stars with Quark Matter Cores
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Gregory Comer, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2011
* USD 58,536.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The main goal of this project is to build a comprehensive
theoretical formalism that will model physical properties of so-called compact
stars, which are the collapsed cores---about 20 kilometers in diameter but with
the mass of the sun---of ordinary stars that have exhausted their nuclear fuel.
Like the earth, a compact star has an outer crust, magnetic field, inner layers
containing one or more fluids, and perhaps even a solid core. The formalism will
use state-of-the-art nuclear physics of matter at extreme densities to model
compact star rotations and oscillations as well as their gravitational waves
(which are the propagating ripples of spacetime curvature first predicted by
Einstein soon after his completion of General Relativity).

When completed, the formalism will naturally tie into key research goals of the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO), designed to detect
the gravitational waves produced by compact stars. Gravitational wave, or even
upper limit, data obtained by LIGO can be used to test compact star models to
yield an improved understanding of the nuclear physics and fluid and solid
behavior of matter at extreme densities, potentially large magnetic fields, and
gravitational fields that are so large that general relativity must be used to
get accurate results.