* 0855795
* Reproducing the Extraordinary Mechanical Properties of Biominerals through Multiscale Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Youping Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 07/31/2013
* USD 302,643.00

&lt;br/&gt;Biominerals represent a unique class of simultaneously strong, stiff,
hard and tough composites that have been extensively studied by experimentalists
and that to date we have not succeeded to replicate. This proposal aims to
develop a fundamental understanding of the origins of the unusual mechanical
properties of calcium carbonate biominerals and to reproduce the extraordinary
mechanical properties of nacre in computer simulation as a direct result of its
architecture and essential composition. This research will (1) establish a
simulation tool that predicts the mechanical properties of biominerals from
constituent molecules to millimeter-sized specimens, (2) determine the essential
molecular structure and function of the organic interfaces that link the multi-
level structures of nacre, (3) establish the precise nature of the effect of the
hierarchical architecture as well as the organic interfaces on the mechanical
properties of calcium carbonate biominerals, and (4) develop a fundamental
understanding of the multiscale mechanics of hierarchically-structured composite
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in reproducing the mechanical properties
of biominerals in simulations, hence in understanding the mechanisms that give
rise to the remarkable mechanical properties of biominerals, will lead to the
development of next generation high-strength high-toughness ceramics. Success of
this research will also stimulate students? interest in mechanics and mechanical
engineering through the fascinating biological world. The research project will
involve a diversity of students including female and minority students,
undergraduate and graduate students, and will provide these students with an
unparalleled opportunity to gain knowledge and to develop skills in an
interdisciplinary research area. Computer models and codes developed will be
posted for public use and for feedback. Research results will be published in
journals and on the internet, and will be presented at conferences, seminars and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;