* 0855865
* CreativeIT Pilot: Learning from Creativity in the Wild: Leveraging the Success of Creative Content Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephanie Teasley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 290,009.00

For researchers and developers of creativity support tools, online spaces of
"user-generated content" (UGC) such as the video-sharing site Youtube.com and
the photo-sharing site Flickr.com are of particular interest. These systems are
massive, diverse spaces for creative production, interaction, collaboration and
appropriation. This project investigates how specific UGC systems, those we call
Creative Content Systems (CCS), are being used by literally millions of people
to generate and disseminate their creative products. A better understanding of
the dynamics of participation in such systems would allow us to both design more
effective system support for creative activities in future UGC system, as well
as providing us with a richer model of IT-enabled creativity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit comes from three
contributions. First, this work will generate enhanced models of creative
practice in online communities. Amateur/professional interactions have become
increasingly prevalent in online communities and the differences between these
populations in creative practice and intended audiences needs to be better
understood and supported. Second, the research will generate and assess design
recommendations for next generation creative support technology. Generating a
better understanding of the common and distinct factors of amateur and
professional creative practice is a necessary precondition for evolving the next
generation of support tools for creative individuals and creative communities.
Third, this work will generate enhanced knowledge of successful facilitation of
amateur activity. Via the design recommendations for next generation CCS design,
creative professionals will benefit from knowledge and technology to help them
leverage amateur creativity and contribution. Leveraging the success of these
systems will lead to broader impacts by encouraging innovation and creativity
beyond this project's current participants and systems. Though this project is
set in the context of creative cultural activity, the findings will be more
broadly applicable to increasing participation in STEM-related projects that
wish to enlist amateur contributions and volunteers. The results from this study
will be disseminated broadly to academic communities including, but not limited
to, Creativity and Cognition, CSCW, and CHI.