* 0855815
* "CSEDI: From fine to global scales:  Integrated studies of the structure, dynamics, and mineral physics of the lower mantle"
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2012
* USD 362,000.00

The solid earth, the earth excluding the oceans and atmosphere, is a giant heat
engine responsible for not only continental drift and plate tectonics, but also
geological hazards (especially those from giant earthquakes) and for the
formation of mineral and hydrocarbon resources. The purpose of this research is
to better understand how this heat engine works by focusing on the earth's lower
mantle. The lower mantle is the largest region of the planet by volume and the
heat sources and physical processes there play a critical role in determining
how the heat engine works. In this project, we will take a cooperative approach
in which we will understand the basic material properties of earth materials
under extreme pressures and temperatures; incorporate those experimental results
into three-dimensional simulations of the earth's interior; and then test the
predictions of both approaches with detailed studies of seismic waves passing
through the earth's deep interior. We believe that there are three areas in
which our work will have broad impact. First, our specialized work on the lower
mantle is of broad interest to the scientific community because it improves our
understanding of how the earth works as an interconnected, dynamic system.
Second, we will partially support and mentor three Caltech graduate students in
the Seismology Lab. and thereby contribute to the training of the next
generation of scientists in the U.S. Third, our multidisciplinary approach will
allow our students to become leaders in the internationally competitive field of
global geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismologists have revealed that the
mantle side of the core mantle boundary (D") is extraordinarily complex with a
myriad of fine structure (e.g. ~10 km to a few 100 km's). Thermal and chemical
heterogeneity, solid-solid phase transitions, and melting within the lower
mantle are probably all required in order to explain observed structure and
suggest that the lower boundary of the mantle is as complex as the continental
crust. Understanding the origin of the fine scale structure of the lower mantle,
in general, and D", in particular, is key toward understanding how the solid
Earth works as a globally interconnected system. In order to better understand
this region from the different means available, this work will involve
collaboration between a seismologist, a geodynamist, and an experimental mineral
physicist.