* 0855141
* Collaborative Research: II-New: OpenVMI: A Software Instrument for Virtual Machine Introspection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Dongyan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2014
* USD 255,000.00

This project develops the OpenVMI, an open-source, software-based research
instrument for virtual machine introspection (VMI). VMI is important to certain
research areas such as distributed computing, automated system management and
configuration, and computer security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtualization
technologies have created new momentumfor a number of research areas such as
distributed computing, automated system management and configuration, and
computer security. One basic yet powerful instrumentation function in
virtualization-based research is virtual machine introspection (VMI): observing
a VM?s semantic states and events from outside the VM. VMI is hard to implement,
mainly because of the semantic gap between the external and internal
observations of the VM. Thus a generic VMI software instrument becomes highly
desirable to virtualization researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops and deploys OpenVMI, an open-source, software-based research instrument
for VMI at Purdue University and North Carolina State University. OpenVMI can be
thought of as a ?fluoroscopic? instrument for VMs. Through the OpenVMI API, a
user will be able to obtain the VM?s semantic states and events in both kernel
and user spaces without modifying or instrumenting the VM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research areas are identified at the PIs?
institutions that will benefit from the development and deployment of
OpenVMI:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Management of hosted virtual environments: This
research involves monitoring, provisioning and regulating autonomous virtual
environments running in a shared distributed hosting infrastructure. Open- VMI
will enable non-intrusive, semantic monitoring of VMs, which will trigger VM
management operations at runtime such as VM migration, resource adaptation and
access control. &lt;br/&gt;-Monitoring, detection and investigation of user-
level malware: This research is concerned with OSlevel policies and mechanisms
for malware detection and investigation. By using OpenVMI, these policies and
mechanisms can be moved out of the target VM, achieving stronger tamper-
resistance without losing VM observability. &lt;br/&gt;-Monitoring of OS
integrity: This research addresses the integrity of the guest OS against kernel-
level attacks. It also involves detailed profiling of kernel-level attacks for
future detection and recovery. OpenVMI will provide a unique vintage point to
observe runtime state changes of kernel objects, which will help reveal details
of an OS integrity violation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six research projects in the
above areas are designated for OpenVMI deployment.