* 0855515
* Collaborative Research: Topics in Gauge Theory, Gravity and String Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* V Nair, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 480,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This proposal involves a number of interrelated topics of study in theoretical
physics and builds on methods and results developed earlier by the PIs.
Specifically, new directions for Yang-Mills theories in (2+1) dimensions will be
studied, building on the Hamiltonian approach. This will include studying finite
temperature effects. The problem of understanding gravity as a large-N limit of
a non-commutiative Chern-Simons theory will be studied and solutions of the
theory corresponding to a black hole in the limit of large N will be sought. A
generalized multiple reflection expansion for calculating the Casimir energy
will be used to address various problems, such as dielectric boundaries and the
calculation of corrections to four-dimensional vacuum energy due to extra
dimensions. A twistor string description of N = 8 Einstein supergravity will be
explored and twistor calculations of more amplitudes will be pursued. The
minimal bosonization of a higher-dimensional fermion system via non-commutative
Wess-Zumino action with boundaries will be sought, and physically relevant
models will be tackled. The physical states and properties of the non-
commutative Chern-Simons description of the toroidal quantum Hall system will be
investigated. A phase space and operator approach to generalized non-abelian
fluid mechanics will be developed, with possible applications to systems such as
the quark-gluon plasma. Properties of black holes in the AdS/CFT correspondence
will be investigated and the failure of the semi-classical gravity approximation
will be worked out in detail. Models for dark energy and modified gravity in
which four-dimensional Lorentz invariance is only valid at low energies will be
developed and their observational consequences for dark energy and precision
tests of gravity will be analyzed. String dynamics of models of the early
universe in which the scale factors oscillate will be investigated, and
predictions for the spectrum of cosmological perturbations will be worked out.
The broader implications are as follows: since the subject matter has areas of
overlap with string theory, field theory, condensed matter physics and
mathematical physics, the project can help develop synergy within different sub-
disciplines. The project also has a role in training, teaching and fostering
talent. This project is important in establishing collaboration between City
College and Lehman College, creating the opportunity for the high energy
theorists of two colleges to function as a group sharing research interests,
resources, seminars, and postdoctoral associates. Both colleges are now in a
phase of increasing student enrollment, and by helping to foster an active
research environment this project can have a positive impact on attracting
undergraduate students into physics. Given the demographics of the student body
at the two campuses, this will be particularly true for minority and under-
represented groups.