* 0855607
* Noise and High Frequency Properties of Single-Molecule Transistors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2014
* USD 570,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The transistor is the underpinning of the
Information Age. Over the last sixty years, the transistor has been reduced from
several centimeters to a few tens of nanometers, with each device now more than
1000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. As sizes are reduced
further, quantum effects become critically important in determining device
properties. At the same time, it becomes increasingly difficult to acquire
information about the detailed geometry and material quality of the devices. In
the last decade the ultimate limit of this scaling has been reached with the
development of single-molecule transistors (SMTs), where the critical channel
for current is a small molecule 1-2 nm in size. These devices are excellent
tools for examining the physics of conduction at the nanoscale, including the
origins of dissipation and the importance of electron-electron interactions.
This award supports a project with the goal of extending SMT studies beyond
electrical conduction to include measurements of electrical noise. Noise, in the
form of fluctuations in the current through the device, is predicted to provide
valuable information about both vibrational and magnetic processes within SMTs.
Two graduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art nanofabrication
methods and will use both low- and high-frequency techniques to measure the
noise in SMTs under various conditions, thus preparing them for future academic
or industrial careers. If successful the research results will provide new
insights into the physics relevant to future technologies, while the work itself
will open the door to further new measurements, including the detection and
manipulation of single electron spins.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Single-molecule transistors (SMTs) have been
developed over the last decade, and have been outstanding tools for examining
the physics of conduction at the nanometer scale. SMTs are highly quantum
mechanical systems where electron-electron, electron-vibrational, and spin-based
interactions can all be strong. One persistent challenge in understanding such
structures is the limited information available through DC characterization of
electronic conduction. Higher frequency measurements of conduction as well as
shot noise can provide much deeper insight into the roles of electron-
vibrational and strong correlation effects. Shot noise in particular gives
information about the correlations between electron tunneling events. This award
supports a project to use both low- and high-frequency methods to measure shot
noise in SMTs under various conditions. In SMTs containing unpaired electrons,
shot noise will be used to test the theoretical prediction that the effective
charge of the electron is modified to a fractional value when transport takes
place via the Kondo process. These measurements will lay the groundwork for the
eventual development of high frequency ?RF-SMTs? and possible single-molecule
electron spin resonance. This program will provide state-of-the-art training of
two graduate students in nanoscale science fabrication and measurement
techniques thereby preparing them for future careers in academic or industrial
research.