* 0855218
* II NEW: Flexible mobile platforms for continuous  range and imagery  collection
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* John Oliensis, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 235,069.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer vision research and related
technology are on the cusp to be taken out of the lab to meet real-world
challenges: understanding, reasoning, and navigation in large-scale, dynamic,
and complex environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will acquire a
state-of-the-art, custom sensor suite, the 3D Content Digitization Suite
(3DCDS), to support research and performance evaluation of computer vision and
robotics algorithms in challenging real-world, outdoors, dynamic scenes: 2D-3D
fusion for real-time geometry processing; and large-scale scene understanding
and hierarchical semantic context inference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3DCDS
includes high-end panoramic laser range sensors, panoramic cameras, navigation
equipment, and off-the-shelf cameras arranged on a custom made reconfigurable
platform which is mounted on a vehicle. 3DCDS enables testing scene
understanding and awareness algorithms under various conditions and it
facilitates the collection of ground truth data. Trade-offs across different
sensing platforms will be evaluated and the extensive dataset will serve as
benchmark for a broad range of algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data and
benchmarks will be made publically available. Stevens will host a web portal for
researchers to submit the results of their algorithms on the
benchmarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research agendas that can be supported by this
infrastructure and the collected data span multiple domains and include: fusion
of range and image data for inferring accurate, high-resolution, hierarchical
scene segmentation; object recognition and scene understanding using invariant
features combining geometry and appearance; real-time, dynamic scene awareness;
comprehensive evaluation of sensors and methods on ground truth data captured in
uncontrolled environments.