* 0855524
* RUI: Investigation of Atomic Dipole Traps Created by Diffraction of Laser Light for Use in Quantum Computing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Thomas Gutierrez, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
investigate a new light pattern as a possible solution to the "addressability
problem" of neutral atom quantum computing. Quantum computers are theoretical
devices that exploit the fundamental rules of quantum mechanics for the purposes
of computation. They would be massively parallel on a scale unmatched by current
conventional computers and could also perform certain calculations exponentially
faster. Because of this technological promise, and despite many challenges, a
major effort is being made by the physics community to develop a functioning
quantum computer by investigating several viable schemes. One of these schemes,
neutral atom quantum computing, uses cold atoms trapped in a light pattern. The
only remaining problem with the neutral atom approach to quantum computing is
finding a light pattern that allows the storage of single atoms in a large array
of sites that can be individually addressed for quantum operations using a
focused laser beam. In this project, a novel solution to this problem is
investigated: the light pattern formed behind a two-dimensional array of
pinholes will be explored computationally and experimentally as a viable quantum
memory (i.e. large array of atoms) with single-site
addressbility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work is to
provide undergraduate students with the opportunity to get involved in cutting-
edge research. The physics department at Cal Poly is a purely undergraduate
department, so all tasks will be performed by undergraduate students. Both the
PI and the Co-PI have a record of attracting students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in science. Students will construct and perform the cold
atom experiments and assist with developing computer simulations of the traps.
The project aims to stir the students' interest in scientific research and teach
them laboratory, computational, and critical thinking skills that will help them
start a scientific career or any other chosen career path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;