* 0855137
* CI-ADDO-EN: A Community Testbed for Controlled and Repeatable Wireless Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Daniel Stancil, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 09/30/2013
* USD 750,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is deploying two community
wireless network test facilities that use real-time signal propagation emulation
to implement the N-by-N interfering channels connecting the wireless devices.
Since signal propagation is controlled in software, experiments are easy to
control and are fully repeatable. This allows thorough testing and evaluation of
research results, fair, side-by-side comparison of wireless solutions, and the
emulation of very diverse wireless environments (e.g. residential, office, mesh,
vehicular, etc.) on a single platform. The testbeds operate in the 2.4 GHz ISM
band and support for the 5GHz band and for MIMO devices is being added.
Endpoints consist of WiFi devices and USRP software radios by default, although
other devices can be supported. A set of 'world models' that model specific
wireless environments (mesh and vehicular) is being added. This makes the
testbed easier to use, and simplifies sharing of experiments and comparing of
results. To support and encourage such sharing, a repository for shared
experiments is maintained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wireless emulator testbed
allows researchers to run repeatable and fully controlled wireless networking
experiments, which significantly improves the quality of the research
evaluation. By sharing experiments, researchers are able to more thoroughly
evaluate and compare their research on a realistic platform, which otherwise
would not have been possible. The emulator also improves education in wireless
networking by enabling exciting hands-on assignments and projects.