* 0855789
* Hadronic and Nuclear Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Jose Goity, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

The goals of this project are to advance the theoretical understanding of
hadrons and light nuclei through the application and development of methods
broadly based on the concept of effective theories. These effective theories
allow for a description of hadronic and nuclear systems preserving a rigorous
connection with the fundamental theory of the strong interactions, Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). One of these studies will address the phenomenology of
excited baryons by means of a theoretical framework known as the 1/N expansion
of QCD, where N is the number of color degrees of freedom. This plan is of
relevance to the current experimental programs on excited baryons at Jefferson
Lab and elsewhere. Theoretical studies of some fundamental aspects of the 1/N
expansion will also be carried out, especially with focus on the phenomenon of
spontaneous breaking of the chiral symmetry in QCD. Another study will address
the problem of describing QCD at low and intermediate energies with effective
theories. In particular, the project will consider the problem of extending the
range of validity of the low energy effective theory of QCD known as Chiral
Perturbation Theory to the intermediate energy domain through the inclusion of
excited meson states in the effective theory. The application of effective
theories to nuclear physics will focus on the study of the low energy expansion
of nuclear current matrix elements, in particular electromagnetic currents, for
which a large number of phenomenological applications are possible. The project
has also an important education component, which includes the training of a PhD
student and collaborations with postdoctoral associates.