* 0855561
* Global QCD Analysis and Electroweak Symmetry Breaking in High Energy Collider Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Jon Pumplin, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,350,000.00

Current understanding of high energy physics is embodied in the Standard Model
(SM). According to that theory, protons and neutrons, along with all other
strongly interacting particles, are composed of even more fundamental particles
called partons (quarks and gluons). Interactions between the partons are
described by the theory of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). The proposed research
involves continued refinement in understanding the interplay between QCD theory
and experiment, which is necessary to deepen the understanding of QCD and to
determine the probability distributions of the partons in the proton by global
analysis. The resulting CTEQ Parton Distributions are essential to the
interpretation of experiments at the world's leading high energy collider
facilities: Fermilab (Batavia, IL), DESY (Hamburg, Germany), RHIC (Brookhaven,
NY), and CERN (Geneva, Switzerland). The Electroweak sector of the SM is
extremely successful in explaining and predicting experimental data spanning a
range in energy from the atomic scale to the Z boson mass.&lt;br/&gt;However,
one major aspect of the model remains to be elucidated: the mechanism of
Electroweak Symmetry Breaking (EWSB), which generates masses for the W and Z
bosons while leaving electromagnetic gauge symmetry intact. In the SM, EWSB is
economically implemented through a single scalar particle called the Higgs
boson. However, the SM cannot explain observations such as the hierarchical
pattern of fermion masses, or the existence of dark matter; so it is widely
believed that new measurements at very high energies, or very high precision,
will soon turn up deviations from the SM that will point to new
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second part of the project represents
continuation of research to probe the EWSB mechanism in high energy collisions.
Special consideration is given to measuring the couplings of the top quark to W
and Z gauge bosons and to (elementary or composite) Higgs boson(s); and to
searching for the Higgs boson and determining its properties. These are prime
objectives of experiments at the Fermilab Tevatron collider and the CERN Large
Hadron Collider (LHC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
are as follows: The achievement of the project will contribute to understanding
of the fundamental interactions in Nature. The project trains graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows in theoretical high energy physics at MSU and at the
CTEQ summer schools. It also provides opportunities for undergraduate students
to participate in research through the REU program, and for high school teachers
and middle school students to experience forefront research through Summer
programs sponsored by MSU and the State of Michigan.