* 0855591
* MPS: Particle Physics and Cosmology in the Experimental Age
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lisa Randall, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 660,000.00

This award funds the research of the PI Lisa Randall in a number of areas of
particle physics and cosmology which are related to the phenomenological
consequences of warped extra dimensions. Chief among these are LHC-related
research along with model building and research related to Dark Matter. Many
models Randall discusses are designed to address the hierarchy problem. The
hierarchy problem remains one of the outstanding motivations for believing that
interesting Beyond-the-Standard Model physics should exist at the weak scale.
The question of why there is such a large separation between the Planck scale
and the weak scale, or even how a theory incorporating quantum mechanics and
special relativity can consistently maintain two such very different mass scales
without a highly unlikely fine-tuning remains the major theoretical issue today
for weak scale particle physics. Warped extra-dimensional geometry can
potentially resolve the hierarchy problem. In this scenario, the cut-off varies
over an extra dimension so that although the cut-off of a five dimensional
theory is of order of the Planck scale, the local cut-off on a brane (which we
will call the TeV brane) is of order a TeV. Randall is also guided by
connections to general relativity solutions, string theory, and cosmology. Some
work will be devoted to particular models, such as Randall-Sundrum (RS) warped
geometry and its experimental signatures, supersymmetry and search strategy and
model building, Higgs physics, and flavor physics. In addition Randall and
colleagues will consider other models for comparison and consider potentially
interesting signatures. With dark matter they will investigate new classes of
models and consider possible implications for the various experiments of
different types of models. In addition Randall plans to engage in more
theoretical work related to general relativity and cosmological solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has many broader impacts. With the onset
of the LHC there are many opportunities to explain particle physics and science
in general to the interested public. The activities in which Randall is and will
be involved include numerous public lectures and interdisciplinary conference
talks, magazine and newspaper articles, including pieces Randall has written and
articles Randall was interviewed for as well as appearances on TV, radio, and in
documentaries.