* 0855454
* Quantum Electrodynamics in Fundamental Physics and Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Ulrich Jentschura, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Quantum electrodynamics is the most accurately tested theory in physics, and it
is a cornerstone of our current understanding of nature. The most accurately
known fundamental constants are determined using the theory, and theoretical
calculations in this field require some of the most advanced computational
methods devised so far in theoretical physics. It is planned to illuminate the
nature of various higher-order correction terms that represent obstacles to a
further understanding of fundamental constants, notably, the Rydberg constant.
Also, the description of long-range (non-contact) interactions of atoms requires
a sophisticated formalism. These interactions actually proceed via so-called
virtual excitations of quantum fields. Various related interactions, including
the loss of energy due to non-contact friction, have not been sufficiently
understood in the microscopic world and yet are important, e.g., for the design
of nanostructured devices (nanotechnology).

The broader impact of the work will include potential new fundamental calculable
standards of time, based on calculable atomic transitions, which are necessary
for a variety of industrial applications and also enable scientists to find
relations among various fundamental constants. Another impact is on numerical
algorithms for so-called special functions describing physical and technical
processes, and for the diagonalization of matrices where industrial applications
can also be envisaged. The education of a graduate student forms an integral
part of the research endeavour.