* 0855291
* High-Energy Neutrino Astrophysics with IceCube at Georgia Tech
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ignacio Taboada, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2012
* USD 272,191.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). It will provide funds to pursue the analysis of IceCube
data. IceCube is a high-energy neutrino telescope currently under construction
at the South Pole. Half of the detector has been installed and is being
operated. Once completed in 2011, the in-ice component will have a volume of one
cubic kilometer. IceCube's main objective is the observation of high-energy
neutrinos from astrophysical sources. It is strongly connected with other
experiments in the field of astroparticle physics and its results can be used
for a multi-messenger survey of the high-energy sky. The group plans to make
contributions in three areas of research: 1. Search for neutrinos in coincidence
with gamma-ray bursts: detection would prove these objects to be the source of
the highest energy cosmic rays. 2. Search for high-energy neutrinos from core
collapse supernovae: a discovery would significantly enhance our understanding
of supernovae. 3. Observation of atmospheric neutrinos via the cascade channel:
to date, high-energy atmospheric neutrinos have not yet been observed with the
cascade channel. Increasing the detector size and improvements in reconstruction
algorithms and background rejection techniques will allow IceCube to make this
observation.

The broader impacts of the program include activities involving elementary,
middle and high schools particularly where a large fraction of the student body
is of Latin-American descent.