* 0855090
* CI-ADDO-NEW: Storage System Trace Collection
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2012
* John Chandy, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2012
* USD 86,284.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storage system researchers have
typically used I/O traces from various sources to drive their analysis and
research. However, these I/O traces fail to adequately capture the effect of I/O
on application performance. Moreover, they do not scale with other parts of the
overall system whether it be application, systems, or processor. As a result, it
is difficult to replay the trace for use in storage systems evaluation. This is
particularly problematic since many of the extant publicly available I/O traces
are quite old.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project is to provide to
the storage research community a set of traces that will allow for accurate
replay and evaluation of storage technologies. The traces will be from real
systems at different levels of the storage system hierarchy including network
layer, file system, and low-level disk. These include traces that do not
currently exist in the storage community such as iSCSI traces, virtual machine
traces, and MS Exchange traces. The project will also provide a set of tools for
tracing application dependent I/O, replaying traces, and analysis. The tools and
collected traces will be made available as a community resource through publicly
available sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
include providing tools and traces that can assist storage system researchers in
developing new I/O system technologies. Since storage systems are critical to
the current information-based economy, advances in understanding I/O system
behavior should be highly beneficial. It should also be useful to data-intensive
applications of national interest such as the genome project, weather
simulation, and digital libraries.