* 0855630
* Forward Meson Production and Spin Asymmetries at RHIC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Steven Heppelmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 495,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the same way that atoms consist of
spinning protons, electrons and neutrons, held together by electrical forces,
the proton consists of spinning quarks held together by an analogous but
mysterious Quantum Chromo Dynamic (QCD) force. Just as the dynamics of atoms are
critically tied to the pairing of spin up and spin down electrons within atomic
orbital shells, so are the dynamics of protons tied to relationships between
spin up and spin down quarks. These relationships between spinning quarks inside
a spinning proton are, however, far from fully
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brookhaven National Laboratory has been the
first to build a proton collider accelerator that allows experimenters to
prepare the spin orientation of pairs of protons before they collide at high
energy, up to 500 GeV in the center of mass. It is found that when the spins are
aligned with an axis perpendicular to the motion of the protons, high energy
particles (neutral pions, etas and jets of particles) produced in the very
forward directions are sensitive to the orientation of this pre-selected spin
axis. This research uses a lead-glass calorimeter in the forward region of the
larger STAR detector to make measurements that can sort out the dependence of
production of these particles upon our choice of initial proton spin directions.
The value of these measurements is in the challenge presented to the theory of
QCD to explain these interesting spin effects. Current theory is quite specific
about how free quarks would interact and how that interaction depends upon spin.
What we hope to learn from this research goes to the fundamental and unresolved
questions about the unique interactions of these quarks within their environment
inside the proton. Ultimately, the goal is to understand the most basic nature
of the proton as a composite object. The research involves participation of
undergraduate students who assist in fabrication of electronics and in analysis
of data from the experiment. One component will also involve a project done by
middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;