* 0855916
* MAJOR: Computational Tools for Enhancing Creativity in Biologically Inspired Engineering Design
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Ashok Goel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 783,457.00

Intellectual Merits: Analogy is a fundamental process of creativity. By
definition, biologically inspired design is based on cross-domain analogies.
This project is developing a computational model of creative analogies in
biologically inspired engineering design, and building an interactive
environment for enhancing biologically inspired design innovations. For a
creative analogy to occur (e.g., design of nano-scale super-hydrophobic coatings
inspired by the self-cleaning mechanism of lotus leafs), there must be
significant similarity between the target problem and the source case at some
deep level. For a creative analogy to work well, analogical transfer must take
into account both the deep similarities and the dissimilarities between the
target and the source. The hypotheses are that creative analogies in
biologically inspired engineering design are &lt;br/&gt;? enabled by knowledge
of deep similarities in the abstract teleological mechanisms of biological and
engineering systems, &lt;br/&gt;? constrained by knowledge of deep
dissimilarities between the physical structures in biological systems and the
physical structures available to realize an abstract teleological mechanism in
an engineering system, &lt;br/&gt;? use an organizational schemata for the
design cases that captures the relationships between teleological mechanisms and
the physical structures in a biological system, &lt;br/&gt;? use knowledge of
specific design cases of biological systems (for problem understanding) and
knowledge of general design patterns that capture their abstract teleological
mechanisms (for solution generation), and &lt;br/&gt;? use multimodal
representations for the design cases in which the physical structures are
represented both visually and verbally.&lt;br/&gt;The computational model
accounts for both problem-driven and solution-driven biologically inspired
design, compound analogies in the design solution, and interactions between the
process of problem decomposition and the processes of analogical retrieval,
mapping and transfer. An interactive environment provides access to specific
design cases of biological systems as well as general design patterns that
capture the abstract teleological mechanisms of biological systems. It will
organize knowledge of design cases in a drawing/shape,
structure/behavior/function schemata that captures the relationships between the
teleological mechanisms and the physical structures in a biological system, and
uses multimodal representations in which the physical structures are represented
both visually and verbally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are evaluating an
interactive tool through in vitro and in vivo studies. In particular, they are
conducting controlled experiments that vary the design problem and access to
knowledge as independent variables, and measure reduction in cognitive errors
and improvement in quality of design innovations as the dependent variables.
Improvement in the quality of innovations will be measured in terms of the
amount of problem evolution, the number of analogies in the design solution, and
the degree of correctness and completeness of the design and its
explanation.&lt;br/&gt;At present, there are few computational models of
biologically inspired design and few tools for supporting it. Although
biological inspired design is promising, its practice today is ad hoc. By
systemizing knowledge of the processes of biologically inspired design, and by
developing computational models of creative analogy and computational tools for
supporting analogy based design, this research has the potential for
transforming the practice of biologically inspired
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Biologically inspired design is an
important and increasingly wide spread movement in many areas of engineering
design ranging from robot design to technologies for environmentally conscious
sustainable development. This research will contribute to multiple design
domains in engineering. This research is based in part on cognitive studies
conducted in classes on biologically inspired design, and the proposed
interactive tool has the potential to revolutionize teaching and learning of
biologically inspired design.&lt;br/&gt;