* 0855622
* Three-body recombination at thermal energies
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Viatcheslav Kokoouline, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 01/31/2012
* USD 114,725.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is targeting an opportunity
to build on the very recent development of a qualitatively new approach to the
problem of three body recombination at thermal energies. Special attention will
be made to develop theoretical and computational techniques to study and control
elementary processes taking place during combustion of coal and, in a longer
time frame, simple hydrocarbons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three body collisions play
an important role in processes occurring at thermal and ultracold temperatures.
New robust theoretical and numerical techniques for calculation of rate
coefficients for three body collisions at thermal energies will be developed and
applied to several processes important for fundamental science (primordial three
body recombination of hydrogen) and applied science (coal combustion). This
project will primarily deal with three body collisions of neutral atoms at
thermal and low energies (chemical reactions). However, a further development
for charged particles is envisaged at a later stage. Principal points of the
present project are the following: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Development of
techniques for determination of three body rate coefficients at thermal
energies. The main effort will be made on the reaction of three body
recombination, A+B+C &gt; AB(v,j)+C. The idea is to develop exact (mostly
numerical) and theoretical (with minimum numerical calculations) techniques and
test them on relatively simple systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Methods: (a)
Numerical solution of the three body Schrödinger equation, using hyperspherical
coordinates with a recently developed efficient technique for the eigenchannel R
matrix with slow variable discretization; (b) A simple theoretical two step
model for three body recombination: A+B&gt;AB*, AB*+C &gt; AB (v,j)+C + energy.
Another type of coordinates, Eckart coordinates, will be employed to solve the
three body Schrödinger equation. The Eckart coordinates combine certain
advantages of the well established alternatives: hyperspherical and Jacobi
coordinates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number
of broader impacts should emerge from the successful completion of the research
in this project: (1) the cross disciplinary importance of the developed methods
(in physics, chemistry, astrophysics, plasma physics, combustion chemistry, and
in the control of combustion); (2) the training of talented graduate students
who will have the tools needed to tackle state-of-the-art problems in this
subject area.