* 0855392
* Collaborative Research:   Constraining the Timing and Nature of Proterozoic Metamorphism in the Northwest U.S. Cordillera
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* William McClelland, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2010
* USD 45,589.00

The goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that garnet-bearing
amphibolites and pelitic schists from the northwest U.S. Cordillera preserve a
record of late Mesoproterozoic high pressure metamorphism that can be attributed
to significant crustal thickening along the western margin of Laurentia before
or during the assembly of the supercontinent Rodinia. To this end a research
team from Washington State University, West Virginia University, and University
of Idaho are undertaking an integrated geochronologic and metamorphic analysis
of garnet-bearing metamorphic assemblages in the northwest U.S. Cordillera in
order to: 1) determine the ages of metamorphism using Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd
geochronology of garnets and U-Th-Pb geochronology of monazites in order to
determine the extent of Proterozoic metamorphism throughout the northwest U.S.
Cordillera; 2) establish the pressure-temperature conditions of mineral growth
in these metamorphic assemblages; 3) compare the results from the garnet and
monazite chronometers and integrate this information with the metamorphic
fabrics using detailed petrography; and 4) link both the geochronologic and
pressure-temperature information to the penetrative deformational fabrics
preserved in the rocks. Establishment of a linkage between late Mesoproterozoic
metamorphism and the high temperature, high-pressure assemblages that exist in
these rocks over a considerable area will show that a major period of crustal
thickening during convergent tectonism occurred on the western margin of
Laurentia at the end of the Mesoproterozoic. The presence of an approximately
one billion year old contractional belt in the northwestern U.S., if confirmed,
would imply that the history of metamorphism and deformation in the Cordillera
is more complicated than previously appreciated. These results would provide
important piercing points for late Mesoproterozoic tectonic reconstructions. In
particular, results of this project will provide additional constraints on
correlations of western Laurentia with other cratonal fragments such as
Australia, Siberia, Antarctica, and China and will ultimately impact various
reconstructions of Rodinia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Grenville orogeny was an
important event that substantially modified the North American continent
approximately one billion years ago. The metamorphic rocks produced in this
event can be found in wide belt that extends from eastern Canada to southwestern
U.S. and northern Mexico. Preliminary geochronological data yielded the
unexpected result that metamorphism of this age also occurred in the
northwestern U.S. To confirm these data, this project is using new
geochronological methods to determine the ages of minerals that are commonly
produced during the metamorphism that occurs during mountain belt formation. If
the preliminary results are born out, current understanding of the nature of the
Grenville event will require revision. Evidence for a billion year old
metamorphic event in the northwest U.S. would also require modification of
current ideas about the configuration of continents at that time.