* 0855901
* Special Cycles on Shimura Varieties and Derivative of L-Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Tonghai Yang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,999.00

The investigator is mainly working on three projects. The first one is a
fundamental and basic intersection problem between the Hirzebruch-Zagier
divisors and arithmetic CM cycles in a Hilbert modular surface over Z. The goal
is to prove a beautiful intersection formula conjectured by J. Bruinier and the
investigator. It has at least two applications. One is a highly non-trivial
generalization of the celebrated Chowla-Selberg formula, a conjecture of Colmez
on Faltings' height of CM abelian varieties. The second is to obtain a nice
upper bound for the denominator of the CM values of Igusa invariants|refining a
conjecture of Lauter. The second application is also practically important in
Cohn-Lauter cryptosystem using genus two curves. The second project is a joint
one with Bruinier They try to study how the CM value of twisted Bocherds
products behave as the CM cycle change. They also want to find a factorization
formula for CM values. Twisted Borcherds products are a family of canonical
Hilbert modular functions with coeficients in the real quadratic field. The
third project is to solve a general intersection problem in a degenerated
Hilbert modular surface and use it to give another proof of the beautiful
formula of Gross and Keating on intersection of three modular correspondences.

Broad Impact: Mathematics has always been essential to the development of
science and technology. Now Mathematics has become increasingly important to
business, finance, biology, and social studies too. Basic research in
mathematics, which is usually `pure' mathematics (without application), has
increasingly found unexpected and deep application in unexpected areas. For
example, the number theory I studies used to call the queen of Mathematics,
meaning that it is very beautiful and very attractive but useless in practice.
But now it is extremely important in coding theory and cryptosystem, both are
essential to our electric communication and electronic business transaction as
well as our national security. Arithmetic and algebraic geometry which is also
in part of my proposed research has now applications in engineering such as face
recognition and economics. My proposed research contributes to basic and deep
understanding of some arithmetic and geometric subjects in number theory and
arithmetic geometry, and will in turn contribute to our society's well-being.
One of my proposed project has direct applications to cryptosystem, which is
essential to our national security and national economy.