* 0855436
* Request for Funding Support of the 2009 DPF Meeting at Wayne State University; Detroit, Michigan; July 26-31,2009
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Paul Karchin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

The proposal requests funds from the National Science Foundation to help defray
the cost of organizing the 2009 Meeting of the Division of Particles and Fields
(DPF2009) of the American Physical Society on July 26 - 31, 2009, at Wayne State
University, Detroit, Michigan. The funds are to be used entirely to support
graduate students and postdoctoral research associates who otherwise could not
afford to attend the conference. The organizers will waive the registration fee
for these students and postdocs, and to pay for housing costs and some travel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the 2009 Division of Particles and Fields Meeting the
latest results in both experimental and theoretical particle physics, particle
astrophysics, cosmology, and heavy ion physics will be presented in plenary and
parallel sessions. Many of the talks at this meeting will be presented by
younger physicists, including the graduate students and postdoctoral research
associates who will be supported by this grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts are as follows: The proposed program of the 2009 Meeting of the
Division of Particles and Fields will promote general interest in science while
advancing discovery. It will include a special lecture given to the public. The
organizers will invite a speaker who is known to the public and who can present
forefront results in high energy physics in a popular manner.