* 0855370
* University of Maine Proposal for Joining the NSF Center for Advanced Forestry Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Robert Wagner, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 01/31/2015
* USD 357,350.00

IIP 0855370 University of Maine Wagner

University of Maine (UM) is planning to join the existing multi-university
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) entitled "The Center
for Advanced Forestry Systems" (CAFS) which was established in 2007 with four
member institutions: North Carolina State University (lead university), Oregon
State University, Purdue University and Virginia Tech. The primary focus of the
proposed research site within CAFS will be modeling the productivity of managed
natural forests. This research focus will be addressed at multiple scales
ranging from the individual tree to the regional forest. UM has a long history
of applied research in the management of naturally regenerated forests as well
as a strong relationship with the forest products industry. The proposed
activities at UM will augment current CAFS projects, and will more fully address
the needs for scientific and technological advances for enhancing the
competitiveness of the US forestry sector.

The effort at UM has the potential to improve the competitiveness of the forest
products industry by solving key problems using applied research and enhanced
institutional collaboration. The broader scientific community will benefit
through refereed publications and presentations at scientific meetings that
focus on key nationwide research questions. Enhanced graduate student research
opportunities will increase the number of trained professionals able to address
these future forest resource challenges. UM also plans to address employee and
student diversity issues.