* 0855067
* II-NEW: Collaborative Research: Spam Processing, Archiving, and Monitoring Community Facility (SPAM Commons)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Brent Kang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 04/30/2011
* USD 120,000.00

In this project, the PIs propose to construct and develop a shared
infrastructure to support the collection and maintenance of realistic, large
scale spam data sets, referred as SPAM Commons.

Spam is a problem in many important communications media such as email and web.
A sub-problem of spam, phishing (a form of online pretexting), caused an
estimated $3.2B in damages in 2007. The broad impact of effective spam filtering
methods can be estimated in billions of dollars in several communications media
such as email and web.

Spam has also invaded other media, with concrete attack examples in social
networks, blogosphere, Internet telephony (VoIP), instant messaging, and click
fraud.

Unfortunately, spam research has been hampered by the lack of published real
world data sets due to concerns with privacy and company intellectual property.
This project team develops a shared infrastructure to support the collection and
maintenance of realistic, large scale spam data sets, called Spam Processing,
Archiving, and Monitoring Community Facility (SPAM Commons).

The main goals of SPAM Commons are: (1) to facilitate remedial research that
will stem the wastes and losses caused by spam, and (2) enable revolutionary
research that aim for stopping certain kinds of spam attacks altogether.

SPAM Commons is divided into a Public Partition and a Protected Partition.

The Public Partition is a direct analog of standard corpora for speech and image
recognition research, consisting of a systematic and regular collection of both
spam and legitimate data in the various communications media, starting from
email and web spam, and expanding into other communications media as spam
becomes a serious threat in each area and data become available.

The Protected Partition consists of a combined data and processing facility that
makes private data or near real-time spam data available for experimental
evaluation of spam defense mechanisms in a protected testbed. Access to such
protected data will enable new spam research on real-time evolving spam and real
world data sets that is infeasible today.

The intellectual challenges of the SPAM Commons project extend beyond the new
research on various abovementioned spam areas enabled by the availability of
data sets. The construction of both partitions of SPAM Commons includes
significant intellectual challenges of their own. First, the isolation of
Protected Partition addresses partially the concerns of privacy, which remains a
general research problem. Second, useful spam and legitimate data sets require
automated distinction of spam from legitimate documents with certainty, which
remains an open research question in email, web, and other media. Third, the
adversarial and mutual evolution of spam producers and defenders require
continuous collection of fresh data for further study. Finally, the collection
and streaming of near-real-time spam data represent research resources currently
unavailable to spam researchers. Advances in these areas will spur the growth
and evolution of SPAM Commons that will enable new research on the evolving and
growing spam problem.

The impact of SPAM Commons data sets on experimental spam research may be
similar to the impact of large corpora in disciplines such as speech/image
recognition and natural language processing, which achieved a level of
scientific result reproducibility and comparativeness after the use of such
corpora became standard requirements. The proposed data repository will be
supported and used by 9 university partners (Clayton State, Emory, Georgia Tech,
NC A&T, Northwestern, Texas A&M, UC Davis, U. Georgia, UNC Charlotte), and
several industry partners (IBM, PureWire, Secure Computing).