* 0855543
* Studies of Fundamental Symmetry Breaking Effects via Precision Experiments at JLab
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ashot Gasparian, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 480,000.00

Symmetries play a fundamental role in our understanding of Nature. In physics
they define the basic conservation laws and general properties of matter,
radiation, as well as interactions between them. Developments in nuclear and
particle physics in the past several decades have shown that symmetry breaking
effects also play a critical role in the formation and development of our
universe. In particular, the lifetimes of pseudo-scalar mesons (neutral pions,
eta and eta-prime mesons) are defined by broken symmetries in Nature. The
symmetry breaking effects, though very critical for the formation of matter, are
extremely small and require high precision state-of-the-art experiments to be
able to "look back" at the early stages of development of the universe. The
PrimEx project aims to perform high precision investigations of the properties
of two of the lightest elementary particles: the lifetimes of neutral pions and
eta mesons. The breaking effects of so called "chiral" or "left-right" symmetry
in Nature provide the existence of these particles, as well as, define their
lifetimes. The PrimEx collaboration, lead by the PI of this project, completed
the first stage of the precision measurement of the neutral pion lifetime. The
new result is a factor of two more precise than the current average of the world
value, as presented in the Particle Data Book (PDG). The second stage of this
experiment is planned to perform within the next few years to reach the proposed
factor of five improvement over PDG's current value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; At
North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCAT), a historically black university,
90% of the students are African American -- students especially underrepresented
in physics. Awards to NCAT's PrimEx group from 2002 to the present allowed for
the support and training of 9 undergraduate students, 6 graduate students and
the group's present postdoc. Funding for this award will continue to support
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a postdoc -- giving them unique
opportunities in experimental nuclear and particle physics at the forefront of
the field.