* 0855125
* II-EN: High-Performance Network Monitoring Infrastructure For Research in a Large-Scale Operational Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2011
* USD 207,942.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing security
monitoring to robustly protect large sites against Internet attacks presents
exceptionally difficult research challenges. There is a world of difference
between detecting attackers in a small-scale environment such as a departmental
LAN (as is often used for evaluation of academic studies) and doing so at the
scale of a large site. Algorithms that work fine in the presence of a modicum of
background traffic can be rendered completely useless when faced with two orders
of magnitude more background traffic, for reasons of both performance and false
positives induced by the much greater diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this proposal is to greatly enhance our UC Berkeley
infrastructure that monitors the campus border traffic in order to facilitate
the continuation of security research tied to the operational requirements of
one of the largest academic network environments in the country. The proposed
new cluster will serve as a powerful research platform for many future studies,
providing unprecedented capabilities for analyzing a large-scale operational
network in depth. Furthermore, on a technical level it will allow the principal
investigators (PIs) to systematically assess the scalability of the our
clusterized approach to larger network loads and determine what is required to
provide in-depth monitoring capabilities for other environments. Intellectual
merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The instrumentation
infrastructure supported by this proposal will serve as the key enabler for a
range of research otherwise not possible to undertake at an equivalent scale.
These span: (1) detection algorithms that operate robustly in the presence of
highly diverse background traffic, (2) indepth semantic analysis of the very
broad range of modern network applications, (3) efficient recording of high-
volume traffic streams for forensic analysis, (4) scalability assessment of
clustering and multicore techniques for achieving high performance monitoring,
and (5) ties with the UC Berkeley cybersecurity staff leading to investigation
of new research problems that arise when deploying network defenses
operationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The ability to richly
monitor large traffic streams in real-time has major implications for Internet
security, as it is a key component for securing large Internet sites. This
effort will enable a range of research directly grounded in the operations of a
high-performance, high-volume site, a type of environment only very lightly
addressed in the field due to its significant logistical and technical
difficulties. The monitoring system will realize an order of magnitude more
power for such analysis than to our knowledge any existing deployment provides.
As such, it will serve not only as a platform for network security research at
scales previously unattainable, but also as an exemplar for how others can
construct and operate such systems. Thus, this effort has the potential both to
enable new discoveries regarding protecting high-volume network environments,
and to facilitate the broader use of such technology for better securing and
operating high-speed networks. Finally, the infrastructure from this grant will
provide doctoral students with an unparalleled opportunity for undertaking
research in an environment unmatched by any other in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;