* 0855421
* Collinear and Soft Gluon Corrections in Top Quark and Higgs Processes at the LHC and the Tevatron
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Nikolaos Kidonakis, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 120,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Understanding and controlling the effects of QCD is crucial for performing
precision tests of the standard model (SM) and detecting and identifying signals
of new physics at hadron colliders. Perturbative QCD calculations are plagued by
the dependence on the renormalization and factorization scales, resulting in
uncertainties in the predictions of cross sections of typically O (100%) at
leading order in the perturbation series in the strong coupling constant. To
reduce the dependence on these arbitrary, unphysical parameters, QCD predictions
need to include higher order corrections. The cross sections of the SM processes
under consideration in this proposal are all known at next-to leading order
(NLO) QCD (top-pair production, single top production) and next-to-next-to
leading order (NNLO) QCD (Higgs production via gluon fusion). The PIs intend to
further improve these calculations by including soft gluon resummation. The
proposed calculations will further reduce the residual theoretical uncertainties
due to the scale dependence, which is necessary in view of the envisioned
experimental accuracy at the LHC. In the data analysis multi-purpose Monte Carlo
(MC) generators such as Pythia and Herwig are well-used tools but providing
improved predictions including higher-order corrections beyond the parton shower
approach in form of a MC tool is still work in progress. The broader impacts are
as follows: The proposed activities will play an important role in providing
improved QCD predictions of a variety of processes in the SM and its
supersymmetric extension that are crucial to fully exploit the physics potential
of the LHC. Moreover, the calculational advancements in perturbative QCD
developed as part of this project as well as the inclusion of soft resummation
in Herwig++ will benefit the entire field of hadron collider phenomenology Dr.
Kidonakis is already involving undergraduate students in his research
activities. He plans to extend these activities by providing future teachers of
Kennesaw's Master of Arts in Teaching program with a research experience in
particle physics.