* 0855129
* II-NEW: Exploration of Social Trust in Mobile Educational Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Robin Kravets, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 07/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Advanced wireless technologies allow users to communicate anytime and anywhere
and wireless communities are becoming ubiquitous with the proliferation of
various handheld mobile devices. These communities are very different from
traditional Internet-based online communities in which people are connected with
one another but neither know each other in person nor necessarily care where
they are at any specific moment. In contrast, in wireless communities, people
are much more closely bound to each other through a sense of sharing a common
physical and/or social context. This planning grant explores small 'nomadic' and
'settled'- like wireless communities in educational environments and the social
trust aspects when using educational services within these mobile learning
communities (MLC). The PIs develop a limited mobile wireless testbed, with
hybrid wireless peer-to-peer, and infrastructure-based connectivity, and a small
set of trust-ensuring educational services, made available in the form of a MLC-
toolkit to students in a selected class. The PIs validate the MLC- toolkit in a
small MLC group and explore the social trust depending on the type of class /
users activity, active participation of students, and mobility of students
(nomadic versus settled). The PIs also explore, where the assurance of social
trust comes from, e.g., from friends and their various types of ties (strong
versus weak ties), and/or from the underlying software and hardware
infrastructure. The impact is in developing, and deploying the MLC-toolkit, and
understanding social trust metrics and their relations to users and underlying
infrastructures.