* 0855482
* Hyperpolarized 129Xe: Physics and Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Brian Saam, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 07/31/2012
* USD 252,261.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inert (or 'noble') gases are so
named because they generally do not interact much with other materials. Like
many other elements, however, certain of these gases possess a property called
'spin,' that is, the nucleus at the center of each atom behaves like a very tiny
spinning magnet. The presence of these spinning magnets can be detected, because
when acting in concert, they can produce a detectable electrical current in a
coil of wire by a technique is known as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). In
this project, a laser technique known as 'spin-exchange optical pumping' is used
to generate an extraordinary alignment ('polarization') of the spins in the
isotope Xe-129, which is stable (non-radioactive) and is abundant in naturally
occurring xenon. This so-called 'hyperpolarization' of xenon gas enhances its
sensitivity to NMR by a factor of 10,000 or more, making possible a wide variety
of both fundamental and applied magnetic resonance
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main thrusts to the project. The
first is to improve and optimize the state-of-the-art method for generating
large quantities of hyperpolarized xenon. In this method, the gas flows through
a long glass cell through which the laser light also travels. The laser light is
absorbed by a vapor of alkali metal (usually rubidium). The single valence
electron of the alkali-metal atom also possesses spin and is aligned or
polarized by the light. The alkali-metal atoms then collide with the xenon atoms
and the spin polarization is transferred to the xenon nuclei. Several techniques
based on magnetic resonance of the alkali-metal electron are applied to
quantitatively assess both the degree of alkali-metal polarization and the
degree of xenon polarization. These are crucial diagnostics for optimizing
performance of the system. The second main thrust of this project applies
hyperpolarized xenon to a long standing problem in fundamental physics: the
ability to predict how a large system of mutually interacting particles will
behave. In this case, the large system is 1020 or so Xe-129 nuclei, frozen in
place at -200 °C with their nuclear spins interacting magnetically with each
other. This is an ideal system in which to study the effects of chaos on the NMR
signal generated by all of these nuclei. It is an especially compelling system
from a fundamental perspective, since chaotic effects are only understood for
so-called classical systems, whereby one can in principle know simultaneously
each of the positions and velocities of the interacting particles. The system of
interacting Xe-129 nuclei is clearly governed by quantum mechanical theory,
whereby such precise knowledge of each particle is forbidden. Despite this
seeming paradox, a collaborator predicted a universal NMR signal behavior that
is remarkably matched by experiments using a mathematical analog of classical
chaos in the quantum realm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is nearly impossible to
overstate the multidisciplinary reach of research into hyperpolarized noble
gases. In additional to fundamental physics, they are applied in medical
imaging, biochemistry and molecular imaging, and surface science. All of these
applications depend on an understanding of the basic physics of the spin-
exchange optical pumping process in order to optimize the polarization and
production rate. The medical imaging application is perhaps most compelling:
hyperpolarized noble gases are ideal because they are non-toxic and can be
inhaled to produce beautiful magnetic resonance images (MRI) of animal and human
lungs. Physicians studying lung disease and drug companies studying potential
treatments are all keenly interested in this technology. Research previous to
this award has already produced a patent on storage cells for hyperpolarized
xenon that are quite relevant to both of these companies. Hence, the project
reaches across disciplines within physics (from AMO to condensed matter, to the
relationship between quantum mechanics and chaos), impacts commercial
development of hyperpolarized Xe-129 for medical imaging and other applications,
and involves students at all levels. In particular, a track record of involving
undergraduates, especially women, in this research program is well established
and will continue.