* 0855628
* Collaborative Research:   Quantifying Feedbacks between Groundwater Decline, Wind Erosion, and Ecological Change in Desert Vegetation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/12/2008,08/31/2012
* James Kaste, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,121.00

This award will fund an analysis of the interactions between groundwater, soil
and vegetation properties, and desert dust generation. Wind erosion of desert
soils is thought to cause irreversible change to ecosystems, and the mobilized
particulate matter can seriously degrade air quality. In deserts globally,
regions that produce the most dust are characterized by low elevation
depressions where wind erodible material has been and continues to be deposited
fluvially. Shallow groundwater is often pumped from these regions for
agricultural and municipal use. Since water demands are rapidly increasingly in
many desert regions, there is increasing need to understand of how groundwater
management might influence dust generation. Ideally, information could be
attained that would guide groundwater management with the goal of promoting soil
stability. This project will utilize measurements of vegetation and soil
conditions and wind velocities to model wind erosion at a range of sites that
experienced successively greater groundwater fluctuation over the past 20 years.
Model results will be compared to direct measurements of recent soil loss using
radiogenic fallout isotopes and dust traps. Finally, measurements of soil
resource availability (nutrients and soil moisture) will be used to understand
feedback processes between groundwater decline, soil loss, and ecosystem changes
that might promote continued soil instability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will have a broad impact on our understanding of the role
water management has on dust and air quality in deserts. The work will form
collaborations between academic institutions and regulatory groups in the
proposed study region, near Bishop, California. Both the Inyo County Water
Department and the Great Basin Unified Air Pollution Control District will
provide necessary data to the project and gain important information on how
their vegetation and air quality management activities could be tailored to gain
long-term sustainability.