* 0855659
* Function of Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Transcription Factors in Specifying Stomatal Cell Fate
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Keiko Torii, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2012
* USD 437,926.00

The productivity of land plants relies on the proper development and function of
stomata, which are microscopic valves on the plant surface. Stomata regulate the
movement of gases between plants and the atmosphere. Molecules of carbon dioxide
(a greenhouse gas) enter the plant through the stomata and are converted into
carbohydrates by photosynthesis. Oxygen, a byproduct of photosynthesis, is then
released from plants to the atmosphere through the stomata. In addition, water
loss through open stomata, a process known as transpiration, promotes water
movement from the roots and supports plant growth, while closure of stomata
prevents plants from wilting. During plant development, stomata are formed
through a series of differentiation events, where activation of "master
regulatory" transcription factors with a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif
play a pivotal role. Three bHLH proteins, SPEECHLESS, MUTE, and FAMA, act as a
switch for three consecutive steps of stomatal cell differentiation, and two
other bHLH proteins, SCREAM (SCRM)/ICE1 and SCRM2, act as their partners through
the formation of heterodimers. The activity of the SCREAM factors determines the
fate of the plant epidermis: the complete absence of SCREAMs eliminates stomatal
cell lineages, while gain-of-function of SCRM/ICE1 results in plants that are
covered with stomata. This research project will uncover the function and
regulation of SCRM/ICE1 and its paralog in specifying stomatal cell fate, and
investigate how SCRM/ICE1 influence stomatal-specific bHLH proteins. Biochemical
mechanisms that inhibit their action will be investigated, and novel factors
that regulate their activity and function will be isolated using a sensitive
genetic screen. SCRM/ICE1 has a dual role in freezing tolerance and stomatal
differentiation, and the mechanism of the dual function will be explored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include the training
of young female scientists (a starting postdoctoral fellow and a graduate
student) and an undergraduate student, who will have excellent opportunities to
obtain broad training in plant developmental biology, molecular genetics,
biochemistry, and cell imaging. Additional undergraduate researchers will also
be trained through independent research for credit. They will be mentored
directly by the PI to formulate scientific hypotheses, interpret their results,
and present their findings within the laboratory as well as in a public setting.
A part of this project will be incorporated into the Introductory Biology
classroom (with an enrollment of greater than 200 students) and into practical
laboratory experiences for college sophomores and juniors. Outreach lectures
will be initiated to emphasize the connections between plant stomata and human
life, and to encourage young female scientists to advance in their career paths.