* 0855426
* RUI: Oscillons and Casimir Forces in Classical and Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Noah Graham, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2013
* USD 120,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Field theories provide our best known description of the fundamental
interactions of Nature. In many situations, one can make significant progress by
considering the theory. Perturbatively, starting from a collection of waves
propagating independently. This research project will address two situations in
which this perturbative approach fails in a fundamental way. The first situation
arises when one considers the possibility of waves forming coherent lumps that
do not disperse. While static objects of this kind have been well studied, much
less is known about solutions that undergo regular oscillations, called
oscillons or breathers. Such objects are especially of interest in the early
universe, when the large energies needed to form them are available. This
project will investigate the existence of oscillons in particle physics models,
the rate at which they would have formed in the early universe, and the
potential role they could play in generating the out-of-equilibrium conditions
necessary for baryogenesis, the process by which ordinary matter formed in the
early universe. The second situation arises when one considers quantum
mechanical effects that cannot be approximated by weak coupling. This project
will focus on Casimir forces induced by quantum electromagnetic fluctuations in
conductors or strong dielectrics, and their analogs in related theories. In such
situations the Casimir force depends on coherent properties of the geometry and
orientation of the objects, and differs qualitatively from the result one would
obtain perturbatively. Recently developed techniques have made it possible to
calculate Casimir forces for a broad set of new geometries and materials. These
techniques will be used to study shape, orientation, and material dependence of
Casimir forces and to formulate and attempt to prove universal theorems
governing their behavior. Similar techniques will also be used to study Casimir
energies of electroweak string solutions in the Standard Model of particle
physics. The broader impacts are as follows: The techniques and results of this
research are potentially applicable to a wide range of other branches of
physics, applied physics, and nonlinear dynamics, as are the computational tools
to be developed during the course of this work. The source code for these tools
will be made publicly available for use by other researchers. This research
program will also significantly impact the teaching of physics at Middlebury
College, both through the undergraduates directly involved and through
enhancements to the curriculum that will grow out of this work. Students
participating in any of these aspects will have the opportunity to develop new
skills in computational physics and nonlinear dynamics, and to use these skills
to better understand fundamental concepts in physics.