* 0855040
* Out of scattering plane (e,2e) and laser assisted electron impact autoionization studies of helium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Keith MacAdam, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 340,000.00

This experimental research program is aimed at studies of electron-impact
ionization of atomic helium. One experiment will measure electron angular
distributions of the two electrons, one the incoming electron and one the
electron from the ionization, scattered from the atom over a full 360 degrees.
Data will be taken in the region of the helium autoionizing states (excited
states of atoms that decay by emission of particles rather than light), both on
and off resonance. The results are expected to add new insight into a postulated
double scattering mechanism. A second experiment will investigate helium
autoionization in the presence of a laser field. Ejected electron spectra will
be measured which will contain sidebands separated from the normal
autoionization peaks by energies equal to integral numbers of the photon energy.
The profile of the autoionization peaks are also expected to be modified by the
presence of the laser. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the program
involves student education. Students acquire skills in lasers, electronics,
vacuum systems, and computer programming, networking, and interfacing with
experiments. They present their work at national and international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;