* 0855908
* CreativeIT Pilot Project : Collaborative Undergraduate Computing Studios Facilitating Decentralized Participation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Timothy McLaughlin, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 293,057.00

This Pilot CreativeIT Project provides innovative approach to promote creativity
in computationally intensive distributed undergraduate design studios. This is
accomplished through regulated modifications of team structure, workflow, and
student use of awareness technology in three successive studio courses. Using
these techniques, the student participants develop skills as well as a more
profound understanding of specific influences on technical and visual
creativity. This work addresses a project management issue faced by major
companies in the visual effects, animation, and electronic game industries where
high levels of technical and visual creativity are required from a global
workforce. The objectives are to define conditions in which information
technology promotes creativity in a decentralized studio environment and
establish a sound basis for conducting a multi-institutional
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants in the studio portion of
this project are located on three campuses, one overseas, and one high school.
They join together in small teams that span the different locations to work
collaboratively on projects requiring both visual and technical problem solving.
The studios are assessed for success of learning environments by a professional
evaluator, and after completion the projects are rated on a Likert Scale for
technical and visual creativity. The results are be analyzed in terms of the
perceived benefits of awareness tools and their impact on the quality of the
outcome. An advisory board for the project is composed of industry
professionals, studio instructors, and the evaluator. The board plans, monitors,
and conducts the studio courses; and assesses the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
promotes the CreativeIT vision of developing innovative approaches to education
in computationally intensive environments. This is accomplished in three ways:
1) by increasing our understanding of how technology, team composition, and
workflow affect creativity; 2) by developing skill-sets among students working
with distant collaborators, and 3) by helping define the curriculum objectives
and infrastructure required to extend participation beyond major university
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Information technology
enables collaboration among world-wide project participants.&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together academia and industry to address the issue of how
creativity is promoted among separated team members. Industry participants
including Lucasfilm Ltd., DreamWorks Animation, SKG, ReelFX Creative Studios,
Digital Domain, and Adobe Systems are interested in this project because it
directly addresses issues that they face. Today, educators and administrators
must extend the reach of creativity enhancing and technically challenging
curricula outside the brick-and-mortar classroom.&lt;br/&gt;If broadened as a
Major Project this Pilot Project has the potential to use
the&lt;br/&gt;cyberinfrastructure to promote multi-institutional transformative
changes in industry and in education.