* 0855205
* U.S. - Korea Workshop:  Dynamical Seasonal Prediction
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* K. 'Emilia Jin' Chin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 09/30/2010
* USD 37,279.00

0855205&lt;br/&gt;Chin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Korea Workshop:
Dynamical Seasonal Prediction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American researchers, junior scientists, and graduate students
in a U.S. - Korea Workshop on Dynamical Seasonal Prediction (DSP) to be held in
Busan, South Korea in early 2010. The co-organizers are Dr. Kyung Emilia J. Chin
at George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia and Dr. Woo-Jin Lee of the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation Climate Center (APCC) located in Busan, South
Korea. Several centers and universities in the U.S. are conducting research on
DSP and the APCC Center in Korea produces real-time operational DSP by
collecting the forecast outputs from 15 institutions in 8 countries including
the U.S. Several of the U.S. scientists participate in the APCC Science Advisory
Committee consisting of 13 world-class scientists in the fields of climate
modeling and prediction. Others participate in various APCC working groups.
However, there is currently no proposed research project to improve the DSP
through specific international collaborative activities between the U.S. and
Korea. The proposed workshop will provide the scientists the opportunity to
review the current status of DSP in each country and plan a realistic roadmap of
future collaborative activities. The workshop will be organized around the
following four themes: 1) Overview: scientific drivers and current status of DSP
in U.S. and Korea; 2) Strategies for improvement of DSP; 3) Strategies for DSP
system evaluation, modeling experiments, and initialization for prediction of
the coupled ocean-land-atmosphere climate system; and 4) Collaborative research
projects between the U.S. and Korea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient
overlap of interests between George Mason University and the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation Climate Center to indicate that they can successfully
pursue the activities proposed and that the interaction will benefit both sides.
Discussions on the cutting-edge technologies and perspectives of Multi-Model
ensemble techniques, initialization of coupled ocean-atmosphere models and ideas
for improving coupled models will improve the beneficial use of dynamical
seasonal prediction. The workshop will help spread the results of DSP to many
countries that do not currently have access to such predictions on a routine
basis. By involving junior scientists and students in early career stages, the
workshop will provide an opportunity for these participants to build valuable
international networks that can continue to enhance their research in subsequent
years. Broad dissemination of the workshop's materials will be made available
through publications and the co-organizers' websites.