* 0855860
* Collaborative Research: Research and Development on the LSST Calibration System
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Sokoloff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2013
* USD 197,617.00

This award will provide funds for two groups to participate in the planning for
the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). The LSST is a facility under
consideration that will address the nature of Dark Matter and Dark Energy which
are observed to be fundamental components of the Universe that do not fit within
the otherwise stunningly successful Standard Model of particle physics. LSST
will address these issues in a uniquely powerful way and is planned to be the
most ambitious sky survey in the visible band. It will be a large, wide-field,
ground-based system designed to obtain multiple images covering the sky. The
survey will feature precision astrometry and photometry and thus will be ideal
for measurements of weak lensing and the construction of transient object light
curves which is ideal for Supernovae Ia cosmology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
are members of the LSST project and besides their work on the LSST calibration
system they are also members of the LSST Supernova and Large Scale Structure
Science collaborations. They are working on a simulation of the LSST calibration
to define parameters for design and construction, and during the time frame of
this award this work will transition to implementation of a calibration pipeline
which will be tested on both simulated LSST raw data and real sky data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several broader impacts of this activity. At
Wayne State, undergraduates are included in research via an REU/RET program. At
Cincinnati, there is an active QuarkNet program which involves K-12 teachers in
research and develops content that they include in their class rooms.