* 0855694
* Fundamental Physics with Cold Polarized Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Timothy Chupp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 540,000.00

The neutron is a subatomic particle that comprises more than half of the matter
in the world. Within the nuclei of most atoms, the neutron remains stable, but
when freed from the nucleus, it is unstable. Free neutrons are an important tool
for study of subatomic physics, because the decay and interactions of free
neutrons reveal the interactions of its constituents and decay products.
Neutrons also have spin, the quantum mechanical property of the most fundamental
pieces of matter that distinguishes two states called spin-up and spin-down.
Spin is responsible for the nuclear magnetism exploited, for example, in NMR and
MRI. The spin states also affect the decay and interactions of neutrons, and so
the control of neutron spin becomes useful for more detailed study of subatomic
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a program to incisively and
carefully advance both the precision and the accuracy of the neutron lifetime,
measurement of the radiative decay branch and measurement of correlation
coeffcients in neutron decay. Three intertwined projects are underway: 1)
advances toward a new cold-neutron beam measurement of the neutron lifetime by
transfer of calibration from a calorimetric measurement of the neutron beam
flux; 2) precision measurement of the radiative decay branch in neutron decay
over an extended range of photon energies; 3) development of experimental
principles and apparatus that will measure the proton asymmetry and search for
Scalar currents and other new physics with a precision polarized cold neutron
beam. Very precise measurement of the neutron polarization (i.e. the excess
fraction of the selected spin state) and precise spin reversal are required to
mitigate false effects that may arise in these experiments. The techniques of
He-3 polarization, the spin filter and spin flipping will be greatly improved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work probes deep intellectual questions about the
most fundamental pieces of matter. The aim is to collect data that will help
complete the picture of elementary particles and their interactions. The
techniques have much broader impact. Laser polarized He-3 and Xe-129 used in
related experiments are now used in biomedical research, materials science, and
quantum information research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a remarkable
training ground for undergraduate and graduate students. The technical
challenges combined with the deep intellectual issues provide motivation and
develop technical skills. Undergraduates will gain research experience working
along with graduate and post doctoral fellows. Graduate students emerge broadly
capable and move on to prepare for faculty or national lab positions as well as
interdisciplinary research. This work has also led to development of new courses
for nonphysics majors, to a set of public lectures on Nuclear Magnets and
Neutrinos and leadership in communicating science to the interested general
population. In the context of probing fundamental problems of physics, exciting
in its own right, the hardest problems produce the most innovative solutions
with spin-offs unimaginable at the outset. Atomic clocks, enhanced MRI, and
experiments that probe the origin of matter all follow from the control of
nuclear magnetism and neutron spins.