* 0855773
* COLLABORATIVE MAJOR Computational Textiles as Materials for Creativity: Participatory Design Communities in Afterschool and Classroom Programs for Economically-Disadvantaged Youth
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Leah Buechley, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 290,302.00

Multidisciplinary teams composed of computer scientists, arts and computer
science educators, and learning scientists from the University of Pennsylvania,
MIT and Indiana University are researching how to encourage about 400 youth
(ages 10-18) to creatively engage with computational textiles in afterschool and
school settings. Computational textiles?textile artifacts that are
computationally generated or that contain embedded computers?will capture
youths? pre-existing interests in new media, fashion, and design while
supporting learning and creativity in computer science, arts, design, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are designing a new programming
toolkit for 3D textile design to promote creativity and to study these tools in
different workshop settings in afterschool and classroom programs. While
previous efforts have focused on developing environments for 2D and 3D
programming for novices, their goal is to expand these efforts to include 3D
textile design to appeal to disadvantaged youth not normally drawn into
computing. Moreover, they are developing an open, participatory website that
allows youth to display their created artifacts and share, discuss, and remix
their designs. These efforts build on our prior successes developing an online
community around Scratch, which now hosts over 10,000 designers. They are
engaging local youth communities and professional advisors from a variety of
backgrounds to identify and encourage creative design solutions as part of their
efforts to build this community, the first-ever youth community of computational
textile designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal leverages several
successful developments: (1) a construction kit for building computational
textiles called the LilyPad Arduino that makes this domain widely accessible for
the first time; (2) research on a media-rich programming environment, Scratch,
that is used by a worldwide community of designers of all ages; and (3) a
conceptual framework of media arts in K-12 education that describes and analyzes
creative digital production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Csikszentmihalyi?s
system model (1988, 1997), the PIs define creativity as the dynamic interaction
between an individual?s contributions to a domain and community recognition
within the field. To investigate the different components of creativity as a
system, this project focuses on the technical, artistic and critical practices
in youth? designs and interactions and employs a variety of assessment
approaches including mixed methods data analyses of recorded group interactions,
interviews with youth designers and professional artists, case studies of
designers and artifacts, and log file data tracking online community
participation and commentaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project presents a novel opportunity to study creativity within an emergent IT
field (i.e., computational textiles and their applications) and will contribute
to creativity research by providing empirically validated accounts of the system
nature of creativity captured in interactions between individual designers and
community feedback. Furthermore, they are developing tools for how to tailor
programming to support 3D textile design, investigate an online community for
sharing and validating creative computational textile designs, and investigate
learning approaches in workshop models for computational textiles design for
novice programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed tools and
activities broaden opportunities for youth from disadvantaged communities to
develop advanced IT fluency skills by designing computationally enhanced
materials and artifacts and contribute in meaningful ways to the emergent field
of computational textile design. The implementation and assessment is conducted
in workshops at after school sites that vary strategically in their technology
experience to allow for a broader dissemination of the developed tools and
activities. The findings from the work is shared with youth coordinators at
professional development meetings, is presented at national conferences, and is
disseminated further in academic journals and through their website.&lt;br/&gt;