* 0855393
* CP Violation and Rare-Decay Studies
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Philip Rubin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 06/30/2013
* USD 287,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a new
program of research in elementary particle physics at George Mason University.
The PI, Philip Rubin, will complete his research in charm physics with the
CLEO-c collaboration and join in constructing an apparatus at CERN (NA62) to
make extremely sensitive measurements of elements of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-
Maskawa (CKM) quark mixing matrix by measuring the decay rate of kaons to
pizero-neutrino-neutrino-bar beginning with the charged kaon mode. Both the
neutral and charged channels are clean but exacting probes of the Standard Model
and of physics beyond this model. In particular, measurements of the rates of
these channels will provide great insight into CP-violation, a symmetry breaking
that permits the concentration of matter, and therefore the development of life,
in the universe. Rubin and his group will work on the critical muon veto system,
helping to refurbish NA48's hadron calorimeter and providing the monitoring and
controls system. In the past, Rubin has conducted his research almost
exclusively with undergraduate students. While continuing his commitment to
providing exciting undergraduate experiences in research, his Department's new
Ph.D. program, which commenced in Fall 2008, will allow for graduate students to
be part of the high energy physics program. His additional outreach efforts are
focused on student development and teacher training by developing
interdisciplinary courses designed simultaneously to meet University graduation
and Virginia state certification requirements.