* 0855475
* RUI: Experiments with Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* David Hall, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 06/30/2013
* USD 469,086.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

At extremely low temperatures, the properties of physical systems can manifest
unusual and striking behavior. One such behavior is superfluidity, which is a
coordinated fluid flow without any viscosity. The fundamental properties of
collisions between atoms are also unusual at low temperatures; for instance,
every collision between a pair of ultracold atoms in a superfluid is in some
sense ``head-on.'' This project examines the relationship between the individual
collisions between pairs of atoms within the superfluid and the collective
behavior of the superfluid itself. The former requires that the interaction
between individual atoms must be understood and well-controlled. The latter
requires an understanding and detection of the dynamical behavior of a
superfluid in response to external influences, such as rotation. Both of these
requirements can be met within a dilute-gas Bose-Einstein condensate, an
extremely cold form of matter first observed in 1995 (and for which observation
the Nobel Prize was awarded in 2001). Recent experimental innovations in imaging
and controlling interatomic interactions, developed in the principal
investigator's laboratory and elsewhere, will be extended and applied to systems
of rotating Bose-Einstein condensates. Further experimental work involves an
examination of the fundamental physical processes involved in the interaction
between two distinct superfluids.

This cutting-edge scientific research is carried out at an undergraduate
college, providing meaningful research opportunities to tomorrow's young
scientists at earlier stages of their careers than is typically possible at
large research universities. These opportunities are available to an unusually
wide pool of potential future scientists as a result of the leadership the
college has demonstrated in enhancing socioeconomic diversity. Experience also
teaches that research in fundamental physics leads inevitably to greater
understanding of more complex processes, and thence to successful application of
acquired knowledge to specific problems throughout science and engineering. The
experimental research explored here, particularly with regard to its focus on
interatomic interactions in double condensates, may lead to improvements in
rotational and magnetic field sensors, atomic clocks, and the development of
neutral-atom quantum computers.

