* 0855039
* Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 750,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments at the Tevatron and the
Large Hadron Collider are poised to shed light on the nature of electroweak
symmetry breaking. New experimental and theoretical tools are being used to
probe the structure of matter at high temperature and high density. Physics
beyond the standard model is already apparent in phenomena such as neutrino
mixing. Dark matter and dark energy suggest deep connections between
astrophysics at large distances and particle physics at short distances. The
methods of effective field theory are the essential tools for separating energy
scales and rendering strongly-interacting quantum field theories tractable. The
PI and co-PI will develop effective field theory descriptions relevant to
particle physics phenomenology spanning the energy, intensity, temperature and
density, and cosmic frontiers. At the energy frontier, signals of compositeness,
supersymmetry and extra dimensions in the electroweak-symmetry breaking sector
will be studied. At the intensity frontier, novel interactions of neutrinos and
photons will be computed in detail, and their phenomenological consequences
explored. At the temperature and density frontier techniques developed in string
theory will be used to study the phase structure of hot and dense strongly
interacting matter. At the cosmic frontier, dark matter candidates arising from
new electroweak-scale physics, and from axions, will be studied. The broader
scientific impact will be that the PI and Co-PI will develop new theoretical
tools to analyze possible new fundamental particles and interactions, and will
work with experimenters to help discover them. The co-PI will participate as a
mentor and consultant in the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools "May
Project" independent study program. High school seniors will be exposed to
university-level research, and will have the opportunity to investigate a
question from one of the frontier areas. Both the PI and Co-PI will participate
in other outreach programs which in the past have included appearances on local
radio and TV programs and public lectures.