* 0855889
* CAREER:  Horseshoes and Hand Grenades:  Exploiting Error Tolerance in Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Diana Franklin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 05/31/2012
* USD 258,848.00

The goal in most reliability projects has, traditionally, been to prevent errors
of all kinds. Researchers are now discovering that not all errors cause a
failure. Some errors can be masked within the circuits as not all inputs affect
final results. By preventing all errors rather than only those errors that
change a result, time and power get wasted. This project proposes to explore
techniques which allow errors to occur that do not change final results. In many
applications such as facial recognition or voice recognition, many of the data
errors will not be noticed by the software, depending on the particular data.
For example, if we one bit gets flipped in an incoming audio signal for voice
recognition, it may not affect the result at all. The proper word may be
recognized despite the error in one sample. A key observation, however, is that
even these applications are not very resistant to control flow errors. For
example, if the voice recognition software stops before it completes its
analysis of the audio signal, the wrong word would most likely be recognized
leading to failure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how to take
advantage of partial tolerance to unreliability. More efficient reliability
mechanisms can be designed that are targeted towards only the important
instructions, not all instructions. In even more tolerant applications, errors
can be introduced into the system in order to speed up the system--allowing the
process to proceed without waiting for slow operations. In order to discover and
exploit error-tolerance, this project will identify 10-15 applications that are
tolerant to errors, develop heuristics to determine which instructions are more
tolerant to error than others, develop specific techniques for efficiently
protecting only critical instructions from errors, and develop mechanisms to
introduce errors into less important, high-latency instructions in order to save
power and/or improve performance.