* 0855498
* Fundamental Studies of the Nucleon Spin in QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Renee Fatemi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 04/30/2013
* USD 479,875.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The protons and neutrons that serve as
building blocks for our visible universe are constructed from smaller, more
fundamental particles called quarks and gluons. These point-like particles, or
partons, are confined inside nucleons due to the nature of the strong force
which governs their interactions. Consequently, the abundant, stable and easily
manipulated proton has served as an experimental "partonic laboratory'' for over
half a century. The underlying mechanisms of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
formal theory of strong interactions, are illuminated via investigations into
how the proton mass, charge and spin manifest from partonic degrees of
freedom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin, a type of angular momentum inherent to all
fundamental particles, is a purely quantum mechanical dynamic and therefore
serves as a particularly sharp probe into the nature of QCD. The "spin puzzle"
is an outstanding question in QCD physics and can be stated simply: How does the
spin and orbital angular momentum of the quarks and gluons combine to form the
total proton spin of 1/2? Two decades of experiments have constrained the total
quark spin contribution to be about 1/3 of the sum. This surprisingly small
value motivates experiments designed to measure the flavor-separated quark spin
distributions as well as the gluon spin and partonic orbital angular momentum
pieces of the spin puzzle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund
experimental efforts to constrain the gluon contribution to the spin puzzle via
measurements of jet asymmetries as reconstructed in the STAR detector at the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. These funds will also support manpower for the
construction, testing and installation of the data acquisition system for the
Forward Gem Tracker, the STAR detector upgrade designed to measure the parity
violating asymmetries of W production that are sensitive to the flavor separated
anti-up and anti-down quark spin distributions in the proton. This award
provides the unique opportunity for University of Kentucky graduate and
undergraduate students to learn and develop the software tools and analysis
techniques necessary for jet reconstruction, while simultaneously contributing
to the construction of a state-of-the-art detector at the worlds only high-
energy polarized proton collider.&lt;br/&gt;