* 0855197
* CI-P: Development of Community Infrastructure for Body Sensor Network Research, Education, and Support
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Body sensor networks (BSNs) represent an emerging area of research with
significant scientific and technical challenges but with tremendous potential to
impact a variety of application domains--most notably healthcare and medical
research. While significant advancements are being made in this area, most
efforts are isolated and independent, limiting the collective progress and
making it difficult for new researchers to enter the field. This planning
project establishes a foundation for the development of community research,
education, and support infrastructure to help advance the field of BSNs. The
project activities include 1) soliciting input from a broad community of
researchers, educators, and domain experts to establish the consensus needs of
the BSN community; 2) developing initial models for BSN hardware, software, and
support infrastructure; and 3) developing a business model to ensure that cost
is not a barrier to BSN research, education, or application. The ultimate goals
of this project are to 1) increase the relevance and practicality of BSN
research and development by enabling engineers to experiment with standardized
physical systems and achieve more practical results; 2) empower new researchers
and educators to enter the field with an inexpensive, substantial, and
ultimately self-sustaining support infrastructure; and 3) provide teachers at
all levels of education the infrastructure and educational modules to
incorporate BSNs into their classrooms and laboratories, providing hands-on
experiences through which students can see how computer science and engineering
can have a direct impact on human health and quality of life.