* 0855473
* OLYMPUS and TREK: Two Precision Experiments to Determine the Two-Photon Exchange Effect in Lepton-Proton Scattering and to Search for New Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Rolf Ent, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observed discrepancy in
measurements of the proton electric-to-magnetic form factor ratio between the
Rosenbluth and recoil polarization method has been interpreted as due to
previously neglected effects of two-photon exchange (TPE). Evidence for TPE can
be directly and most stringently tested by comparison of positron-proton and
electron-proton elastic cross sections, as their difference is proportional to
the TPE amplitude. Without a definitive experimental test, not only the
electromagnetic form factors but also the interpretations of all electron
scattering data, usually done in the framework of single-photon exchange, are
under considerable doubt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OLYMPUS experiment at DESY,
Hamburg, Germany has been proposed to definitively determine the effect of two-
photon exchange in elastic lepton-proton scattering by precisely measuring the
ratio of positron-proton to electron-proton elastic unpolarized cross sections.
It makes use of intense beams of positrons and electrons at the storage ring
DORIS, an internal unpolarized hydrogen gas target, and the BLAST detector from
the MIT-Bates Linear Accelerator Center. The setup will be augmented with
forward-angle tracking telescopes based on gas electron multiplier (GEM)
technology, to be used as luminosity monitors, which will be constructed at
Hampton University. It is anticipated that development of new GEM detectors will
be applicable in future experiments at Jefferson Lab and at J-PARC in
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program offers great
opportunity for first class education and research purpose domestically and
abroad. This proposal will lead to a new lab on the campus of Hampton University
and opens new research and educational opportunities for students from minority
populations, predominantly African-Americans.