* 0855737
* CSEDI: Melt stability and dynamics in the deep Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 250,061.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

The relatively low shear modulus and high temperature of Earth's ultralow-
velocity zones (ULVZ) imply that these thin (5-40 km thickness) regions at the
core-mantle boundary (CMB) may be partly molten. In order to maintain the
cooling rate necessary to drive a dynamo by convection, Earth's ancient core
must have been hotter than at present and the lowermost mantle would therefore
have been more extensively melted. It has been hypothesized that the higher
density of melt relative to solids in the deepest mantle stabilized this molten
layer, forming a dense basal magma ocean (BMO) that appeared early in Earth's
history and whose remains are at present the ULVZs.

The existence of a BMO has large effects on the dynamics and differentiation of
the deep Earth. Incompatible elements would have been sequestered into the melt
by fractionation, while the chemical signature of solids crystallized from the
BMO would be governed by the phase diagram. This crystallization signature
should appear at Earth's surface in volcanic products from deep-seated mantle
plumes. Other structures in Earth's lowermost mantle such as "chemical piles"
may be formed or modified by BMO crystallization. The presence of a BMO will
also enhance the extent of core-mantle chemical interactions relative to a solid
lowermost mantle, possibly leading to the formation of a buoyant layer at the
top of the core that is enriched in light elements.

This project aims to further explore the consequences of a BMO by developing a
two-phase dynamics model that will be used to better constrain the dynamical
evolution of a BMO, to address several questions raised by the BMO hypothesis,
and to begin to test the hypothesis with geochemical data and seismological
observations. The effects of a buoyant stratified layer at the top the core
produced by reactions between the BMO and core will also be explored using a
numerical dynamo model to test whether features of dynamos in such cores are
compatible with geomagnetic observations.

The project will provide two years of support for a post-doctoral researcher,
who will benefit from interdisciplinary training, and involves direct
international collaboration among researchers in 4 different countries (United
States of America, United Kingdom, France, and Canada). Most will be new
collaborations. The two-phase flow models can be applied to a large variety of
mush-slurry systems in other disciplines, such as the evolution of crustal magma
chambers and volcanic systems. The code will be used in upcoming benchmark
exercises, a time consuming but essential aspect of code development and
modeling. The code will also be made available to the broader research community
for use in other projects.The relatively low shear modulus and high temperature
of Earth's ultralow-velocity zones (ULVZ) imply that these thin (5-40 km
thickness) regions at the core-mantle boundary (CMB) may be partly molten. In
order to maintain the cooling rate necessary to drive a dynamo by convection,
Earth's ancient core must have been hotter than at present and the lowermost
mantle would therefore have been more extensively melted. It has been
hypothesized that the higher density of melt relative to solids in the deepest
mantle stabilized this molten layer, forming a dense basal magma ocean (BMO)
that appeared early in Earth's history and whose remains are at present the
ULVZs.