* 0855088
* Quantum Field Theory Under the Influence of External Conditions; Norman, OK
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Kimball Milton, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,500.00

This award provides funds to help defray the expenses of students and young
scientists in order to enable them to attend the Ninth Workshop on Quantum Field
Theory Under the Influence of External Conditions (QFEXT09) which will be held
at the University of Oklahoma in September 2009. The conference commemorates the
birth of H. B. G. Casimir in 1909. Topics to be addressed in this workshop
include Casimir and van der Waals forces: progress in theory and new
experiments, applications at micro- and nanoscale; Casimir effect: exact and
approximate methods, related mathematical problems; vacuum quantum effects in
classical background fields: renormalization, singular backgrounds, applications
to particle and high energy physics; vacuum energy and gravity: renormalization
of Einstein's equations with singular source functions, vacuum energy in
supersymmetric and noncommutative theories. This meeting is the leading forum
for the discussion of quantum vacuum phenomena, with participation by most of
the leading workers in the field. The broader impacts are that the funding will
be used to support the travel of invited junior US participants (graduate
students and postdocs) in the workshop who otherwise would be unable to attend.
Publication of the results of the workshop will ensure the dissemination of new
findings. Informal collaborations fostered by this meeting, as in previous
meetings, will have profound impacts on future research in this area. There will
be equal numbers of US and foreign students and postdocs which will provide
great chances for international interchanges and collaborations.