* 0855510
* Collaborative Research:  Advanced Analogical Search with Integrated Function and Form: The Verrocchio Project
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Kristin Wood, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2012
* USD 62,913.00

The research objective of this award is to improve understanding and
capabilities in concept generation through design by analogy methods. The
proposed approach, a collaboration between the disciplines of cognitive
psychology, engineering design and computer science, is to provide new tools for
design based on a representation that associates functional and geometric
information, combining a linguistic search for functional similarity with a
multi-level search for geometric similarity to automatically identify and
present analogies to the designer. The initial application for the Verrocchio
Project is the design of prosthetic and orthotic devices for persons with
disabilities, a domain that is ripe for innovation. The initial search space is
the USPTO utility patent repository. Deliverables will include: (1) means to
more effectively generalize design problems through functional descriptions; (2)
the ability to search for analogical solutions with alternative functional
representations; (3) ways to search for geometric similarities across a set of
functional analogies; and (4) the ability to produce a tractable set of
analogies for use by the designer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will have five broad and transformative impacts. The
first impact arises from the key product of the research: a method for
systematically and automatically identifying analogies. This tool will have
broad applicability across many product domains, and will improve the efficiency
of the search for innovative products in those domains. Second, the research
will advance the foundation for use of analogies in engineering design methods.
Third, because the research will result in a computer implementation of the
method, the work will add to the growing cyber infrastructure of the country.
Fourth, the interdisciplinary nature of the research ensures cross-fertilization
of theory and research techniques in each of the collaborators? disciplines.
This interdisciplinarity will enhance the probability of broad adoption of the
approach. Fifth, instructional materials will be developed for training students
in the approach. These instructional materials will be freely available to
instructors at other institutions, encouraging broader adoption of the approach.