* 0855579
* Plasma enhanced frequency conversion of ultra broad bandwidth laser pulses to optical harmonics focused in atomic and molecular gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Randy Bartels, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 247,050.00

This project explores ultra-broad bandwidth generation of optical pulses in the
ultraviolet (UV), deep UV, and vacuum UV (VUV) spectral ranges. Conversion of
few cycle pulses to the UV has traditionally been limited by dispersion and
transparency constraints from dispersive crystals and by inherent low conversion
efficiency in low density gases. This work will develop a detailed understanding
of the physics of few-cycle light pulses propagating in spatially structured
plasmas for optimization of efficient conversion to short wavelength odd-order
optical harmonics. Besides investigating new optical physics, these studies will
pave the way for the generation of ultra-broad bandwidth pulses compressed to
<5-fs in duration in the UV, deep UV, and VUV spectral regions.

Efficient sources of VUV few cycle laser pulses will prove to be an invaluable
tool for probing excited state dynamics of molecules and for probing electronic
structure of molecules and materials. The ultrafast laser pulses will serve as
excellent probes of fast processes such as dynamics at conical intersections,
photoisomerization, photodissociation, and photobiology, to name a few. An area
where application of these tools is particularly apt is for studying
photoconversion processes such as dynamics in light harvesting complexes and
electron transfer dynamics and dye sensitized photoconversion cells.

Undergraduate researchers will be included in all aspects of this project,
focusing on research areas of short pulse propagation, nonlinear optics,
ultrafast optics, plasma physics, and molecular spectroscopy. Involvement by
students through summer undergraduate programs (REU, McNair, LSAMP) will
encourage students from diverse backgrounds. In addition, the PI will continue
revising and delivering his "optics show" for K-2nd graders.