* 0855883
* Major Collaborative Proposal: CreativeIT: Understanding the Creative Design Process: A Novel Cognitive Model Based on Behavioral Experiments in Circuit Design and Architecture
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Simona Doboli, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2014
* USD 87,320.00

The project plans to develop a cognitive model that helps understand, emulate
and enhance creativity in conceptual electronic circuit design. Insight into
creativity in circuit design is gained from novel behavioral experiments that
investigate one main engine of creativity, that of generating conceptual
combinations with emergent features, within and across three different areas:
analog circuit design, architecture, and general domain. The work studies the
impact of constraints and repeated iterations of the design task on the
creativity of the solutions. Behavioral experiments in circuit design and
architecture will be modeled after the guidelines developed for the general
domain. Experiments in circuit design will study additive and non-additive
conceptual combinations when designing new electronic circuits, such as modern
operational transconductor amplifiers. Experiments in architecture will study,
for example, the design of pedestrian bridges with a movable opening. Based on
experiments, a cognitive model will be developed for generating iteratively
novel conceptual combinations with emergent features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work is motivated by electronic circuit design being an expensive activity,
accessible only to a small group of experts. There are arguably no methods to
improve creativity in circuit design. This is an important limitation as
electronic circuits are essential in healthcare, environmental monitoring,
infrastructure management, telecommunication, and many other areas. The research
is expected to lead to new, creativity-oriented design methodologies of superior
productivity. The gained insights can also form the basis of original computer-
aided design tools that invent novel circuits, a capability far beyond the tasks
performed by current tools. The perspective on how novel conceptual combinations
are generated and utilized can be used to develop new methods of instruction in
electrical engineering, architecture and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is funded by SBE within the CreativeIT
Program.