* 0855365
* Perturbative QCD and the LHC phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Kirill Melnikov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 450,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Physics at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) will offer unprecedented
opportunities to study and answer fundamental questions in particle physics.
Discoveries at the LHC will give us the first look at the physics beyond the
Standard Model, the subject of many speculations in the past. Those discoveries
will set the direction for further developments in particle physics and will
have a very broad impact on our understanding of physics in general. The goal of
the PI's research is to establish convincingly the presence of New Physics at
the LHC and to elucidate its origin. Because the LHC is a hadron collider, every
bit of physics there depends on Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the theory that is
used to predict an outcome of hadronic collisions. For the LHC purposes, QCD is
perturbative but very complex. A better understanding of QCD is required to
achieve the high goals of the LHC. The PI proposes to study and solve two
outstanding problems related to QCD applications to the LHC physics: i) nextto-
leading order (NLO) QCD computations for processes with large number of external
particles and ii) the development of practical methods for next-to-nextto-
leading order (NNLO) QCD computations for hard scattering processes at hadron
colliders. The PI expects that these methods will find applications in other
areas of particle phenomenology; to this end, he plans to pursue some studies in
heavy quark physics as well. The broader impact of the proposed research derives
from its importance for the success of the LHC physics program. Good
understanding of QCD is required to extract unbiased information about physics
beyond the Standard Model from the LHC data. The development of new
computational methods envisioned in this proposal should open up the possibility
to improve theoretical description of hard scattering processes at the LHC
thereby leading to new opportunities for experimental analyses and the discovery
and the investigation of New Physics. An integral part of the project will be
collaboration with and the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows.