* 0855664
* Theoretical Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics at JILA
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Ana Rey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group project aims to delve into a
broad range of problems stemming from the desire to understand gases of
ultracold atoms and molecules in full detail, and how to manipulate these gases
to engineer systems of interest. Of particular interest will be the alkaline-
earth atoms and similar atoms (such as ytterbium), and polar species. These
atoms offer a wealth of untapped potential in applications as diverse as optical
frequency standards, modeling of unusual condensed matter systems, and quantum
information devices. The work will deepen theoretical understanding of two,
three, and four-body interactions that are essential to the preparation,
stability, and control of cold gases. Complementary work will focus on
exploiting these properties to generate a detailed set of how-to instructions
for modeling otherwise intractable condensed matter Hamiltonians, or else to
describe novel transport possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of the planned work arises in part from the favorable prospects for adding
significantly to the body of understanding of condensed matter systems. By
designing simulations in the highly-controllable environment of an atom gas on
an optical lattice, the group may be able to provide fundamental insights into
such materials as high-temperature superconductors, colossal magnetoresistance
materials, and many others. In addition, the project will impact the training of
graduate students, who will be able to interact with the different theoretical
and experimental research groups at JILA. The investigators will continue to
contribute to community outreach programs such as public lectures and accessible
physics articles, to organize workshops, and to maintain service to the physics
community.