* 0855668
* Control of atoms-light and nuclei-X-ray photons interactions in solids via quantum interference
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Olga Kocharovskaya, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 385,000.00

This research program explores the physics of quantum coherence effects in
optical crystals doped with rare-earth or transition metal ions. Such ions have
atomic like structure of discrete energy levels in the band gap of the host
materials. They are often refereed to as atomic gas lattices or frozen atomic
gases. Their potential advantages are high atomic density, absence of atomic
diffusion and collisions, compactness, scalability, robustness and compatibility
with optical fiber communications. We study the possibilities of the efficient
control of both linear and nonlinear optical responses (such as resonant
absorption, refractive index, group velocity, frequency conversion, etc.) based
on excitation of the long lived spin coherence in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader impact the research
program extends fundamental concepts of atomic and quantum optics to solid-state
physics. The exploration of quantum coherence phenomena in solids may open
realistic prospects for various applications, including quantum information
storage and processing, improvement of spatial resolution, controllable optical
delay lines, development of new solid-state lasers (in particular, in the
traditionally difficult UV, VUV and X-ray frequency ranges), efficient frequency
conversion, generation of ultimately short pulses, ultra-sensitive magnetometry,
spectroscopy, metrology, and others. It provides excellent opportunities for
young researchers to be trained both theoretically and experimentally in the
advanced fields of quantum, coherent, nonlinear and ultrafast optics, photonics,
solid-state and laser physics.