* 0855918
* SGER: Exploring Technique to Monitor Underwater Vibratory Soil Compaction for Venice Lagoon Restoration
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Michael Mooney, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 06/30/2010
* USD 49,188.00

This research project concerns the potential for real time monitoring of
underwater soil compaction using a vibratory plate. The hypothesis for this
research is that real time monitoring of seabed soil compaction can be performed
by using the measured vibration characteristics of the vibratory plate and de-
coupling the soil skeleton and pore fluid stiffness components. The research
will involve participating in field testing near Chioggia, Italy to collect
vibratory plate and in-situ pore water pressure data. The field testing program
is being conducted by the group overseeing the geotechnical work for the Venice
lagoon restoration project. Subsequent analysis of the data and modeling of the
vibratory plate/soil system will seek to extract soil stiffness from the
vibration data, explore the separation of the pore fluid and soil skeleton
phases during interpretation of data, evaluate the influence of excess pore
water pressure on stiffness measurement, and evaluate the influence of rocking
modes that may exist in the field. If successful, the findings hold considerable
promise for advancement in construction quality control and expediency during
off-shore land reclamation and surge protection barrier construction. Real-time
under-water compaction monitoring is not currently possible. This basic research
would potential enable this technology to be developed. The research will
broaden our network of partnerships particularly through this international
collaboration. The results will be disseminated through scholarly journals and
conference proceedings.

This research award will provide the PI and an American graduate student from
CSM with a significant international experience, and the opportunity to become
involved in a major international construction project. The Office of
International Science and Engineering encourages US investigators to form
international collaborations such as this, and is co-funding this award.