* 0855329
* Collaborative Research: Decision-Dependent Stochastic Processes  Inference and Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Timothy Hanson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 135,892.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is addressing
the important question of the impact of human intervention on uncertainties that
drive a particular system. Methods will be developed to assess whether
interactions between decisions and uncertainties exist. If the answer is
affirmative a new stochastic process equipped with "decision-dependent-prior
distributions" is proposed. New models and Markov Chain Monte Carlo estimation
procedures are defined to enable Bayesian inference for decision-dependent
models. The second important question addressed is how to make optimal decisions
in such environments. It has been approached by several researchers but with
limited advances. This proposal provides a new procedure for tackling these very
difficult optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methods and
algorithms will be applied to evaluate and construct maintenance system at
nuclear power plants. Properly accounting for and quantifying uncertainty in
maintenance policy decisions will reduce the variability in nuclear power
production of electricity, while providing utility engineers quantified
assessments of equipment performance on safety. Properly understanding and
modeling the interplay between decisions and uncertainties, and their impact on
the stochastic optimization problem at hand will enable utility engineers to
better operate their power plants, while, simultaneously, minimizing costs. The
potential impact is not limited to the electric power industry. In fact, the
results will be applicable to any system in which future stochastic behavior is
influenced by current and past human decisions. There are a plethora of real
world applications that could merit from understanding and modeling decision-
dependency along the lines of the research detailed in this proposal.