* 0855521
* Rydberg States in Localized Ensembles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Thad Walker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This project is focusing on manipulating ultracold Rydberg atoms in spatially
localized ensembles. The unique properties of such atoms make it possible for a
blockade mechanism to extend over the entire sample, allowing for interesting
quantum effects to be observed. The approach to this problem allows high quality
quantum manipulations while accounting for key issues that arise from the
complexity of the atoms. In particular, care is taken to make samples of
appropriate geometry with sufficiently large Rydberg-Rydberg interactions to
allow the blockade mechanism to work. To this end, resonant microwave fields
induce oscillating dipole moments in the atoms. The blockades are identified by
looking at the quantum statistics of phase-matched four-wave mixing light
generated under blockade conditions. In a second experiment, the dephasing of
collective Rabi flopping is studied in the regime of weak to poor blockade. It
is predicted that dephasing will be prominent under conditions of poor blockade,
but will disappear at strong blockade levels.

This project is committed to significant undergraduate involvement and has a
history of its undergraduate students continuing on to graduate school in AMO
physics. The PI has integrated concepts from the research project into
undergraduate courses from which he recruits undergraduate researchers. The
training of graduate students is a particularly important broader outcome of
this project.