* 0855882
* Dance.Draw: Embodiment as Input for Collaborative, Creative Expression
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Sybil Huskey, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 762,372.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will study
lightweight embodiment as an input for collaborative creative interaction,
specifically applied to the domain of dance. The PI and her team of
technologists, choreographers and artists will work together to define an
evolving system that assists in the design and production of interactive dance
performances with real-time audience interaction. The Dance.Draw system will
enable dancers' motions, tracked via small RF transmitters worn in satin cuffs,
to act as input streams that can be flexibly applied as control parameters for
interactive visualizations. The system will log dancers' motions and will be
able to composite video of the dancers with different visualizations, enabling
post-hoc analysis of the choreography and exploration of prospective mappings
between the motion and the projected media. This will allow choreographers to
explore interactive dance without always having a full cast of dancers present.
In addition, it will enable other stakeholders, such as artists and musicians,
to experiment offline with their media and adjust how these interplay with the
choreography. The system will be extended into a Web-based "DanceTube"
application that will allow the public to engage in interactive dance
choreography. In addition to using the dancers' movements on stage and the
motion of their bodies in place, the PI plans to allow the Dance.Draw system to
use input from the audience to provide a feedback loop between the audience,
dancers and visualizations. To this end her team will build dual-channel,
wireless audience response devices; these handheld meters will allow the
audience to explicitly indicate levels of engagement using a knob or slider
while simultaneously collecting implicit biometric arousal information via
galvanic skin response, both to help evaluate audience response to interactive
dance performances and potentially to provide input as well. The aggregate
audience response or random individual responses can be mapped to specific types
of visualizations, which the dancers can react to, making each performance
unique and giving the audience an expanded role in the interaction. Finally, the
PI will develop a new standardized survey mechanism to help evaluate the
Dance.Draw interface as a creativity support tool; this survey will be applied
in user studies throughout the project, and thus will itself be thoroughly
tested as an evaluation mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
interdisciplinary project will promote mutual understanding among artists,
choreographers, dancers and technologists. Project outcomes will include new
technologies to support human creativity, as well as increased understanding of
creative processes during physical, embodied, collaborative activity. The Web-
based "DanceTube" application will allow the public to experience the process of
interactive dance design. The PI will further organize dance camps for school-
aged children, in which the new technology will be featured. The results of this
research will be disseminated broadly through scientific conferences such as
CHI, UIST, and CSCW, and also via dance festivals and dance-related conferences
and venues. The PI will make the Dance.Draw application and source code
available through a public repository such as Sourceforge.