* 0855358
* Atomic-Scale Tracking of Dopant Atoms
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Paul Thibado, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 04/30/2013
* USD 266,461.00

Technical: The doping of semiconductors is a cornerstone of the electronics
industry. This project focuses on using surface properties to aid low-solubility
dopant atoms in finding the desired place in the host crystal lattice. The
specific material system studied in this project is Mn-doped GaAs, which has
potential for spintronics applications. The experiments include growth of
semiconductor materials using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and surface diffusion
studies using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The central idea of project
is to utilize the various configurations of GaAs(001) surface to find a natural
way for Mn dopant atoms added to the surface to end up in substitutional
positions in favor of interstitial positions. Surfaces, unlike the bulk, offer a
rich variety of stable configurations and each one can be independently formed
across the entire surface thereby providing many unique and chemically varied
templates for aiding the doping process during layer-by-layer growth.
Specifically, some surfaces are arsenic rich, some are gallium rich, some have a
symmetric geometry, some have an asymmetric geometry, some are free of edge
sites and others a full of edge sites, and so on. In order to fully understand
the non-equilibrium (kinetic) doping process at the atomic-scale, this project
aims to study the entire pathways of the dopant atom from initial deposition
onto a surface to its final bulk bonding site. In doing this, the doping
processes will be uncovered and quantified via the diffusion coefficients,
energy barriers, diffusion anisotropies, and the sticking anisotropies.
&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. The science
involved in this research project will impact the field of impurities in
semiconductors. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained for
semiconductor growth, scanning tunneling microscopy characterization, vacuum
techniques, as well as all phases of scientific research such as literature
research, presentation skills, and writing refereed journal articles. A creative
outreach activity of this project is hosting of Girl and Boy Scouts in the PI's
research laboratory, where the children build atomic models, spot weld, and
study different vacuum environments.