* 0855995
* Generating Alternatives: Enhancing Creativity in the Design of Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Barbara Tversky, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 762,072.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation is a goal, sometimes
elusive, of design. In this project the PI and his team will, within the context
of a Master?s course in information system design, construct and test a series
of exercises aimed at promoting innovative designs, inspired by thinking about
creative processes in general and the information technology design process in
particular. Information design is an ideal platform for the study and promotion
of creative processes, because the topological structure of information systems
allows development of tools for objective representation of the accuracy,
variability, and similarity of designs. Three increasingly broad and
sophisticated sets of exercises will be developed and tested. The first set will
use exploratory play with the elements of IT design (nodes and links) and
priming of fundamental topological structures (trees and hubs) in order to
elicit more advanced and creative solutions for initial design problems. The
second set will use techniques that encourage abstraction to enable students to
transfer designs across domains. The third set will employ perceptual
manipulation of design topology and conceptual comparisons of design topologies
to increase the variability of design solutions students invent. The tool for
representing and comparing designs will be turned into a tool for encouraging
the generation of varied and novel designs. Because the experiments will be
embedded in a design course, the exercises will benefit both the students and
the research. Such an undertaking requires a team with expertise across several
disciplines. Collectively, the PI and his team have expertise in human
comprehension and production of diagrams, research design and evaluation of
educational methods, and the design of software-intensive information systems.
The team bases its predictions and techniques on their prior work on the
development of design expertise in the classroom context; the team has already
produced computational tools that serve as the foundation for the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Poor design, and the resulting
poor software, impedes coordination in many government and corporate
institutions. Improvements in the education of designers may be amplified by
their efforts in practice and in mentoring other designers over the length of
their careers. Although there are many methods recommended for teaching systems
design, few of these have been empirically tested. This research is novel in
that it will look at the intermediate product of IT design, topological
sketches, in order to understand the cognitive processes of creativity. From
this, the PI will construct methods to assess and to increase design innovation
that will be useful to other researchers and instructors. Specific impacts
should include improving systems design education, consequently improving the
efficacy of software and social systems created by graduates of the PI's and
other design programs, which in turn may help us improve a broad range of human
activities. The research has the potential to be transformative, because design
is the way we interact with the future.