* 0855467
* Turbulence and vortices in two-dimensional Bose gases
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Brian Anderson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 08/31/2012
* USD 489,208.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vortex dynamics in fluids and
superfluids lie at the hearts of many important phenomena in physics, including
turbulence and the breakdown of superconductivity. While successful models of
the bulk properties of such phenomena have been produced, detailed microscopic
descriptions that include the roles of vortices have been exceptionally
difficult to develop. This NSF award supports research aimed at filling this
crucial niche through the experimental study of Bose-Einstein condensates. Made
of millions of trapped atoms in an ultracold vapor, Bose-Einstein condensates
can be manipulated and detected in the laboratory with microscopic precision,
and theoretically understood and modeled with techniques utilizing microscopic
descriptions of atomic interactions and quantum mechanics. As the coldest known
objects in the universe, dilute-gas condensates also act as coherent fluids and
can be used to study fluid and superfluid phenomena in ways not possible before
their first experimental observations in 1995. This research program integrates
NSF-supported laboratory work with the theoretical efforts of international
colleagues into a larger collaborative investigation of turbulence physics,
phase transition dynamics, and new vortex creation and manipulation mechanisms
in gaseous superfluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
pieces together some of the most difficult parts of the larger puzzle of
building a microscopic understanding of vortex behavior, turbulence, and related
phenomena in fluids and superfluids. The results of this research are thus
expected to have significant and exciting broader impacts in the development of
physics as a discipline, and in a wide area of specific fundamental and applied
physics topics. By investigating new techniques for vortex manipulation, this
study will also develop tools of utility to potential future techniques
utilizing quantum-level information processing. As the education of students is
certainly one of the most important aspects of federally sponsored research,
this project involves undergraduate and graduate students; the education of both
groups is key to maintaining national and international strength in science and
technology. The majority of this award is allocated to the financial support of
graduate students in order to teach these students state-of-the-art experimental
techniques in a cutting-edge area of research, and more generally how to do
high-quality independent research. These graduate students will carry on a
tradition of technical excellence as they eventually merge into other laboratory
settings, and will be suited to effectively teach research skills to future
generations of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;