* 0855313
* Detection of Gravitational Waves: Instrument Science and Data Analysis for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2013
* USD 2,550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In the near future, our understanding of the universe will
be greatly enhanced through the direct detection of gravitational waves (dynamic
ripples in space-time) generated from the most violent events in the universe
such as the collision of two black holes. The Laser Interferometer Gravitational
Wave Observatory (LIGO) operates with exceptional sensitivity to detect
perturbations from these distant astrophysical events. The University of Florida
LIGO group will carry out research and development for LIGO in four main areas.
First, work will be done on improving the performance of the Enhanced LIGO
detectors and on devising ways to insure the high-performance operation of
mission-critical optical components when the Advanced LIGO interferometers come
online. Second, new methods for searching the sky for localized gravitational
wave emissions form massive black holes and bright gamma ray bursts will be
developed. Third, looking further into the future, methods to enhance heat
transfer for cooling heavy mirrors to be used in future gravitational wave
detectors will be developed and tested. Finally, manpower contributions to the
LIGO science runs, LIGO data analysis, and data monitoring software will
continue to be made.

Broader impacts from this research include the development of a scientifically
trained work force spanning from undergraduate students through Ph. D. level
scientists which will be trained in a diverse set of scientific skills from
spanning from lasers and optics to electronics and feedback control systems to
sophisticated software and algorithm development. This work will positively
impact the national and international scientific infrastructure through the
University of Florida LIGO group's direct participation in research and
operations at the LIGO Observatories. Finally, this research will have
technological impacts that go beyond gravitational wave astronomy. High-average-
power optical devices developed by this program have commercial applications to
the laser and optics industries.