* 0855683
* A new method for producing ultra-cold molecular ions
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Eric Hudson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 05/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is developing a
new technique for the production of ultracold molecular ions. By utilizing
sympathetic cooling with appropriately chosen ultracold atoms, both the
molecular ion's external (translational) and internal (rotational and
vibrational) motions can be quickly cooled. No other technique has been
demonstrated, or even proposed, with this feature. Therefore, this award, and
its accompanying experimental effort, represents a dramatically simplified
scheme for producing ultracold molecular ions in their absolute internal and
external ground state as compared to previous proposals. The early stages of
this work will result in a better understanding of the detailed statistical and
chemical physics inherent to the quantum interactions between ultracold atoms
and molecular ions in the ion trap environment. Once these features are
understood, the technique will be used to pursue applications ranging from
quantum chemistry to precision measurement to quantum
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will have a broad impact to the
fields of physics and chemistry. With an efficient means of producing ultracold
molecular ions, researchers would be able to pursue interests at the leading
edge of fields as diverse as quantum chemistry, astrophysics, fundamental
physics, and quantum computation. The most noteworthy of these goals include:
the study of cold chemistry, which not only has important implications for
understanding the formation of interstellar clouds, but will allow for
investigation, and possible control, of reactive collisions in the truly quantum
regime; precision measurement of molecular transitions, which can be used to
very sensitively measure parity violating effects, as well as constrain the
possible variation of the fundamental constants; and, perhaps most
interestingly, the implementation of a robust scalable, quantum computation
architecture. Furthermore, under this program both undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral researchers will be trained in atomic,
molecular, and optical physics research.