* 0855253
* II-NEW: Sharing The Perspective of Ten Million Peers
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Fabian Bustamante, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2012
* USD 262,333.00

Sound Internet research requires comprehensive network measurements. This work
is motivated by the observation that, collectively, peers in large-scale peer-
to-peer systems (P2P) have a unique and valuable perspective on network
conditions, one to which today?s researchers, network operators and users have
limited or no access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; For over a year the principal
investigator (PI) has made available a BitTorrent extension aimed at reducing
the known problem of cross-ISP traffic in P2P systems. This extension reduces
off-network traffic through biased peer selection using a lightweight approach
based on reusing network information from commercial CDNs, and it has been shown
to be highly effective in the wild. In addition to biasing peer selection, the
extension allows subscribing volunteers to participate in a monitoring service
for the Internet. With over 260,000 volunteer users today (a current growth rate
of 200 per day), and distributed in over 150 countries and more than 3000
networks, this system is already the largest-ever monitoring service. On a daily
basis, the growing collection of users allow the researcher to record over 100,
000, 000 transfer-rate samples, 1.8 million traceroutes, to over 3.5 million
peers spread over 18, 000 ASs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there are clearly a
large number of important research questions that could be answered based on
this dataset, the task of collecting, archiving and analyzing this volume of
data is a constant challenge. On a single day, we must handle over 7GB of
uncompressed data! To address this challenge, the PI will build the P2P
Monitoring System, a platform for data collection, archival and off-line
analysis of the passively collected network- and application-level traces
collected by the participating hosts. The end goals are (a) to reduce the effort
currently dedicated to logistical issues related to the management of this data
set in order to focus on exploring the many research paths opened by it and (b)
to make possible the sharing and long-term archival of this valuable dataset
with the wider community through well-established organizations such as CAIDA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The framework will enable a wide range
of research activities, including: (i) explore a new approach to the design and
implementation of large-scale distributed systems based on the reuse of
previously gathered measurements, (ii) understand the feasibility of a network
early warning system that relies exclusively on information passively gathered
from P2P systems, (iii) evaluate the evolution and stability of the social
network formed by P2P users, (iv) explore the potential for revealing a more
complete Internet connectivity graph through the contribution of hundreds of
thousands of vantage points worldwide and (v) investigate approaches to diagnose
and enhance the resilience of network to natural disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Access to end-host views of the network is
key to the understanding and characterization of the underlying network and to
addressing the needs of new emergent Internet services and applications. The
framework developed under this project will free researchers from logistical
concerns related to the collection and processing of this collected view,
allowing them instead to focus on exploring some of the promising research paths
opened by it. The availability of this framework and dataset will also help to
significantly enhance education at Northwestern through student training and
curriculum enhancement. The availability of high-quality measurements is often
key to the success of most research efforts. To open the field of sound,
measurement-based research to the broader research community, we will continue
an ongoing conversation with CAIDA exploring approaches to facilitate the
sharing of this dataset and ensure its long-term archival.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;