* 0855356
* Novel approaches to outstanding problems in M/Superstring theory, supergravity and supersymmetric gauge theories
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Radu Roiban, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superstring Theory and its non-
perturbative completion known as M-theory provide us with the only known
framework unifying Einstein's gravity and other interactions in a quantum
mechanically consistent way. This project addresses outstanding problems of
fundamental importance for understanding the principles of M/Superstring theory
as well as practical directions related to its connection to high energy
particle physics, with the eventual goal of finding a non-perturbative
formulation of M/Superstring theory that can explain the universe around us. The
PI Gunaydin will focus on determining representations of U-duality groups and
their extensions and spectrum generating conformal and quasiconformal symmetry
groups will be further developed and applied to the spectra of compactified
M/Superstring theory and related supergravity theories. Unified N = 2 Maxwell-
Einstein and Yang-Mills-Einstein supergravity theories in five and four
dimensions will be further developed and their applications to supersymmetry
phenomenology investigated. Their M/Superstring theoretic origins as well as
their black hole solutions will also be studied. The oscillator construction of
unitary representations of noncompact supergroups will be further developed so
as to solve some of the outstanding problems in AdS/CFT dualities in
M/superstring theory and related spin chain systems. The PI will also study
Gauge/string duality with reduced supersymmetry, its effects on the
integrability of the world-sheet theory and of the gauge theory dilatation
operator as well as on the direct comparison of the relevant gauge theory
asymptotic Bethe Ansatz with perturbative worldsheet calculations. The Co-pi-
Radu Roiban will work on the following problems: The construction of new
techniques and the application of existing techniques for efficient higher-loop
high-multiplicity calculations in supersymmetric gauge theories with particular
focus on the maximally supersymmetric theory in four dimensions; the
identification of all-order symmetries of the scattering matrix of this theory.
He will also study the high energy behavior of supergravity theories, in
particular that of the maximally supersymmetric ungauged supergravity in four
dimensions, and the existence of perturbatively-finite point-like quantum
theories of gravity; the identification of the origin of the required
perturbative cancellations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to broader impacts,
symmetry principles underlie all of modern physics. Hence some of the methods
developed and the results obtained here will have applications in other areas of
theoretical physics as well as in mathematics. Similarly, the techniques
developed for fully exploiting the consequences of integrability for the
gauge/string duality have applications in statistical mechanics and condensed
matter physics. Several graduate students will be involved in the research
proposed here, thus enhancing the opportunities for the training of Ph.D.
students at Penn State University.