* 0855319
* Studies of fundamental constants, interactions and symmetries via low-energy, high-precision muon experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Timothy Gorringe, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 587,955.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on
investigations of the fundamental constants, elementary interactions and basic
symmetries of the Standard Model. The proposed research is based on precision
experiments with low-energy muon beams and includes continuing work on the
MuLan/MuCap experiments at Paul Scherrer Institute, new work on the MuSun
experiment at Paul Scherrer Institute, and R&amp;D work for a new measurement of
the muon anomalous magnetic moment at Fermilab. MuLan will determine to part-
per-million precision the Fermi Constant of weak interactions, thus permitting
more accurate weak interaction calculations and improved Standard Model tests.
MuCap will determine the so-called induced pseudoscalar coupling constant of the
proton's weak force, thereby testing the nature of spontaneously symmetry
breaking in strong interactions. The MuSun experiment will study the elementary
weak nuclear interaction between muons and deuterons, thereby furthering our
understanding of thermonuclear fusion in the sun. Finally, a new measurement of
the muon's anomalous magnetic moment will render an important test of physics
beyond the Standard Model. The research includes several areas of broader
impact. The PI will continue his involvement of high school students, physics
majors and physics graduate students in research activities. Additionally, the
PI will continue his efforts in undergraduate recruiting, graduate recruiting
and community outreach. Our activities in high-speed data acquisition and high-
volume data analysis will expose our students to many aspects of modern
computing. Finally, our studies of fundamental constants, interactions and
symmetries will have broad impact in nuclear, particle and astrophysics.