* 0855863
* Reaction-Separation Processes for Production of Hydroxymethylfurfural from Fructose using Molecular Sieves
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Prodromos Daoutidis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

0855863&lt;br/&gt;Tsapatsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical exploitation of
biomass as a carbon-neutral source of chemicals and fuels is limited by the
development of process and reaction engineering technology suited for the
chemical transformation of hydrophilic, oxygen-functionalized and thermally
unstable biomass feedstock. This research seeks to simultaneously harness the
shape selective catalytic properties of zeolitic materials and selective
separations for implementation in catalytic membrane reactors that will enable
low temperature catalytic and separation processes for conversion of sugar
monomers, specifically for dehydration of fructose to hydroxymethylfurfural
(HMF). It is predicated upon preliminary data that show HMF can be selectively
separated from fructose using zeolite membranes and seeks to extend previous
work from the PI on the synthesis of high-selectivity, high-permeability
membranes for hydrocarbon separations to integrated reaction-separation systems
and to polyfunctional biomass-derived
feedstock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The project brings together
the complementary and diverse experience of the Tsapatsis (zeolitic membranes),
Bhan (zeolite catalysis) and Daoutidis (process design and control) research
groups to develop new reaction-separation process technologies using biomass as
feedstock. Specifically, the co-PIs plan to:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Determine the
kinetics, mechanism and site requirements for the dehydration of fructose using
steady state and chemical/isotopic transient experimental studies to provide a
rigorous description of reaction rates for process design,&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
Investigate the potential of zeolite-membranes to separate fructose-derived
oxygenfunctionalized molecules and quantitatively assess the effect of
adsorption and transport phenomena on the rate and selectivity of HMF
production, and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Design and optimize an integrated reaction-
separation system based on (i) and (ii) and also, compare and contrast this
methodology at a process engineering level with other reactionadsorption and
reaction-extraction biphasic systems proposed in the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research encompasses the interaction of
transport and adsorption phenomena with kinetics in reaction systems for the
design of integrated low-temperature reaction-separation systems adapted for the
specific molecular structure of biomass feedstock and extends chemical reaction
engineering approaches to process intensification to include biomass
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact Transforming traditional
chemical processing and production is one of the challenges the global society
faces to ensure a sustainable future. Combination of catalyst development, new
materials for separations and energy efficient reaction-purification process
integration has the potential to contribute to this transformation. In this
respect, the research will have broader methodological impact and may stimulate
the development of solutions for other problems related to biorefinery
processes. The co-PIs will incorporate elements of this work as case studies in
an advanced undergraduate/graduate course that focuses on reaction engineering
and separations and in teaching-modules that will be made available on the
internet. Undergraduate students will be encouraged to work on aspects of the
project and emphasis will be given in recruiting efforts to assure continued
diversity within the co-PIs research groups.