* 0855310
* Precision Neutron Decay Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,10/31/2012
* Fred Wietfeldt, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 10/31/2012
* USD 359,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The neutron is one of the building blocks of ordinary matter. However, when free
from the confines of a stable atomic nucleus, the neutron is unstable and decays
into a proton, electron, and antineutrino with an average lifetime of about 15
minutes. This decay is governed by the weak nuclear force, one of the four basic
forces of nature. By carefully measuring the energies and directions of the
emitted particles and the spin axis of the original neutron, subtle details of
the fundamental nature of the weak force can be revealed. We pass beams of cold
neutrons (moving less than 2000 m/s) through a variety of apparatus designed to
make precise measurements of the neutron decay lifetime and angular
correlations. We use these results to test the Standard Model of particle
interactions and look for evidence of new physics. The neutron lifetime is used
to calculated the abundances of light elements produced in the early universe
from the big bang model.

A number of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral
researchers, participate in this research program. In addition to learning the
science of neutron decay, they are educated broadly in the physics and
methodology of research at neutron sources, which prepares them for a wide range
of careers related to neutron science in academia and industry.