* 0855112
* Understanding the Role of the Parietal Cortex in Visual Object Grouping and Feature Binding
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Yaoda Xu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2011
* USD 491,959.00

In everyday life, perceivers are confronted with continuous and overwhelming
influxes of visual information from the environment. To extract the most
relevant visual information to guide behavior and thought, a visual system is
faced with two challenges. One challenge is to select discrete units of visual
information from competing inputs from the environment (e.g., detecting an
approaching vehicle on the road). A second challenge is to integrate visual
information initially processed in separate visual areas (such as color, shape
and motion) to achieve a single coherent visual percept (e.g., a red moving car
on the left). Although vision research has primarily focused on feature
processing in visual cortex, brain lesion and brain imaging studies indicate
that the parietal cortex plays an essential, but at present largely mysterious
role in visual information selection and integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
support of the National Science Foundation, Drs. Yaoda Xu and Marvin Chun at
Yale University will use a brain imaging technique, functional magnetic
resonance imaging, to study visual processing in the parietal cortex of healthy
human observers. This work will provide with a broad understanding of the role
of the parietal cortex in visual perception. Because parietal cortex is often
damaged by stroke, causing deficits in visual information selection and
integration, the outcome of this research may provide clues to aid patient
rehabilitation after parietal lesions. The research may also provide significant
insights to computer vision and the design of sophisticated artificial visual
systems. Finally, the project will provide research experience for both graduate
and undergraduate students.