* 0855470
* Theoretical investigations of molecular collisions and chemical reactions at ultracold temperatures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Balakrishnan Naduvalath, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2014
* USD 182,354.00

The development of techniques for cooling and trapping of a wide variety of
atomic and molecular samples in recent years has created exciting opportunities
for probing and manipulating chemical reactions at cold and ultracold
temperatures. Theoretical studies of atomic and molecular interactions at cold
and ultracold temperatures have become an integral part of this endeavor. To
further advance progress in this field, quantitative calculations of rotational
and vibrational transitions in cold and ultracold molecule collisions, including
heteronuclear molecules, will be carried out by taking the H2-H2 and H2-HD
systems as illustrative examples. In addition, quantum mechanical calculations
will be carried out on the astrophysically important O+OH reaction at cold and
ultracold temperatures. State-of-the-art quantum scattering methods will be used
to investigate the molecule-molecule and atom-molecule collisions. General
purpose computer codes have not been developed for this type of calculations.
The molecule-molecule scattering calculations will be performed using a quantum
scattering code jointly developed with Roman Krems (University of British
Columbia) during the previous funding cycle. The code will be made available to
the broader scientific community once it has been fully implemented and tested
for the general case of diatom-diatom collisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
studies will have broad impact on research at the interface between Atomic,
Molecular and Optical (AMO) Physics, Physical Chemistry, and Astrochemistry. The
computational algorithms developed will be equally applicable for molecular
phenomena in related fields, for example, Atmospheric physics and Astrophysics.
Summer support for an undergraduate student and partial support for a
postdoctoral scholar will be provided to carry out research in the frontier area
of AMO Physics. The postdoctoral scholar will be expected to take up a tenure
track or similar position after completion of the work and to continue to mentor
students and scholars.