* 0855580
* Research in cosmic rays, magnetic fields and the nature of dark matter
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Francesc Ferrer, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 120,000.00

This project focuses on the most energetic particles in the Universe, the Ultra-
High Energy Cosmic Rays (UHECRs). Efforts to understand their origin have been
on-going for decades, and evidence of an anisotropic distribution suggesting a
link to nearby active galactic nuclei has been recently revealed by the Pierre
Auger Observatory (PAO). However, the measurements of the composition and
arrival directions point to somewhat conflicting results. The research will
combine future data of the spectrum and angular distribution to unveil the
mechanism hurling these particles around the Universe. The project also is
concerned with the nature of the cosmic magnetic fields. Charged particle
astronomy relies on the small magnetic smearing of point sources. The origin of
the large-scale magnetization in the Universe could provide a signature of the
Universe at the electroweak phase transition or at the end of infation. The
project spans the period in which the PAO will accumulate a data set exceeding
the experiments to date by more than an order of magnitude. The PI's research
will include the following: 1. Unified analysis of the directions and spectrum.
The PI will extend previous analysis to incorporate the different energy
spectrum resulting from sources distributed non-uniformly. 2. Cosmic magnetic
fields: The compelling evidence for the existence of magnetization in galaxies,
clusters and superclusters poses a theoretical problem. One explanation for the
origin of these magnetic fields is thought to be the product of sphaleron decays
at the electroweak phase transition which results in a non-zero helicity that
could be measured using cosmic ray astronomy. The PI will improve calculations
of the expected helicity, using lattice simulations, and will devise observables
for its detection. The broader impact is as follows: the proposed research will
add to our knowledge of the universe in which we live, and of the most energetic
particles reaching the Earth. It will allow us to learn more about the extreme
conditions at the acceleration sites, and the processes that took place when the
excess of matter over antimatter, that eventually gave rise to our planet and
the stars and galaxies surrounding us, was generated. Washington University
operates a substantial science outreach program to improve teaching and learning
in K-12 science and math: the work carried out as part of the project will be
presented to school teachers in the context of existing courses that enhance
their professional development by bringing them into contact with cutting-edge
research. Many of the local school districts that participate in this outreach
program have substantial populations of under-represented minorities.