* 0855653
* Particles, Strings, and the Universe in Motion
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Mina Aganagic, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 05/31/2013
* USD 1,500,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first decade of the
21st century has witnessed a remarkable convergence of the fundamental questions
about the origin, structure and the future fate of our Universe. Questions such
as "What is the Universe made of?" " What are matter, energy, space and time?" ,
which have now come to the forefront of research in experimental particle
physics, observational cosmology and astrophysics, are tied together by
remarkable developments on the theoretical front: An effective synthesis of
previously disconnected areas of general relativity and cosmology, quantum
gravity, quantum field theory, string theory and even pure
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the group's proposed activity
is to perform fundamental theoretical research at the crossroads of particle
physics, quantum gravity, cosmology and string theory, with applications ranging
from physics beyond the standard model, to the multiverse approach in cosmology,
the interface of string theory and condensed matter, and the nature of space and
time in quantum gravity. The PIs believe that their group is uniquely positioned
to take advantage of the diversity in their expertise, tied together by the
overlap in interests and focus on the same fundamental questions about the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PIs propose to take the
following approach. Mina Aganagic is one of the leading experts in topological
string theory. Her work will focus on applications of topological string methods
and string dualities to novel mechanisms of supersymmetry breaking and in string
phenomenology. She will further pursue the study of black hole entropy from the
perspective of topological strings. Raphael Bousso has done seminal work on
holography and geometric entropy bounds, co-discovered the landscape of string-
theory vacua, and proposed a solution to the cosmological constant problem. He
will work on challenges we face in extracting predictions from the landscape and
the eternally inflating multiverse, such as the measure problem in eternal
inflation, and replacing anthropic conditions by more general selection
criteria. Petr Horava participated in a number of turning-point discoveries in
string theory, such as orientifolds, D-branes, and M-theory. He will apply
methods of nonequilibrium field theory to quantum gravity and string theory,
study quantum gravity with anisotropic scaling, further develop the interface
with condensed matter physics, and look for novel phenomena in low-dimensional
models of string and M-theory. Yasunori Nomura has contributed significantly to
our understanding of physics beyond the standard model; he pioneered grand
unification in higher dimensions and proposed novel TeV scale theories. He will
work on theoretical particle physics and cosmology relevant to experiments
coming in the next decades, in particular the LHC, with emphasis on
supersymmetry breaking and its mediation, the quark and lepton masses, and the
implications of the multiverse on the TeV scale
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity include training of students and postdocs who become the next
generation of scientists of the nation as well as the world. Berkely Center for
Theoretical Physics promotes diversity to encourage female and minority students
and scientists. The fundamental questions addressed in this research are of deep
interest to the general public, and the PIs will continue promoting the
importance and excitement of fundamental science in the broader context of our
society. The PIs will work with QuarkNet teachers to convey the essence of
cutting-edge scientific discoveries to high school students, and will continue
making themselves available as resources. They will work to enhance the award-
winning Particle Adventure website on physics beyond the standard model and
string theory. They will continue to disseminate the results of the current
scientific research to under-privileged areas of the world via lecture series
and educational activities such as Summer schools.