* 0855037
* Collaborative Research: The Nonatomic-Game Approach to Revenue Management Under Competition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Yusen Xia, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 96,445.00

Abstract of Proposal "Collaborative Research: The Nonatomic-Game Approach to
Revenue Management under Competition?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant provides
funding for the characterization of nonatomic-game equilibria of revenue
management problems. Due to its innate difficulty, revenue management problems
in competitive settings have not been adequately examined. This project will
avoid complexities posed by multi-firm interactions by going to the infinite-
firm extreme, considering a continuum of firms among whom none has any
discernible impact on the overall evolution of the market. The focus of the
project will be the establishment and characterization of equilibrium market
processes and pricing policies that mutually sustain one another. Two types of
problems involving stochastic and price-sensitive demand arrivals will be
tackled, with each posing its unique challenges. In one type, firms can freely
choose from a menu of prices, while in another type, firms cannot revisit prices
they have themselves charged. Deterministic counterparts will be studied as
benchmarks for heavy-volume limits, and computational studies will be conducted
to assess the appropriateness of the infinite-firm approximation. &lt;br/&gt; If
successful, results of this research will lead to a deeper understanding of
competitive revenue management problems. General methods, specific tools, and
intermediate results of this research will likely be applicable to theoretical
endeavors elsewhere. In particular, novel uses of the Knaster-Taski and
Kakutani-Glicksberg-Fan fixed point theorems may inspire further research.
Equilibrium pricing policies identified by the project will serve as useful
guidelines to real firms practicing dynamic price adjustments in response to
competitors? price movements. The proposed computational study will address the
problem of how accurate the infinite-firm approximation of the real finite-firm
setting can be. Research outcomes will prove to be more practicable if it turns
out that fewer firms are needed in order to realize strong incentives for real
firms to adopt nonatomic-game pricing equilibria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;