* 0855673
* Elementary Particle Physics Using High Energy Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Henry Lubatti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 04/30/2013
* USD 2,710,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides continuing support
for a program of research for the High Energy Physics group at the University of
Washington. This group is a member of the D0 and ATLAS collaborations and plans
to take advantage of the unprecedented discovery potential of the LHC by
focusing on two broad themes: (1). the search for the Higgs boson(s), the
signature particle(s) of the most compelling model to explain Electroweak
Symmetry Breaking in the Standard Model as well as in Supersymmetry; and (2).
the search for long-lived particles occurring in many extensions of the Standard
Model that address the large hierarchy problem and have a potential for early
discovery. In addition to the physics program at the LHC, it is continuing and
expanding its contributions to the ATLAS detector and software efforts. For DØ
the plan is to focus on the search for the Higgs boson(s), both within the
Standard Model and in Supersymmetry.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work
span several areas. It provides an opportunity for undergraduate training as
they plan to continue their long tradition of involving undergraduates in all
aspects of their research work. They will also continue their efforts to
increase the participation of underrepresented minorities in all of their
research. Finally, they are actively engaged in outreach efforts to local high
school teachers and students, as part of the national QuarkNet program.
&lt;br/&gt;