* 0855633
* Interdisciplinary Studies of H3+: Precision Spectroscopy, Reaction Dynamics, and Astronomical Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Benjamin McCall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 08/31/2012
* USD 485,196.00

In this investigation, both laboratory studies and astronomical observations
will be performed related to H3+, the simplest molecule with more than two
atoms. The infrared spectrum of H3+ will be measured with record precision,
enabling new tests of theoretical calculations. The reaction of H3+ with
molecular hydrogen (H2) will be measured at the lowest temperatures yet, to
probe interesting quantum mechanical effects and support astronomical
observations. The infrared spectrum of the larger hydrogen ion H5+ will also be
measured to provide constraints on the reaction mentioned above. In terms of
astronomy, large telescopes will be used to measure the abundance of H3+ in
various clouds of gas between the stars, and the effect of the reaction of H3+
with H2 on interstellar H2 and H3+ will be modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program can be expected to have several broader impacts because of its
interdisciplinary nature and its development of novel experimental approaches.
Both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the young
interdisciplinary field of astrochemistry. The integration of research and
education will continue to be fostered through the development of new courses in
astrochemistry. Interactions between scientists who consider themselves
primarily physicists, chemists, or astronomers will be encouraged by an
astrochemistry seminar series and also through the organization of a regional
astrochemistry consortium.