* 0855610
* Precision Measurements with Cold and Ultracold Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Stefan Baessler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects covers several
research projects in which very low energy neutrons are used to strengthen our
understanding of fundamental interactions. In the first project, several
observables in neutron beta decay are studied; the combination of these
observables with another experimental result (the determination of the neutron
lifetime) determines the coupling constants of the weak interaction which causes
the neutron decay. They are used as a sensitive test of the validity of the
present theory which describes weak interaction coupling nucleons to leptons
(the electrons and neutrinos produced in neutron decay). A related process is
the weak coupling between nucleons and other nucleons, and the second project, a
measurement of the asymmetry in the direction of gamma ray emission relative to
the polarization of a neutron in the neutron capture on protons, is performed to
determine the strength the dominant process of the weak interaction between
nucleons. The third project is the characterization of gravitationally bound
quantum states of ultracold neutron in the gravitational field over a glass
mirror. A series of experiments is used to search for new short range
interactions which would influence these quantum states. Finally, a purifier
will be built for Helium-4 which is used as a production target for ultracold
neutrons in a search for the electric dipole moment of the neutron. The Helium-3
contamination has to be reduced far below the natural abundance to avoid the
reassertion of the ultracold neutrons on Helium-3
impurities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common goal of this experimental program is
to test the Standard Model in regions which were not accessible before, or at
least not as precise. A discovery of something not explained in the Standard
Model would have important implications for High Energy Physics and Cosmology.
Additional, the experiments have a high educational potential: Besides the
advantages of working on scientifically visible and technologically challenging
projects, the work ethics taught in medium-size collaborations of US and
international institutions is of great value to students, be it as future
scientist or outside academia.