* 0855279
* II-NEW: Equipping the Allosphere, an Environment for Immersive Data Exploration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Richard Wolski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 749,894.00

The activity of visualizing and exploring complex multi-dimensional data
provides insight that is essential for progress in several areas of science and
engineering, where the amount and complexity of the data overwhelms traditional
computing environments. This project will develop the first complete version of
the Allosphere, an infrastructure that will provide powerful methods for
detailed analysis, synthesis, and manipulation of such data by integrating
multimodal representations of large-scale data with human-scale visualization
and interaction techniques in a novel immersive environment.

Intellectual Merit: The Allosphere comprises a 10m diameter spherical display
surface in a three-story near-anechoic building space, with a bridge running
through the center that holds up to 25 participants. When fully equipped, the
Allosphere will include high-resolution stereo video projectors to illuminate
the complete spherical display surface, a large array of speakers distributed
outside the surface to provide high quality spatial sound, a suite of sensors
and interaction devices to enable rich user interaction with the data and
simulations, and the computing infrastructure to enable the high-volume
computations necessary to provide a rich visual, aural, and interactive
experience for the users. The Allosphere will be one of the largest
visualization/exploration instruments in the world, and it will serve as an
ongoing research testbed for several important areas of computing. In addition,
the Allosphere will serve as an environment for experimental media creation and
performance, as a tool for scientific discovery in areas such as nanosystems,
neuroscience, quantum computing, and biochemistry, and as an instrument for
education and outreach.

Broader Impacts: This infrastructure project will complete the audio,
interaction, and computational infrastructure of the Allosphere. This first
version will serve as a computing research infrastructure in two primary ways:
(1) as a platform for driving computing research needed to create future
immersive multimodal, multimedia visualization environments, raising challenging
problems in storage, networking, rendering, software virtualization, real-time
simulation, and human-computer interaction; and (2) as an immersive
visualization environment for research in computing areas such as scientific and
information visualization, knowledge discovery, visual analytics, complex
design, large-scale performance debugging, data mining, and cloud computing. As
infrastructure for both computing and scientific exploration, the Allosphere
will benefit a number of important fields that have wide impact on society. The
facility will be made available to researchers and partners (in academia,
industry, and government) beyond UCSB. The project will also leverage local
outreach programs to attract K-12 students, underrepresented groups, and
undergraduate students, and involve them in scientific projects and explorations
that utilize this unique immersive environment. The facility will be integrated
into courses and research projects in several departments at UCSB. Results will
be disseminated via the project Web site (http://allosphere.ucsb.edu).