* 0855180
* II-NEW: Collaborative Research: Spam Processing, Archiving, and Monitoring Community Facility (SPAM Commons)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

In this project, the PIs propose to construct and develop a shared
infrastructure to support the collection and maintenance of realistic, large
scale spam data sets, &lt;br/&gt;referred as SPAM
Commons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spam is a problem in many important communications
media such as email and web. A sub-problem of spam, phishing (a form of online
pretexting), caused an estimated $3.2B in damages in 2007. The broad impact of
effective spam filtering methods can be estimated in billions of dollars in
several communications media such as email and web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spam
has also invaded other media, with concrete attack examples in social networks,
blogosphere, Internet telephony (VoIP), instant messaging, and click fraud.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, spam research has been hampered by the lack
of published real world data sets due to concerns with privacy and company
intellectual property. This project team develops a shared infrastructure to
support the collection and maintenance of realistic, large scale spam data sets,
called Spam Processing, Archiving, and Monitoring Community Facility (SPAM
Commons). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of SPAM Commons are:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) to facilitate remedial research that will stem the wastes and
losses caused by spam, and &lt;br/&gt;(2) enable revolutionary research that aim
for stopping certain kinds of spam attacks altogether.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPAM Commons is divided into a Public Partition and a
Protected Partition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Public Partition is a direct
analog of standard corpora for speech and image recognition research, consisting
of a systematic and regular collection of both spam and legitimate data in the
various communications media, starting from email and web spam, and expanding
into other communications media as spam becomes a serious threat in each area
and data become available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Protected Partition
consists of a combined data and processing facility that makes private data or
near real-time spam data available for experimental evaluation of spam defense
mechanisms in a protected testbed. Access to such protected data will enable new
spam research on real-time evolving spam and real world data sets that is
infeasible today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual challenges of the SPAM
Commons project extend beyond the new research on various abovementioned spam
areas enabled by the availability of data sets. The construction of both
partitions of SPAM Commons includes significant intellectual challenges of their
own. First, the isolation of Protected Partition addresses partially the
concerns of privacy, which remains a general research problem. Second, useful
spam and legitimate data sets require automated distinction of spam from
legitimate documents with certainty, which remains an open research question in
email, web, and other media. Third, the adversarial and mutual evolution of spam
producers and defenders require continuous collection of fresh data for further
study. Finally, the collection and streaming of near-real-time spam data
represent research resources currently unavailable to spam researchers. Advances
in these areas will spur the growth and evolution of SPAM Commons that will
enable new research on the evolving and growing spam
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of SPAM Commons data sets on
experimental spam research may be similar to the impact of large corpora in
disciplines such as speech/image recognition and natural language processing,
which achieved a level of scientific result reproducibility and comparativeness
after the use of such corpora became standard requirements. The proposed data
repository will be supported and used by 9 university partners (Clayton State,
Emory, Georgia Tech, NC A&amp;T, Northwestern, Texas A&amp;M, UC Davis, U.
Georgia, UNC Charlotte), and several industry partners (IBM, PureWire, Secure
Computing).