* 0855453
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the structure of cerebral cortex gray matter with diffusion MRI
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Douglas Rosene, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2013
* USD 882,361.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this project the PIs proposes to investigate the structure of the cerebral
cortex with noninvasive diffusion-sensitive Magnetic Resonance imaging (MRI). At
macroscopic scale, the human cerebral cortex consists of an estimated 50 or so
discrete areas of distinct structure identifiable only at the microscopic level
but of immense importance as each corresponds to a specialized function. These
fundamental divisions, however, are impossible to discern with contemporary MRI.
Recently, one of the PIs made a dramatic progress in MRI of the fiber pathways
of cerebral white matter using diffusion spectrum MRI or DSI to obtain a large-
scale fiber connectivity of the human brain, or the connectome. The aim of this
collaborative project is to extend DSI from white matter into the gray matter by
developing and validating a diffusion MRI methodology to image the intrinsic
structure and connectivity of discrete cortical gray matter areas.
Undergraduate, doctoral and post-doctoral level students will receive
interdisciplinary training in their interactions with the other two
collaborative labs. In this way students will be trained in the cross-
disciplinary methods of this project, obtaining hands on familiarity with the
ideas and methods of modern neuroscience, neuroimaging, and concepts of
condensed matter physics. Additionally, these studies will be of interest to the
scientific media and public. These studies offer an opportunity to present
neuroscience, its goals, methods, and uses, to a broad general audience, both
nationally and internationally. The present proposal mixes diverse disciplines
and so offers a fertile opportunity for student education. Under the auspices of
the NSF Distinguished Teacher Scholar (DTS) Award, co-PI Stanley's research
group will continue to work intensely with high school students and with college
non-science majors through designing hands-on activities that encourage the
student to ask questions and better understand the activities of a practicing
scientist.