* 0855247
* II-NEW: Enhanced Parallelization for High Performance Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Qing Yi, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 227,178.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the growth in the size of
scientific applications the level of parallelism provided by existing techniques
leads to suboptimal performance and, therefore, an integrated approach to
parallelism is necessary. This research involves the acquisition of a cluster
for high performance computing. Using this infrastructure the investigators will
improve parallelism at many levels ranging from compiler to I/O, in order to
increase the execution performance of scientific applications. The
infrastructure offers a valuable tool to validate the results on a state-of-the-
art system using large scale scientific applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to elevate the productivity and efficiency of high-performance
scientific computing through innovative language, compiler, empirical tuning,
parallel I/O, and power management technologies. The investigators develop new
methods for flow-sensitive static and dynamic program analysis to enhance loop
parallelization. The investigators implement new speculative parallelization
techniques to expose higher levels of thread parallelism for chip-
multiprocessors (CMPs). Furthermore, the investigators plan to build an
integrated framework for parallel I/O by studing various aspects of
declustering, including novel declustering schemes, replicated declustering,
heterogeneous declustering, adaptive declustering and declustering using
multiple databases. Finally, the investigators plan to develop efficient energy
management schemes for parallel high-performance clusters, study various fault
tolerance approaches by exploring the inherent space redundancy in CMPs, and
address the potential negative effects of energy management on system
reliability. The computing platform enables the investigators to validate the
impact of their research on application performance and scalability on a large
scale parallel system.