* 0855632
* One-Way Quantum Computing in the Optical Frequency Comb
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Olivier Pfister, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 530,000.00

This award, "One-way quantum computing in the optical frequency comb," supports
the Quantum Fields and Quantum Information (QFQI) group in the Physics
Department of the University of Virginia (UVa). Quantum computing (QC) is a
fascinating endeavor whose most important promise is the exponential speedup of
particular mathematical problems such as quantum system simulation and integer
factoring, the latter being key to breaking cyber encryption. The physical
challenges posed to the experimental implementation of QC are daunting and can
be summarized by the requirement of exquisitely controlling thousands of single
quantum systems (e.g. atoms) at the individual level. Because light is easy to
control efficiently, as opposed to atoms, this research project is based on a
novel proposal for a quantum computer, by the PI and his collaborators, using
laser-like beams of light at different frequencies. A large amount of prior
theoretical results has shown that this proposal offers exciting perspectives,
in particular a spectacular increase of the size of prototype quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed work comprise an
active research contribution to the UVa Physics graduate and undergraduate
programs, in the form of the continuous advising of 3 Ph.D. students per year
and 2 undergraduate students per summer (typically supported by NSF REU
supplements to the grant). Also stemming from this research, departmental
seminars have been given several times a year by different QFQI members and an
advanced graduate course "Quantum Optics and Quantum Information" (Phys 888) is
now taught by the PI at UVa on a regular basis. On the interdisciplinary front,
this research is spawning collaborative efforts between the QFQI group and Prof.
Arthur Lichtenberger, director of the UVa Microfabrication Laboratory at the UVa
School of Engineering, in particular for microphotolithography applied to the
fabrication of photonic materials. Last but not least, there exists the
potential for this research to usher in fundamental tests of quantum mechanics
by exploring large-scale quantum behavior in a regime where theoretical
predictions are untested and even difficult to make. This would therefore
represent a scientific endeavor on a broader scale than the field of Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics.&lt;br/&gt;