* 0855345
* Cosmological evolution and very high energy astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Todor Stanev, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 40,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work on this project will be
dedicated to studies of the cosmological evolution of the cosmic ray sources and
of the extragalactic light background. It is currently far from obvious which is
the best proxy for the cosmological evolution of the UHECR sources since we are
not certain what the sources are. The PI will thus attempt to combine the
information from different ultra high and very high energy experiments,
including (hopefully) the future detection of very high energy neutrinos, and
reach conclusions related to cosmological evolution. The PI proposes theoretical
work and data analysis that will lead to a better understanding of the
cosmological evolution of different types of powerful extragalactic sources and
to identification of the sources of ultrahigh energy cosmic rays (UHECR) - the
highest energy nuclei in the Universe. Special attention will be paid to the
cosmological evolution of different types of possible sources. The resolution of
this evolution dominates the production of secondary fluxes of cosmogenic gamma
rays and neutrinos from ultra high energy cosmic rays interactions in the
universal photon fields. These include the microwave background and the
extragalactic background light (EBL) in infrared, optical and UV ranges. EBL
plays important role in the production of the cosmogenic fluxes and in the
absorption of TeV gamma rays - both cosmogenic ones as well as of those coming
from different extragalactic sources. The comparison of the absorption of the
gamma rays coming from different sources may reveal the cosmological evolution
of EBL that is now being disputed.&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed work
will yield information about a much wider range of global astrophysical and
cosmological parameters which underscores the broader impact of this work. The
PI is Co-Director of the Erice International School for Cosmic Rays Astrophysics
(ISCRA) and gives lectures there to young scientists. The School meets every two
years and has on the average 60 students (graduate students and postdocs) and 12
lecturers.