* 0855259
* Molecular Vibrational Energy with High Time and Space Resolution
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Dana Dlott, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project is an experimental study of vibrational energy in condensed-phase
molecules using ultrafast laser spectroscopy. The focus is on understanding how
vibrational energy moves over molecular dimensions from one location to another.
This fundamental knowledge is needed to better understand chemical reactivity
and to understand heat dissipation in molecular machines. Two techniques have
already been developed in the Dlott laboratory that allow experimenters to input
vibrational energy at one location of a molecule and probe its arrival at one or
more other locations. In the IR-Raman technique that will be used to study
molecular liquids such as a series of substituted benzenes, the energy is input
with a tunable IR pulse and detected by a time series of anti-Stokes Raman
spectra. In the ultrafast flash-thermal conductance technique that will be used
to study molecular monolayers adsorbed on metal substrates, heat is input by
flash-heating the metal layer and probing the molecular adsorbate with coherent
vibrational sum-frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy. The monolayer method is
especially useful for studying molecular machinery, but SFG provides only an
overall measure of heat flow, as opposed to anti-Stokes Raman that reveals which
vibrational states carry the energy. Recent advances in surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy from the Dlott laboratory will improve the sensitivity of anti-
Stokes Raman enough to probe molecular monolayers. Combined with SFG, these
experiments will reveal both the rate of heat flow and the mechanism of heat
flow through a series of crafted molecular structures.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

All machinery generates heat. When the machine is the size of a molecule, the
familiar concepts of heat transport no longer apply. This project seeks to
understand the fundamental science of heat transport through molecules using
advanced laser technology that produces light pulses less than one trillionth of
a second in duration. With these advanced lasers, researchers in the Dlott group
at the University of Illinois can input heat (vibrational energy) into one part
of a molecule and measure how long it takes the heat to reach other parts of the
molecule located a few angstroms (1 angstrom = 10-10 meters is about the
diameter of one of the molecule's atoms) away. In this project, Dlott group
researchers will develop new techniques to improve the measurement of
vibrational energy, and will study how systematic changes of the molecular
structure can speed up or slow down the heat transport. Ultimately this work
will lead to a fundamental understanding of heat at the molecular level and
provide the underlying knowledge needed to engineer molecules for specific heat
transport applications, enabling new technologies to help the US remain
economically competitive. The work will be performed by graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers at the University of Illinois, who will learn to
design, construct and operate advanced laser systems for studies of molecular
machinery as they progress in their training to become world-class scientists.
The focus on heat flow processes, which are familiar to laypersons as well as
all scientists, helps insure the wide dissemination of the results of our work
to technical journals and popular science media.

