* 0855639
* RUI: Coupled Atom - Polar Molecule Condensate Systems: A Theoretical Adventure
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Hong Ling, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2012
* USD 75,000.00

The primary objective of this project is to explore the physics of heteronuclear
models: coupled atom-molecule systems where heteronuclear or polar molecules are
formed from atoms of distinct species via interspecies Feshbach resonance or
photoassociation. The technique of the stimulated Raman adiabatic passage will
be generalized to multi-level atom-molecule systems for the purpose of an
efficient generation of polar molecules. The same technique is also applied to
create a large angle atom-molecule beam splitter, which serves as the building
block for an atom-molecule interferometer, capable of measuring changes that are
phase sensitive not only to atomic but also to molecular beams.
Electromagnetically induced transparency is studied as an tool for detecting
exotic phases in two-states fermionic models, taking advantage of the
exceptionally high spatial and frequency resolving powers of modern lasers.
Phase separation in which different phases repel each other into separate
spatial regions is studied with a new attitude, in which phase separation is
considered as offering new opportunities for building quantum devices of
practical importance. A separated quantum phase inside an optical cavity is
studied not only as a fundamental nonlinear system for the exploration of cavity
quantum electrodynamics but also as a tool for precision measurement of quantum
phenomena.

This project aims to provide more competitive research programs to students at
Rowan, a predominantly undergraduate public institution. Students are provided
with chances to collaborate with the PI's former students (currently at other
graduate institutions), and visiting Ph. D students or scholars from
collaborating institutions, all of which represent opportunities that are
traditionally only accessible to students at large research universities. The
goal is to equip Rowan students with the research experience and the skills that
will enable them to compete with those from nationally-recognized universities
in future graduate studies or other scientific careers. This project also aims
to motivate the PI to further his effort in integrating research into teaching
while advancing discovery and understanding through his active research program.
The goal is to provide undergraduate students with a more direct path to
advanced research topics in atomic physics and quantum optics, while at the same
time to lay groundwork that enables the students to expand comfortably into any
advanced areas of study in the future.