* 0855322
* Fabrication of Helical Mesoporous Silica Tubes with Confined Assembly Process
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jiyu Fang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 09/30/2013
* USD 246,135.00

0855322 &lt;br/&gt;Fang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Helical mesoporous silica is attractive because of
its potential applications in chiral catalysis and separations, which are of
great interest in the pharmaceutical industry. The objective of this proposed
research is to fabricate helical mesoporous silica tubes by the confined
assembly of achiral surfactants and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) inside chiral lipid
tubules. The specific aims required to achieve the objective are summarized as
follows: (1) synthesize chiral lipid tubules with varying handedness, pitches,
diameters and surface charge, (2) fabricate right and left-handed helical
mesoporous silica tubes by the confined assembly of achiral surfactants and TEOS
inside the chiral lipid tubules of L- and D-enentiomers, (3) alter the pitches
of helical mesoporous silica tubes by the confined assembly of achiral
surfactants and TEOS inside the chiral lipid tubules with varying helical
pitches, (4) change the diameter of helical mesoporous silica tubes by the
confined assembly of achiral surfactants and TEOS inside the chiral lipid
tubules with different diameters, and (5) correlate the surface charge of chiral
lipid tubules with the morphology, helicity, and pore architectures of templated
helical mesoporous silica tubes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Chirality plays an important role in biology. By introducing chiral elements
into mesoporous silica, new structures and properties can be achieved. Self-
assembled chiral lipid tubules provide a unique confinement to assemble achiral
surfactants and silica precursors into helical mesoporous silica tubes. The
fabrication of single-handed helical mesoporous silica tubes with controllable
diameters, handedness, pitches, and pore architectures is particular interested
in chiral catalysis and separations. The silica tubes with helical mesoporous
walls represent a new hierarchical tubular structure. Three different kinds of
surfaces (the out surface, the inner surface of the central tubular cavity, and
the mesoporous internal surface of helical walls) may be functionalized
differently or act together in helical mesoporous silica tube-integrated
chemical systems. The interconnection between the cavity and the mesopores makes
helical mesoporous silica tubes attractive for practical applications due to
increased capabilities of mass transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: A
detailed understanding of how the chiral confinement affects the morphologies,
sizes, helicity, and pore architectures of templated helical mesoporous silica
materials will provide an insight into the mechanism of governing the confined
assembly and lead to better design principles in utilizing helical mesoporous
silica materials in chiral catalysis and separations. Graduate and undergraduate
students, who are involved in this proposed research, will be trained in the
interdisciplinary field of materials chemistry, materials processing, and
nanotechnology. The outreach activities through NSF Florida Georgia Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minorities Participation in Engineering and the Orlando Science
Center program will promote the participation of underrepresented groups and
high school seniors, which will benefit the broad community. The integration of
the proposed research will involve graduate students, undergraduates, and
minorities in scientific research and discovery, which is essential for the next
generation of scientists and engineers.