* 0855241
* Physics and Astrophysics with IceCube Neutrino Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* P. Buford Price, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2012
* USD 708,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The funds will be used to accomplish the following
scientific objectives: (1) Search for neutrinos associated with supernovae whose
core collapsed produces TeV neutrinos while the mildly relativistic jet is
making its way out of the collapsing stellar progenitor. (2) Search for bursts
of correlated muon, electron, and tau neutrinos in the northern hemisphere. The
team will use the best possible efficiency of detecting flaring time profiles by
correlating the time, energy, and spatial positions of multiplets of neutrino
events from both muon and cascade channels that will effectively double the
effective area of the detector compared to present usage. (3) Search for
violation of Lorentz-invariance (LIV) that arises in various quantum gravity
theories, but typically at Planck energies that are not accessible on Earth.
Using very high-energy neutrinos from Gamma-Ray Bursts, the project aims to
improve the current limit or find a violation of LIV. The assumption of the weak
equivalence principle that both neutrinos and photons should undergo the same
time delay as they pass through the gravitational potentials of galaxies will
also be tested. (4) Search for a diffuse extraterrestrial flux of high-energy
muon neutrinos from unresolved astrophysical sources that could lead to
discovery of cosmic neutrinos even if individual sources are too weak for
detection with a cubic-km detector. (5) Service to IceCube including maintenance
and operations, playing a leading role in calibrations, monitoring, and
simulations of various neutrino events. Continued involvement with students
provides a broader impact to this proposed research and firmly grounds this
effort in its educational mission.