* 0855447
* Fundamental Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Alexander Vilenkin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 07/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inflationary cosmology, combined with
recent developments in string theory, is pointing to a major paradigm shift:
from a nearly homogeneous and isotropic universe to an extremely inho-mogeneous
"multiverse", where much of the volume is still in the state of explosive
inflationary expansion. We live in a finite "bubble" where inflation has ended,
and other bubbles with diverse properties are constantly being formed. A major
goal of the proposed research is to learn how this multiverse scenario can be
tested observationally. All possible events will happen an infinite number of
times in an eternally infllating multiverse. Unless we learn how to compare
these infinities, we will not be able to make any predictions at all. This is
known as "the measure problem". To determine the probability measure of the
multiverse, different measure prescriptions will be studied to check for
internal inconsistencies and for conflict with the data. Some measure candidates
have already been ruled out in this way, and the hope is that there aren't that
many viable prescriptions satisfying some minimal set of
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;Another idea to be pursued has recently been suggested
by Garriga and Vilenkin. They conjecture that the dynamics of the inflationary
multiverse is holographically encoded at the future infinity, where it is
described by a lower-dimensional Euclidean field theory. The measure is then
defined by imposing an ultraviolet cutoff in that theory. This is an attractive
approach, as it opens the possibility of deriving the measure from first
principles. The most spectacular observational test of the multiverse scenario
would be a direct observation of a collision of our bubble with another one.
Observational effects of such a collision and the probability for us to be close
enough to detect one will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another major
topic of the proposed research is the study of the evolution and observational
signatures of topological defects, which can be copiously produced at phase
transitions in the early universe. The main focus here will be on cosmic string
networks and on "necklaces", consisting of monopoles connected by strings, which
are the most promising defects from the observational point of view. Numerical
simulations and analytic modeling will be used to study the evolution of string
networks, and the results will be used to make accurate predictions for
gravitational waves, high-energy particle fluxes, and other observable effects.
Detection of topological defects would open a new window into the early history
of the universe and into particle physics at extremely high energies. The
broader impacts are that the proposed research will be done in collaboration
with graduate students and postdocs. The P.I. will continue his efforts to
communicate the results to the general public. This especially applies to the
multiverse worldview, which has far-reaching implications beyond physics. The PI
has already written a book for lay-persons called "Many Worlds in One" and His
work has been featured in numerous newspaper and magazine articles in US,
Europe, Russia, and Japan, and in many popular books.