* 0855767
* Collaborative Research:  Geodynamic Solutions for Seismic Observations of Iceland Hotspot-Ridge Interaction
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Aibing Li, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2012
* USD 153,491.00

This study has three major goals: (1) Test for a dehydrated rheological litho-
&lt;br/&gt;sphere beneath Iceland; (2) define the nature of Icelandic hotspot-
ridge interaction; and (3) reconcile &lt;br/&gt;the ambiguities of previous
seismic studies in the area. It has been proposed that the extraction of
&lt;br/&gt;water from the mantle at the onset of partial melting increases the
viscosity of the residue so much &lt;br/&gt;that it can resist convection. While
such a dehydrated rheological lithosphere (DRL) can impact a &lt;br/&gt;wide
range of processes in mantle convection, the existence of a DRL has yet to be
tested against ob- &lt;br/&gt;servations. The Iceland hotspot is an outstanding
site to perform this test because here the thickness &lt;br/&gt;of the DRL is
likely to be most distinct from that of the (thin) thermal lithosphere, there is
a source of &lt;br/&gt;convective mantle flow, and the area has an extensive,
high-quality seismic data set. The source of &lt;br/&gt;convective flow is
imaged seismically beneath Iceland as a low-velocity body, which is widely be-
&lt;br/&gt;lieved to be a hot, plume-like upwelling in the upper mantle. The
plume hypothesis predicts this up- &lt;br/&gt;welling to feed rapid mantle flow
laterally along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR) but current seismic
&lt;br/&gt;evidence for such a phenomenon is ambiguous. Arguments for a DRL come
from geodynamic stud- &lt;br/&gt;ies of mantle plume-ridge interaction that
require a DRL to hinder the rate of mantle upwell- &lt;br/&gt;ing/melting so as
to successfully predict the thickness of Iceland?s crust. Seismic evidence,
however, &lt;br/&gt;is contradictory. In support of a DRL, recent tomography
studies reveal a layer of low velocities that &lt;br/&gt;extends south of
Iceland with a width (&gt;600 km) and thickness (&gt;150 km) that are consistent
with &lt;br/&gt;predictions of models with a DRL and distinguishably larger than
those without one. The competing &lt;br/&gt;evidence comes from shear-wave
splitting (SWS) and surface-wave measurements of seismic anisot- &lt;br/&gt;ropy
that were interpreted to reflect crystallographic fabric due to shallow mantle
flow, well within &lt;br/&gt;the hypothesized, non-convecting DRL. Anisotropy
from SWS was also interpreted to be caused by &lt;br/&gt;large-scale mantle flow
without the need of a mantle plume in the first place. &lt;br/&gt;The above
goals motivate a new generation of seismic inversion scheme that directly tests
the &lt;br/&gt;physical processes by integrating geodynamic models of mantle
convection and seismic structure. &lt;br/&gt;Models of hotspot-ridge interaction
will simulate a complete range of dynamic behaviors: from vig- &lt;br/&gt;orous
(plume) to weak (non-plume) upwellings; and from cases with shallow lateral flow
of low- &lt;br/&gt;viscosity mantle (no DRL) to deep lateral flow predicted for
more viscous mantle (with a DRL). Pre- &lt;br/&gt;dicted patterns of
crystallographic fabric, temperatures, and retained melt will then be used to
com- &lt;br/&gt;pute 3D variations in elasticity tensors, from which we will
generate synthetic seismograms. Misfits &lt;br/&gt;between the synthetic and
real data will be used to identify the most and least probable geodynamics-
&lt;br/&gt;based solutions. The ability to reject or confirm the mantle
upwelling and along-axis flow that are &lt;br/&gt;predicted by plume theory will
have broad importance to understanding hotspots. A positive test for a
&lt;br/&gt;DRL will show that dehydration can dominate mantle rheology over a
wide range of conditions, in- &lt;br/&gt;cluding the vigorous magmatism at
Iceland. A negative result will lead to questions of the general
&lt;br/&gt;importance of a DRL to mantle convection and could require a dramatic
re-thinking of how melt is &lt;br/&gt;generated and transported along the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project has strong outreach
potential because the topic of the origin of &lt;br/&gt;hotspots has far
reaching importance to understanding absolute plate motions, mantle convection,
&lt;br/&gt;and surface volcanism. The study will also advance a new generation
of geodynamic-based seismic &lt;br/&gt;solution methods. The numerical codes
developed will be made available to the community, such as &lt;br/&gt;through
collaboration with the Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics (CIG).
Benefits to the &lt;br/&gt;broader community include the training of a graduate
student and a post-doctoral scholar in interdis- &lt;br/&gt;ciplinary geophysics
research, and supporting ongoing outreach activities of the PIs. Both of our
uni- &lt;br/&gt;versities are located in ethnically diverse communities and are
important contributors to the social, &lt;br/&gt;cultural, scientific, and
technical resources of their respective regions. The proposed research will
&lt;br/&gt;enrich our teaching and research programs, and provide advanced
technological training and mentor- &lt;br/&gt;ing of science students with
diverse cultural backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;