* 0855487
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Joint seismic, geodynamic, and mineral physics investigation of mantle plumes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Peter van Keken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 294,914.00

The concepts of hotspots and plumes have taken a central place in global
geophysical and geochemical research. A common theory to explain the persistent
excess volcanism at locations such as Hawaii, Iceland and Yellowstone is that
they are supported by columnar upwelling of hot mantle rock called mantle
plumes. Yet, these plumes have remained elusive in seismological images of the
mantle. While a variety of seismological studies suggest the presence of hot
anomalies below hotspot regions, a detection of a narrow whole-mantle plume has
yet to be widely accepted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining multidisciplinary
expertise, we wish to provide fundamental and quantitative tests of the plume
hypothesis. We will establish answers to the following basic questions that
address the physics of plume formation, morphology and longevity in Earth and
the seismological resolution of plume signatures in seismic data: What are the
possible plume structures given geophysical constraints? What is the expected
plume signature in tomographic images? Do deep mantle plumes impart observable
wave perturbations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We address these questions using a
combined geodynamical, mineral physics, and seismological analysis. The
proposing team forms an international collaboration between Jeroen Ritsema and
Peter van Keken at Michigan, Derek Schutt at Colorado State, and Saskia Goes at
London's Imperial College. We will develop new experience on establishing the
structure of plumes and how they are mapped in seismological data sets. This
will allow us to determine the optimal data sets and seismic techniques for
mapping plumes in the mantle and to understand whether and where mantle plumes
can be imaged. The grant will support the interdisciplinary education of three
female graduate students and will foster an international collaboration between
scientists from the US and the UK. Our Yellowstone studies may prove helpful in
forthcoming EarthScope data analysis and the design of a Flexible Array
deployment aimed at the Yellowstone hotspot.