* 0855661
* A Program to Study Hadronic Matter using Electromagnetic Probes at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Daniel Dale, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2012
* USD 910,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this grant goes towards
supporting our continuing research program at the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility (JLab) using electromagnetic probes to study hadronic
matter at the very fundamental and basic levels. Our group has taken crucial
roles in three separate experiments that test the nature of particle
interactions which falls under the rubric of the "Standard Model". One
experiment, Qweak, uses the parity-violating property of the weak interaction to
measure a fundamental parameter of the Standard Model known as the Weinberg (or
mixing) angle to within a relative error of 0.3%. This angle is related to the
ratio of two particle masses, the W and Z bosons, and varies as a function of
the momentum transfered to the scattering target. A precise measurement from
this experiment, when combined with other experiments, will place strong
constraints on proposed extensions to our present version of the Standard Model.
In another experiment, a member of our group leads the pion lifetime
measurements undertaken in Jefferson Lab's Hall B which seeks to probe the
mechanism through which a neutrally charged pion can decay into two photons. In
this experiment, neutral pions will be photoproduced from the Coulomb field of
nuclei via the Primakoff effect, and will be detected in a highly segmented
calorimeter. The experiment measures a fundamental quantity which can be
calculated in the context of chiral perturbation theory and represents one of
the few stringent experimental tests of QCD that can be made in the confinement
scale regime. Our group also conducts experiments to extract polarization
observables from vector meson photoproduction with linearly-polarized photons in
the g8b (proton) and g13a/b (deuteron) datasets, which is the subject of three
ISU PhD theses. Recent CLAS results on the extraction of single- and double-
polarization observables in photo- and electroproduction show their high
sensitivity to small production amplitudes, which is key in extracting excited
baryon state by affording an understanding of the underlying symmetry of the
quark degrees of freedom in the nucleon, the nature of the parity exchange
between the incident photon and the target nucleon, and the mechanism of
associated strangeness production in electromagnetic reactions. As a natural
extension to the JLab baryon resonance studies component at JLab, we expect to
expand our research to the Beijing Electron Positron Collider, where we will
extract excited baryons states decaying through charmed mesons at the Beijing
Electron Spectrometer (BES). We seek to coordinate this research with BES by
analyzing the decay of the J/psi into baryon-antibaryon channels, where we
expect a complementary means for probing nucleon resonances (N*) in the mass
region up to 2 GeV. Our group is planning to construct a set of six drift
chambers to be used as the region 1 particle tracking system in Jefferson Lab's
Hall B. This group's research program at JLab, the accelerator facilities at
ISU, and continuous detector construction projects in the groups Laboratory for
Detector Science, combine in an active program to provide a breadth of
experiences in an educational environment which can be used to effectively train
the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;