* 0855838
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Neutrino Geophysics: collaboration between geology and particle physics
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Stephen Dye, Hawaii Pacific University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 69,421.00

The Earth's interior radiates approximately 46 terawatts (TW, 1012 J s-1) of
heat (total combined production of nuclear power today is about 1 TW of energy).
The Earth's thermal energy comes from the cooling of the planet, minor
contributions from tidal friction and inner core growth, and significantly from
the decay of radioactive elements. The exact proportional contribution of these
heat supplies is unknown. Plate tectonics is the primary manifestation of heat
transport within the Earth today. Large tectonic plates are produced at mid-
ocean ridges and transported across the surface of the globe to deep ocean
trenches, where they plunge into the Earth's interior sending cold slabs into
the interior and cooling the planet. In order to better understand the dynamic
processes that occur both within the solid Earth as well as on the planet's
surface, we must develop a comprehensive model of Earth composition and
structure that is internally consistent with observations from the fields of
geology, geochemistry, geophysics and particle physics. The abundance and
distribution of naturally-occurring radioactive elements is integral to the
understanding of Earth dynamics, as radiogenic heat provides a key source of
energy that serves to drive mantle convection, plate tectonics and the evolution
of the entire planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the
proposed research are to: (1) understand the nature and three-dimensional
distribution of naturally-occurring radioactive elements in the Earth,
particularly potassium, thorium and uranium, which produce &gt;99% of all
radiogenic heat in the Earth; (2) develop an internally consistent model of the
Earth, including the thermal constitution and evolution of the planet; and, (3)
build Earth models that can be tested against data from newly developed
antineutrino detectors. (Antineutrinos are neutral nuclear particles produce
during beta-decay of radioactive elements.) The proposed work plan involves
dynamic modeling to determine the geometry, distribution and chemical
composition of the Earth's major reservoirs, namely the continental crust,
mantle and metallic core. Model results will be interpreted in conjunction with
antineutrino data in order to develop a comprehensive, three-dimensional model
of Earth composition and structure.