* 0855776
* University of Georgia-Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources Proposal for Participation in the NSF Center for Advanced Forestry Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Michael Kane, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 01/31/2015
* USD 357,995.00

IIP 0855776&lt;br/&gt;University of
Georgia&lt;br/&gt;Kane&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Georgia (UGA) will
join the existing multi-university Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC) entitled "The Center for Advanced Forestry Systems"(CAFS) which
was established in 2007 with four member institutions: North Carolina State
University (lead university), Oregon State University, Purdue University and
Virginia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed site will expand CAFS efforts
by providing additional and specialized expertise and research platforms in the
areas of silviculture, biometrics and wood quality. The proposed activities at
UGA will augment and complement current CAFS projects, and will more fully
address the needs for scientific and technological advances for enhancing the
competitiveness of the US forestry sector. UGA has a long history of research on
commercial forestry plantations, and proposes to develop research projects
focused on understanding productivity drivers in thinned stands and integrating
wood quality predictions into growth and yield models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
effort at UGA has the potential to improve the competitiveness of the forest
products industry and forest land owners. The expected new developments in
technical capabilities will have broad applications and benefits beyond just the
US. The emphasis on inclusion of both graduate and undergraduate students in
research will enhance the number of trained experts to work in this important
field. UGA plans to address all issues related to diversity and to commit to the
inclusion of under-represented groups.