* 0855493
* SENSORS: In Vivo Joint Regeneration Monitoring System to be Able to Establish Rehabilitation Approaches during Healing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* John Szivek, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

0855493&lt;br/&gt;John Sziveh&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this study is the development, characterization and utilization of
a ?sensate? cartilage covered scaffold that replaces the load bearing area of a
joint. Load measurements from this implant will facilitate development of better
cartilage regeneration techniques, techniques to modify rehabilitation, and will
allow patient specific adjustment to factors such as load distribution changes
in the lateral and medial compartments of the knee. The scientific merit and
technical impact of this project lies in the understanding of the relationship
between load and knee cartilage tissue regeneration documented during the study.
The load vs. tissue response information will have a broad range of clinical and
basic science uses promoting studies leading to faster more complete recovery
from surgical procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated impact of this
particular study includes: a) on the Orthopaedic field will be to demonstrate
the value of patient and joint specific load information on decisions related to
rehabilitation following surgery, b) on the Bioengineering community at large
will be to show that it is critical to determine loading when developing tissue
regeneration techniques, and c) on human resources will be to directly educate 1
graduate student funded by this project, to educate at least 12 undergraduates
who will work on various specific aspects of the project and to enlighten
several medical students and residents about the value of understanding the
relationship between loading and tissue formation.