* 0855335
* Studies in Mathematical Physics:  Advection, Convection and Turbulent Transport
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Charles Doering, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2013
* USD 630,394.00

This project is a study of qualitative and quantitative properties of solutions
of the partial differential equations of fluid mechanics including the Navier-
Stokes equations. The latter constitute the basic mathematical model of fluid
flow and are believed to contain turbulence among their solutions. Turbulent
transport and mixing have important applications in many areas of applied
physical sciences and engineering and present a number of outstanding challenges
for mathematical physics. The investigations will be carried out utilizing
modern applied analysis, computation, and numerical simulation in collaboration
with graduate students performing doctoral research and postdoctoral researchers
working under the direction of the PI. The project has three major
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advection: Mathematical methods developed by
the PI and collaborators will be applied to the advection-diffusion equation and
turbulent mixing. This analysis will place absolute limits on diffusive
enhancements for passive scalar fields in terms of bulk and statistical features
of the stirring flows, and indicate particularly efficient or inefficient
stirring strategies. New searches for optimal stirring strategies will be
undertaken, and the mixing effectiveness of turbulence will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;Convection: Theoretical issues in thermal convection will be studied
using rigorous analysis and numerical simulation. Differences between convective
turbulence sustained by fixed heat flux and fixed temperature conditions will be
investigated. The analytical techniques of the PI will be developed and applied
to surface tension driven convection.&lt;br/&gt;Energy dissipation and enstrophy
production: Work will continue to determine how maximum enstrophy generating
flow-field configurations are related to structures observed in fully developed
turbulence. Variational approaches for the derivation of a priori bounds on
energy dissipation rates for complex and turbulent flows will be extended to
flow configurations relevant to geophysical and astrophysical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge gained from this project will
contribute to our fundamental understanding of mathematical models in fluid
dynamics, of direct relevance in the applied physical sciences and engineering.
With regard to this activitys broader impacts in education, it provides frontier
dissertation research opportunities for doctoral students and support for
postdoctoral researchers at the University of Michigan. This research also
involves extensive collaborations and interactions with investigators from
institutions worldwide. In the long term this research will aid the development
of practical techniques for applications ranging from aeronautics to
astrophysics, and meteorology to materials manufacturing.