* 0855578
* RUI: Test of QCD Symmetries via Study of Light Pseudoscalar Mesons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Liping Gan, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 266,464.00

This project is designed to integrate important contributions to the ongoing
research at Jefferson lab (Jlab) with an educational experience for promising
undergraduate students. A UNCW group with a team of undergraduate students and
one full time faculty member has been actively involved in Jefferson lab
research in the past seven years. The primary goal of this project is to
optimize the undergraduate experience while making important contributions to
our understanding of the fundamental properties of QCD at low energy by studying
the three lightest neutral pseudoscalar mesons, pion-zero, eta and eta'. This
research project consists of several experiments to measure the radiative decay
widths and transition form factors of these three particles via the Primakoff
Effect, and development of new experimental program to search for eta and eta'
rare decays. The results of these measurements will have a significant impact on
fundamental aspects of QCD. It will open a new window to determine the
fundamental parameters of QCD in a model-independent manner, such as the light
quark-mass ratio and the mixing angle of eta-eta' mesons. In addition, the
measurements of branching ratio or upper limits for various rare and forbidden
decays of eta and eta' will provide sensitive probes to test fundamental
symmetries (P, PC and C), and search for new physics beyond the Standard Model.

This project will engage undergraduate students as key contributors. It will
create a research-enriched learning environment, explore new approaches to
recruiting prospective students, and develop new courses which are research
related. Students working in an international collaboration will enhance their
international experience and gain global perspectives. As a woman physicist
active in research, the PI will be a role model to attract female students into
science. The involvement of undergraduates has become one of the trademarks of
the UNCW research group and matches the university's commitment to provide a
high quality undergraduate learning experience.