* 0855642
* Optical Feshbach Resonances and Solitons in Quantum Degenerate Strontium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Thomas Killian, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 01/31/2013
* USD 413,372.00

Many technological marvels in modern society rely upon our ability to understand
and control the properties of materials on a microscopic level, such as tuning
the electrical conductivity in semiconductors that are used to make computer
chips. In the last decade, there have been great advances in the creation and
study of ultracold clouds of gaseous atoms, which are cooled by lasers to
temperatures around a millionth of a degree above absolute zero. Ultracold atoms
made in this way have the amazing property that their interactions can be
arbitrarily controlled, which opens the possibility of using them to make
designer materials or test models of complex and important phenomena such as
high temperature superconductivity. The tool currently used to control these
interactions is the application of a strong magnetic field, but magnetic fields
have disadvantages; it is difficult to quickly change large magnetic fields or
vary fields on small length scales. Prof. Killian's research group at Rice
University in Houston, Texas will develop new techniques for manipulating atom-
atom interactions using lasers, which are much more flexible and may open the
way to new applications such as laser beams made of atoms instead of light, or
the ability to make new states of matter.

This work will also involve at least two graduate students and one undergraduate
student, and it will train them for high-technology careers in optics or
materials. The ultracold atomic physics laboratory at Rice also has a
partnership with the Houston campus of Yes Prep High School, a highly successful
charter school targeting disadvantaged youth. This collaboration brings high
school students into the laboratory for term-time visits and summer camps, and
introduces them to the excitement of science at the frontiers of discovery in
hopes of inspiring them to pursue science, technology, engineering, and math
careers. Basic atomic physics experiments such as these are laying the
scientific and human resources foundation today for the technological marvels of
tomorrow.