* 0855575
* ACME: Advanced Cold Molecule Electron Electric Dipole Moment Search
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Gerald Gabrielse, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 6,217,174.00

The Advanced Cold Molecule Electric Dipole Moment Search (ACME) is a new
collaborative effort to detect the electric dipole moment (EDM) of the electron.
The most fundamental of physics theories, the Standard Model of particle
physics, predicts an extremely small electron EDM, while essentially all
proposed extensions to the Standard Model predict an electron EDM that is within
the projected sensitivity for this experiment. The ThO molecule that ACME will
use provides in one species all of the advantages identified by past molecular
EDM studies, with the added benefit of a higher internal electric field which
will further increase the sensitivity of the experiment. Moreover, the prototype
ThO molecular beam source that ACME is developing, using laser ablation and
cryogenic buffer gas cooling, already demonstrates the possibility of a usable
flux of molecules that is a thousand times that of previous experiments. The
initial ACME goal is to measure the electron EDM with a sensitivity that greatly
exceeds the current limit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many students and postdocs will
learn their craft working on this experiment, and many of the techniques
developed will have general application to precision measurements. There will be
a broad impact on physics, whatever the ACME result. The lack of an electron EDM
at the attainable precision would eliminate the most studied and motivated
extensions to the Standard Model. The discovery of an electron EDM would be one
of the great breakthroughs in physics, signifying the long anticipated breakdown
of the Standard Model of particle physics, and heralding a new understanding of
the imbalance between antimatter and matter in the universe