* 0855686
* A Search for Gravitational Radiation at LIGO:  Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Raymond Frey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,125,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Oregon experimental relativity group continues its
efforts within the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) to search for burst
sources of gravitational radiation (GWBs). The group will continue to focus a
significant fraction of its effort on the identification and amelioration of
noise sources in the LIGO interferometers, as a prerequisite to the realization
of a scientific discovery. The program involves two complementary areas of
activity in GWB science within the LSC: (1) data analysis and (2) detector
characterization and improvement. In the area of data analysis, the search for
GWBs produced in association with gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) in the LIGO science
run S6 will be completed. The detector characterization and improvement effort
will continue to focus on environmental influences. Work will continue on
identifying and reducing environmental influences in order to improve
interferometer sensitivity, and to decrease false event rates. Efforts will
extend beyond these two primary areas, and have important contributions to all
LIGO searches and the success of Advanced LIGO.

This research contributes significantly to society, due to its profound,
fundamental nature, and the opportunities which are associated to enable broad
participation in the scientific enterprise. The discovery of gravitational
radiation would be a major achievement in advancing the applications of
Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, and initiate a new age of discovery and
understanding. Publications of the scientific results would mark a great moment
of human enlightenment regarding the nature of the universe. The Oregon group
makes a special effort to broaden the impact of this work by integrating the
most advanced, technical aspects with outreach activities. These include
undergraduate participation in the group's research, summer research programs
for talented high school students, work with Oregon high school teachers to
bring the research experience into thehigh school (part of the Quark Net
program), and speaking engagements to community groups.