* 0855669
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Hypoxia-tolerance in the High Flying Bar-headed Goose
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jessica Meir, Meir                    Jessica        U
* Fellowship Award
* John Snyder
* 08/31/2011
* USD 180,615.00

0855669 Meir

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Jessica
U. Meir to work with Dr. William K. Milsom at the University of British Columbia
in Canada.

Animals operating in extreme environments often push the envelope of their
physiological capacity, and thus represent unique models of physiological
adaptation. Species which must maintain oxygen (O2) demands when O2 supply is
limited represent ideal models in which to examine the physiological, cellular,
and biochemical mechanisms underlying tolerance to hypoxia (low levels of oxygen
in the body). The bar-headed goose is able to sustain flight at altitudes
approaching 9,000 meters over the summit of Mt. Everest, where oxygen levels are
only about 1/5 of that at sea-level. The goals of this project are to explore
physiological adaptations in this species, with the overarching purpose of
understanding tissue and cellular hypoxia tolerance in an animal that has
evolved specifically to maintain performance in hypoxia. Although the bar-headed
goose may possess an increased tolerance to hypoxia, it is hypothesized that
mechanisms that maintain a sufficient O2 supply by optimizing O2 transport and
delivery are the most important factors in this bird?s ability to sustain flight
at altitudes where O2 is limited. This project aims to investigate the transport
of O2 from the respiratory system to the tissue, with specific focus on delivery
to the heart.

This work is also important for the following: 1) the development of a smaller
and lighter PO2 recorder/microprocessor that will provide great potential for
use on a variety of species and in clinical situations, 2) potential for
application of findings to the field of human medicine (hypoxia and
ischemia/reperfusion injury ? stroke, heart attack, etc.), 3) the creation of
partnerships with international institutions and researchers, and finally, 4)
the training and broadening of the skill-set of the young principal
investigator. These studies will provide new knowledge into the adaptive
mechanisms used by O2 tolerant species such as the bar-headed goose. Linking the
natural biology of high altitude flight to clinically relevant models of hypoxic
damage will ultimately allow us to identify therapeutic targets to enhance
survival in humans after such circumstances as circulatory collapse, ischemic
injury and other trauma states. The PI has also been extensively involved in
educational and public outreach events, and is eager to continue in this vital
role in the future.