* 0855949
* Collaborative Research: Novel 3D Nanocomposites for Optical and Solar Applications: A First Principles Approach to Cost-Effective Design, Nanomanufacturing and Characterization.
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Ramki Kalyanaraman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2013
* USD 317,203.00

The research objective of this multidisciplinary activity is to design, make and
characterize nanocomposites consisting of multiple metals in a dielectric. The
approach will be to use theory and experiments to design and discover novel
optical nanomaterials. Optical theory will be utilized to understand the
superior absorption of light by plasmons in metal nanoparticles. Hydrodynamic
theory and computer simulations based on first principles will be used to guide
a knowledge-based approach to the design of functional nanocomposites consisting
of specific concentrations and types of metals in dielectrics. The resulting
three-dimensional nanocomposite structures will be manufactured by utilizing
thin-film deposition in conjunction with laser-based pattern formation. These
nanomaterials will be characterized by structural and optical techniques in
order to test and verify the design as well as the manufacturing processes.

If successful, this integrated research activity will advance the science and
technology of cost-effective manufacturing of nanomaterials for applications in
optics, plasmonics and nanophotonics. The innovative use of self-organized
patterns with a theoretical and practical understanding of nanostructure-optical
property correlation will enable multi-functional nanocomposites. These
nanocomposites will find use as broadband solar absorbing coatings for energy
harvesting in photovoltaics, as materials for light waveguides in length scales
below the optical diffraction limit, and in integrated silicon photonics. The
broader impact from this research will include the training and education of
undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary science and engineering
areas of optics, hydrodynamics, materials science and nanotechnology.