* 0855171
* II-EN:  Robotic Equipment for the Investigation of Dexterous Two-Handed Manipulation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nancy Pollard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Satyandra Gupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 381,702.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the grand challenges in
robotics is to achieve dexterity, especially dexterity in manipulation. The
equipment funded by this project ? a robot torso, two arms, and a custom
designed robot hand, supports investigation of manipulation tasks, with a
particular focus on two-handed dexterous manipulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary projects include (1) task transfer of two-handed
manipulation tasks from human demonstrations and (2) application domain specific
designs for a non-dominant robot hand. For task transfer, this project explores
a combination of task understanding, planning and learning, and direct user
interaction, following along the lines of our previous research in one handed
grasping and manipulation. For hand design, this project pursues design
optimization to develop the simplest possible robot hand capable of
accomplishing a suite of everyday tasks, operating as the non-dominant hand.
This approach promises new insights into the required number of degrees-of-
freedom of the hand, the required number of drive motors, required sensing, and
the geometry of critical but often ignored parts of the hand, such as the
palm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact includes forming a better
understanding of human motion. We believe that we can only successfully transfer
a task from a human demonstration to a robot performance if we understand a
great deal about why a person chooses to perform a task in a certain way. Our
proposed robot hand design project also has great implications for prosthetic
design, as our robot hand design process will be driven with goals of simplicity
in design and ability to perform tasks from everyday life.