* 0855323
* Collaborative Research: Semiclassical Methods for the Study of Spin Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Stone, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2013
* USD 172,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Research will be carried out into the semiclassical behavior of spin systems,
using spin-coherent-state path integrals and other mathematical and theoretical
physics tools. A significant part of this research will be done in the context
of understanding a variety of experimentally realizable physical systems.
Coherent-state path integrals, especially those for spin, have long been
regarded as mathematically difficult to work with. In the last few years,
however, there have been several advances in the understanding and uses of these
path integrals which have opened up many new areas for study. The basic problems
to be pursued include (i) operator ordering, and Bohr-Sommerfeld rules, possibly
to higher than leading order in the semiclassical limit, (ii) development of
Gutzwiller-like trace formulas, based on the recent evaluation of the
semiclassical propagator for multispin systems, (iii) group theoretic
decomposition rules for the addition of angular momenta via path integrals, (iv)
semiclassical behaviour of such rules, and (v) study of the multispin propagator
from the viewpoint of the global anomaly. The physical systems to which the
fundamental theoretical developments will be applied include (i) small magnetic
molecules in molecular solids, especially via the trace formula, (ii) so-called
Bose-Hubbard models for atomic condensates in optical lattices,
(iii)antiferromagnetic spin chains, with emphasis on the role of anisotropy, and
(iv) lattice spin models. Many of the concepts involved in the spin case are
shared by particle coherent-state path integrals, which will also be employed to
understand unresolved issues in the thermostatistical escape of metastable
systems. The calculations will be largely analytic, but numerical approaches
will be employed as needed. The extension of path-integral methods to spin
systems, and study of their relationship to other methods for studying the
semiclassical limit, is a desirable addition to theoretical physicists' arsenal,
since path integrals have a proven record as an essential tool in statistical
and quantum mechanics.

Broader Impacts: The project will prepare future researchers through the
training of undergraduate and graduate students, and the mentoring of post-
doctoral associates.