* 0855407
* Searches for Transient Gravitational Wave Signals
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Neil Cornish, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 302,246.00

This award supports research designed to extend the ability of the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) to detect gravitational
wave signals from a variety of transient sources, including black hole mergers
and core collapse supernovae. The enhanced searches for transient gravitational
wave signals will employ the powerful technique of constrained signal
reconstruction using data from a network of gravitational wave detectors. A key
element of this approach is the development of constraints that describe prior
knowledge of the signals. Information from numerical simulations of black hole
mergers and core collapse supernovae will be used to construct source specific
prior input. Once a detection has been made it is important that the signal be
characterized values established for the parameters that describe the signal.
This will be done through implementation of Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling
routines to study spinning black hole inspiral signals and un-modeled burst
signals. These implementations will be integrated into the standard LIGO search
pipelines using the existing infrastructure to compute signal likelihoods. These
studies will be carried out in close collaboration with the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration data analysis working groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority
of the gravitational wave signals that LIGO hopes to detect would pass by
unnoticed, hidden in the instrument noise, without sophisticated data analysis
techniques. Enhancements in data analysis can be just as valuable as hardware
upgrades. The LIGO project presents young researchers and students with the
opportunity to participate in the birth of a new observation science that is
poised to make discoveries that will revolutionize astronomy and deliver unique
insights into some of the Universe's most exotic phenomena. The research program
supported by this award offers opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students to learn these data analysis techniques with potentially broader
applicability. In addition, a lecture program on gravitational wave astronomy is
being developed that will be taken to schools throughout Montana.