* 0855870
* Pilot Project: Teaching Introductory Programming Utilizing the Liberal Arts
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Mary Elizabeth Jones, Immaculata University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2012
* USD 163,307.00

Current undergraduate computer science curricula do adequately prepare students
to communicate and interpret technical skills to other technical disciplines.
Effective and efficient programming demands technical skill and creativity,
mental discipline and intellectual openness, but computer programming is usually
taught from a technocentric viewpoint, so that students do not develop skills
that enable them to develop programs for diverse and rigorous applications.
Students therefore lack adequate contextual understanding of how programming
skills solve real world problems. The result is project difficulties manifested
in the management, design and implementation of software
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot project improves our understanding
of the creative processes in the context of software design, through the design,
implementation, testing, refinement, and dissemination of an introductory
undergraduate computer programming course through storytelling using the ALICE
programming language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project
advances instructional strategies for introductory programming that foster
creativity through focus on planning, attention to process, collaborative
problem solving, and design refinement and refactoring. The use of storytelling
to teach programming is a highly novel approach to extending the work begun in
the ALICE project (partially funded by NSF). This will be accomplished by
embedding the programming skills into an integrated liberal arts environment,
and specifically focusing on learning and using programming structures in the
service of a broader task. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed project provides an instructional strategy to enhance teachers? ability
to recognize, articulate, and demonstrate integration points between creative
and technical skills through the use of storytelling. It will enhance the
problem-solving and collaborative skills of students and help them build
connections between diverse tasks and the applicability of programming as a
problem-solving tool. It will help build solid planning and collaboration skills
in IT (Information Technology) students and invite a more diverse group of
students to enhance their creative endeavors through programming. In a time of
rapidly growing need for individuals with programming expertise, it has the
potential to provide a new model for training a new generation of technical
specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;