* 0855496
* RUI:  An Experimental Investigation of the Influence of Background Gas Collisions on the Classical Orbits of Rydberg Electrons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Matthew Keeler, University of Minnesota Morris
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 07/31/2012
* USD 130,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In the 1920's quantum mechanics
replaced the classic "solar-system" model of the atom where electrons follow
simple circular and elliptical paths around the nucleus. Quantum mechanics is a
more powerful model than its predecessors in that it more accurately predicts
how atoms interact with light, electrons, and other atoms. But under conditions
where the electron in an atom is in a highly excited state, known as a Rydberg
state, the behavior and motion of the electron can be accurately described in
terms of classical shaped orbits, such as planets around a star. Improvements in
laser technology have enabled physicists to produce these Rydberg states easily
and reliably. By making measurements with lasers the path of the electron within
a single atom can be reconstructed and this opens up a brand new method of
investigating atomic interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
measure the distortions of classical electron orbits due to the interactions
with nearby atoms. It will also shed light on how well the electron behavior is
described by either quantum mechanics, classical orbits, or a hybrid "semi-
classical" theory known as closed orbit theory. The experimental results will
help to develop and confirm a modified "semi-classical" theory that allows us to
predict the response of an electron in a Rydberg state to collisions with other
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will provide hands-on research experiences
for students at an undergraduate institution which has a large female
population. It will be particularly important for illustrating the concepts of
quantum mechanics and the correspondence principle. The project allows direct
involvement of undergradute students in the construction of experiments, data
acquisition, theoretical interpretation, and presentation of the work at
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;