* 0855871
* Many-body Rydberg systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Georg Raithel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 12/31/2013
* USD 531,000.00

Rydberg atoms are highly excited atoms that are sensitive to external fields and
other atoms due to their exaggerated properties, which include large
polarizabilities and electric-dipole moments. In laser-cooled atom samples,
these properties result in strong Rydberg-Rydberg interactions that have been
shown to cause a Rydberg excitation blockade. In the blockaded domain, one
Rydberg excitation is shared among many atoms, leading to novel quantum many-
body states. In this project, the lifetime (decoherence) of these many-body
states is probed using echo-type experiments, in which coherent-control
techniques are used to reverse excitations via partial or full time reversal of
the system evolution. The degree to which a perfect echo can be achieved depends
on how well the system evolution can be time-reversed. It is measured how
perfect an echo can be achieved by controlling the atomic interactions in a
fast, time-dependent manner. Residual deviations from a perfect echo are
expected to be indicative of motion-induced de-coherence of the many-body
system, which is of high fundamental interest. To explore this topic, the echo
visibility is studied as a function of sample parameters such as temperature and
duration of the echo sequence. The many-body system this project is dealing with
further exhibits spatial correlations between the locations of the Rydberg
atoms. These correlations are demonstrated and characterized using a spatially
sensitive ion detection method. In related experiments, the dynamics of
excitation hopping between atoms is studied. Further merit is provided by the
development of a fundamentally new technique for millimeter-wave spectroscopy of
Rydberg-Rydberg transitions, based on modulated standing-wave laser
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research on de-coherence of many-
body Rydberg systems is of high fundamental interest and has implications in
quantum information processing. The study of quantum transport in many-body
Rydberg systems may further the understanding of the dynamics of electronic
excitations in other complex quantum systems, such as biological molecules,
light harvesting complexes and nanophotonic materials. Spectroscopy of Rydberg
atoms in modulated ponderomotive potentials could have a broader impact on
precision measurement of atomic properties and fundamental constants. An
important part of the project's impact on society is the training of graduate
students in research, oral and written presentation, and teaching. The graduate
students are thereby prepared for future responsibilities in academia,
government laboratories, and industry. The project includes smaller research
components that may be suitable for undergraduate work. Outreach to the general
public is provided through the PI's involvement in the University of Michigan
Physics Olympiad, the Michigan Math and Science Scholars program, and Science
Cafe talks. These activities aim at the encouragement of high-school students to
consider a career in science or engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;