* 0855446
* CSEDI: Dynamics of Subducted Slabs in the Transition Zone: Compressible Convection with Self-Consistent Equation of State
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Scott King, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2014
* USD 253,720.00

Seismologists have imaged a variety of geometries fast anomalies beneath
subduction zones. These anomalies have been interpreted as deformed subducted
oceanic lithosphere lying atop the base of the transition zone at some locations
and subducted oceanic lithosphere traversing the transition zone with little
apparent resistance at other locations. The investigators will investigate how
the equation of state (i.e., density as a function of pressure, temperature, and
composition) impacts the dynamics and morphology of subducted oceanic
lithosphere. While a number of studies have shown that the morphology of
subducted oceanic crust is controlled by the evolution of the plate boundary at
the surface, the investigators have shown that the material properties and phase
changes in the transition zone also have a significant impact on the morphology
of subducted material. This research will bring together laboratory measurements
of mineral properties with mantle convection calculations. Most compressible
convection calculations currently use a simplified equation of state that is
thermodynamically inconsistent and the first-order question that will be
addressed is when and whether it is justified to use a simple equation of state.
A second question is which parameters (e.g., slab strength, Clapyron slope of
the transition zone phase transformations, slab age, plate velocity, trench
migration) control the transition from flat lying slabs to penetrating slabs.
The third component of this work is to assess which minerals and specific
parameters in the thermodynamic database have the most significant effect on the
dynamics of subduction. This provides guidance to the mineral physics research
community as to which parameter(s) have the most significant influence on the
dynamics of subduction. This will provide feedback as to which parameters to
focus on improving measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
develop a clearly documented, modular, software package that will provide the
thermodynamic properties of a mantle material at a given pressure and
temperature. The goal is to enable future researchers to update elements of the
thermodynamic database as new information becomes available or to perform
parameter study investigations by systematically changing specific elements of
the thermodynamic database. This software will be developed to interface with
current and future mantle convection codes and will be made available to the
research community through the Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics
website.