* 0855166
* A Testbed for Advanced Network Systems Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Jonathan Turner, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 06/30/2012
* USD 692,556.00

The purpose of this project is to create an internet-accessible testbed to
support research and education in advanced network systems. It builds upon and
leverages an existing community resource, the Open Network Lab
(www.onl.wustl.edu), adding high performance components that can be configured
and extended to support a wide range of experimental projects. The project takes
advantage of new low cost 10 gigabit Ethernet switching technology, dual quad-
core servers and programmable Network Interface Cards (NICs) with multicore
network processors. The project requires extensions to the ONL control and
management software, the development of software modules for the programmable
NICs and a number of extensions to the existing testbed to make it more suitable
for clean slate networking research. Effective experimental testbeds are
essential for high quality systems research in networking. This is particularly
true during the current period of transition in which networking research finds
itself. The concepts of overlay hosting and network virtualization developed and
demonstrated in research systems, are now showing up in large, commercial data
centers. So-called utility computing or cloud computing has emerged as an
important delivery vehicle for web-based services. As cloud computing is used
for more communication-intensive applications, we can expect to see a growing
need for more dynamic and application-oriented networking elements within the
cloud infrastructure. There is increasing innovation in layer 2 networking
technology, leading to local and metropolitan area networks that exploit
commodity Ethernet switches, while moving beyond the limitations that have
traditionally constrained Ethernet to the LAN environment. The research
community is focused on clean slate network ideas that put aside the constraints
of legacy network technologies to develop a better understanding of what might
be possible. A key part of this research agenda is the construction and
systematic evaluation of experimental prototypes that demonstrate new research
ideas This is an infrastructure development project, seeking to create an
important community resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Its Intellectual Merit lies
primarily in the research and educational activities that will be enabled by the
availability of the new capabilities being developed. By providing an
experimental environment supporting research on 10 gigabit networking, the
testbed enables researchers and students to pursue projects that are currently
outside their reach, because they require an experimental infrastructure that
they cannot afford. The testbed also makes researchers more productive, by
providing the necessary tools and infrastructure to allow them to focus on the
innovative elements of their research ideas, freeing them from many of the more
mundane tasks that typically have to be done before the more interesting issues
can be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of the program will
be felt in several ways. First, by enabling better experimental evaluation of
networking research ideas, the testbed can help to contribute to their
development and can facilitate their transition from the research context to
practical application. Second, the principal investigator expects the
educational component of the testbed to have a significant impact on
undergraduate and graduate education. Students who have meaningful laboratory
experiences can make a more direct connection between networking concepts and
actual network operation, allowing them to learn faster and become more
productive. Third, this project can contribute to attracting more students to
careers in science and engineering. The growing impact of globalization on the
world economy makes it essential for the United States to continue to play a
leadership role in the development of new networking technology. Sophisticated,
but easy-to-use laboratory facilities, can help reduce the barriers that can
inhibit student entry into engineering studies and can play an important part in
reversing the decline in U.S. engineering enrollments, particularly among women
and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;