* 0855402
* Quantifying Material Microstructures with Quaternions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Christopher Schuh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 07/31/2012
* USD 315,000.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project seeks to develop a new mathematical framework for the description
of crystal orientations, as well as misorientations between crystals. The
approach is built upon four-dimensional vectors called quaternions; a quaternion
can represent the axis and angle of a rotation in a simple way, and
distributions of quaternions can be used to describe populations of crystal
orientations (i.e., texture information), as well as populations of grain
boundary misorientations. The intellectual merit of the present project lies in
three technical objectives. The first of these is the development of the
mathematical tools required to express orientation distributions in the
quaternion framework, inclusive of relevant crystal and sample symmetries. For
the case of grain boundaries dual symmetries reflective of the two adjacent
crystallites are simultaneously applied. The second technical objective of the
project is to provide a sound mathematical connection between the new quaternion
framework and the more conventional Euler angle-based framework in wide use in
the field of texture analysis today; this connection permits forward-translation
of decades of prior research into the new framework. The final technical
objective of the project is to apply the new quaternion-based framework to
address some pressing problems in the crystallography of grain boundaries and
grain boundary junctions in polycrystalline materials; in particular the local
correlations in grain boundary misorientations induced by triple junctions and
quadruple nodes are assessed mathematically using this framework. The project
also has significant broader impacts for the scientific community. In addition
to student training in materials microstructures, texture analysis, and advanced
characterization techniques, the project develops open-source software that is
freely disseminated on the Internet. The software renders all of the
mathematical manipulations developed under the project accessible to the
community in the form of simple algorithmic tools. These tools permit
researchers to evaluate crystallographic texture, intuitively represent grain
boundary statistics, and map grain boundary misorientations overlaid upon
conventional micrographs.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The discipline of materials science and engineering has reached a point where it
is possible to design a material at the level of assembling individual crystals
into a solid. Among the important considerations in materials design are the
orientations of individual crystals in the material, and the interfaces or
boundaries between crystals in the structure. The specific crystal orientations
and interface structures formed in a material dictate to a very large extent the
material?s ability to resist damage, to exhibit high strength and toughness, and
to display functional properties. The present project develops the mathematical
tools necessary to design materials microstructure, with specific emphasis on
crystal orientations and misorientations between crystals. The project
specifically develops methods based on so-called quaternions, four-dimensional
vectors that can describe a crystal orientation. The use of quaternions in the
field of material microstructure greatly simplifies the description of many
important problems, and is conducive to the development of fast algorithms to
characterize, analyze, and design new materials microstructures. The present
project, in addition to developing these mathematical tools, also seeks a
broader impact by disseminating computer algorithms free for use by the entire
scientific community. These computer codes allow researchers to more intuitively
visualize materials structure, and to perform the calculations required to
optimize them as well.