* 0855277
* II-EN: BlueTool:  Infrastructure for Innovative Cyberphysical Data Center Management Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Patrick Phelan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 07/31/2013
* USD 800,000.00

Energy consumption for data centers (a.k.a. hosting centers, server farms,
clusters etc.) is rapidly increasing and is fast becoming a significant portion
of the nation?s annual energy budget. Surprisingly, many of the contemporary
data centers are designed and managed very inefficiently, mainly due to reliance
on folklore techniques rather than those grounded in hard scientific evidence.
In addition, contemporary research and experimentation in greening data centers
is severely hindered by the unavailability of an experimentation test-bed, the
cost of performing live tests of alternative configurations and the excessive
long duration for performing simulations based on high-complexity offline models
based on computational fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;The BlueTool project aims to
resolve these issues by: 1) increasing awareness of the latest scientific and
engineering research on managing data centers, and 2) providing a research and
evaluation infrastructure to test and develop new methodologies to address the
inefficiencies of data centers. BlueTool will promote the use of holistic cyber-
physical concepts to foster the development of energy-efficient and sustainable
data centers. It will leverage recent research advances in cooling technologies
and cyber-physical management for data centers at Arizona State University (ASU)
and provide synergy for advancing the ongoing research in this field at ASU and
elsewhere. BlueTool will consist of: (a) an online tool that can simulate
various configurations of data centers, in terms of physical layout, hardware
and software configuration; (b) a research hub and portal, maintained by the
IMPACT Lab at ASU (http://impact.asu.edu), that offers data services on various
updatable archives including power and thermal profiles, multi-scale low-
complexity thermal and power models, and data center management methods and
software. Researchers from both academia and industry will be able to use
BlueTool's online consulting services to improve the computing performance and
energy consumption of conventional or existing configurations with newly
developed techniques.