* 0855465
* RUI: Searching for Preferred Directions in Space and Time
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Larry Hunter, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 374,733.00

Two experiments will be pursued that test the fundamental underlying symmetries
of nature. The first of these experiments will look for a preferred direction in
the universe. This is accomplished by precisely measuring the energy of a
mercury nucleus as a function of the alignment of its spin with respect to the
fixed stars. The existence of such a preferred spatial direction violates the
principle of Local Lorentz Invariance (LLI), one of the underlying symmetries of
most current physical theories. The second experiment searches for a permanent
electric dipole moment (edm) of the electron using a ceramic material called
gadolinium iron garnet. This is a novel approach to one of the greatest
experimental challenges in physics. The existence of a non-zero edm of a
fundamental particle would violate the principle of time-reversal invariance.

Observation of a violation of either of the above symmetries of nature would
radically alter our understanding of the physical world. String theory and
supersymmetry remain two of the most attractive theories in particle physics,
though both have proven to be very difficult to test. It has been suggested that
string theory might allow for a violation of local Lorentz invariance at a level
close to that which will be probed in the LLI experiment. Similarly,
supersymmetry predicts an electron electric dipole moment very close to the
level that will be probed in the edm search. The LLI experiment may result in
further improvements in precise optically pumped magnetometers. The edm
experiment will stretch our understanding of electromagnetic interactions at the
surfaces of the iron garnets. This improved understanding might be important in
future magnetic information storage devices. Both of these experiments will
provide valuable training to undergraduates.