* 0855060
* II-EN: A Heterogeneous Networking Test Bed to Support Middleware Services for Pervasive Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Qi Han, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 193,628.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous interesting applications have
been enabled by embedded sensing technologies and significant research progress
on wireless sensor networks. To further ensure a wider adoption of this emerging
technology, seamless integration of wireless sensor networks with other existing
networks such as WiFi and the Internet is a must. In order to address challenges
that arise from such an integrated infrastructure, this project builds
HeteroNet, a heterogeneous networking infrastructure, by augmenting an existing
flat and homogeneous sensor network test bed. HeteroNet integrates resource
constrained sensor nodes and more powerful sensing devices, stationary nodes,
mobile nodes, and resource sufficient servers. These nodes communicate in
wireless or wired fashion. This test bed establishes an experimental
infrastructure to serve as a platform for development, testing, validation, and
evaluation of the investigator's current research on middleware services for
emerging applications on hybrid networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
benefiting from HeteroNet includes: integration of interoperable sensor networks
to the Internet, amorphous event monitoring in sensor networks, and system
status monitoring for QoS-aware mobile applications.&lt;br/&gt;HeteroNet enables
research that is not possible via simulation or current small homogeneous sensor
network test bed. The findings from the research enabled by HeteroNet have a
profound impact on pushing the state-of-the-art of next-generation distributed
systems and networks. The development of HeteroNet also benefits educational
activities at the graduate and undergraduate levels. HeteroNet is used to
facilitate and improve courses on networking, distributed systems, multimedia
systems, and computer architectures at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
The test bed is open to other research groups on campus to enable many as yet
unforeseen CISE-relevant projects, stimulating more fruitful interactions among
different researchers.