* 0855044
* Coherent detection and reconstruction of gravitational waves bursts
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Sergey Klimenko, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This award will support research in the area of coherent network analysis ---
detection and reconstruction of gravitational wave (GW) signals with multiple GW
detectors (detector networks). Work will be done on development of the coherent
network algorithms and their applications to burst searches which target
detection of GW transients from the most violent events in the Universe.
Coherent algorithms will enable not only a detection of gravitational waves, but
also the astrophysical analyses of GW signals and measurements of source
properties. Such measurements will lead to understanding of the underlying
physics and the dynamics of GW sources, may reveal the origin of known cosmic
events (such as short duration gamma-ray bursts), probe the equations of state
of neutron stars and allow a thorough test of General Relativity. Work will be
done on inclusion of source models into the coherent analysis in order to
improve the confidence of detection, perform characterization of sources and
confirm or rule out the models. This will be particularly important for the
enhanced and advanced GW detectors which target the first detection and study of
gravitational wave signals.

Interferometric gravitational wave detectors are among the most advanced
instruments ever built to explore the Universe. Their complex design and
sophisticated data analysis provide unique educational and research
opportunities for students in all areas of physics. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be involved with sophisticated methods for extraction of signals
from noise, computational schemes for manipulation of large data sets, data
processing on large computing clusters and modern astrophysical theories. The
proposed research addresses problems of GW detection with the worldwide network
of gravitational wave detectors. Participation in the joint data analysis
conducted in collaboration with multinational teams will give students a rich
research experience and exposure to diverse cultural approaches in conducting
research and pursuing science to prepare them for a wide spectrum of career
opportunities.