* 0855840
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Uncertainty Analysis in Solutes Transport at Basin Scale
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Samuela Franceschini, Franceschini            Samuela
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2010
* USD 37,632.00

0855840 Franceschini

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Samuela
Franceschini to work with Drs. Andrea Rinaldo and Marco Marani at the Universita
degli Studi di Padova in Italy.

Researchers at the Universit√† degli Studi di Padova have implemented a model ?
the Mass-Response Function (MRF) model to simulate solute transport at the basin
scale. The MRF model is based on linking the solute travel times ? the time the
dissolved contaminants take to travel from the injection point to a control
point in the watershed, with the global, basin-scale contact times between
phases controlling mass exchanges ? the time it takes the dissolved contaminants
that are in contact with soil and/or water to undergo chemical or physical
transformation. The relatively large contact times between the soil and the
runoff flow, favors the conditions for chemical and physical processes of solute
transformation. The researchers guided by Prof. Rinaldo and Prof. Marani have
successfully applied the MRF model to several sub-basins draining into the
Venice Lagoon. However, due to the inherently uncertain character of the natural
processes and the fluctuating values of the model input variables, the described
deterministic approach is not sufficient to accurately assess the reliability of
the system to support management decisions. This is particularly true of water
quality policies regarding the Venice Lagoon and its watershed. Local
administrators, scientists and engineers must carefully manage the closing of
the inlets to the sea to preserve the city of Venice from the high tie while at
the same time providing a means of exchange between the lagoon water (receptor
of pollutant loadings from the mainland) and the Adriatic Sea. The randomness of
the studied natural phenomenal and the need for more reliable information to
support the management decisions suggest that a systematic approach to account
for uncertainty in modeling solute transport a basin scale is essential. In an
attempt to provide more realistic representations of solute transport at basin
scale, The PI couples the MRF model first to probabilistic techniques ? the
Point Estimate Methods (PEMs) and then to time series analysis methods to
evaluate the field measurements. The main goal is to assess the uncertainty of
the estimated results for both runoff flow and solute concentrations.

The broader impact of this research is linked to the possibility of providing
more reliable results that may be used to support future water resources
management decisions. The objective is to develop a robust physically-based
mathematical model to represent catchment-scale hydrologic and solute responses.
The use of uncertainty and time series analyses allow for better understanding
of the physicochemical processes involved in the solute transport and provide
supporting results to optimize future field work. The results of this research
can be broadly applied to benefit the local community and the work of local
agencies and districts to maintain or to improve the quality of water sources in
heavily fertilized agricultural areas. To this end, this study will help in
effectively assess the contaminant loadings to the lagoon of Venice, further
helping in establishing management practices to improve the water quality of
this body of water.