* 0855646
* Experimental Investigation of Forces in the Submillimeter Range
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ramanath Cowsik, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 502,191.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award provides support to Washington University in St.
Louis in their effort to build an extremely sensitive and versatile torsion
balance. The instrument will probe possible deviations from the inverse square
law of Newtonian gravity at sub-millimeter distances, and study Casimir forces,
which are macroscopic manifestations of quantum fluctuations of the
electromagnetic vacuum. The torsion balance that will be built is comprised of a
gold-coated aluminum disk, suspended by its edge with a fine torsion fiber,
inside a high vacuum chamber. The suspended disk is viewed by an auto
collimating optical lever of sub-nanoradian resolution. A large circular sheet
of gold acts as a source of the force fields under study. This plate will be
mounted in close proximity to the disk, with its face nearly parallel to it. It
will be moved to and fro, and also in a yaw-like oscillation through a small
angle, while the response of the suspended disk is being continuously recorded
by the optical lever. The frequency, amplitude and phase of the angular
oscillations of the suspended disk carry information about any deviations from
Newtonian gravity and the Casimir force at sub-millimeter length scales.

These experiments will probe the finite temperature corrections to the Casimir
force and any deviations from the inverse square law of gravity, such as those
predicted by new theories of particle physics, including those that postulate
extra spatial dimensions. These new theories attempt to unify gravitation with
electromagnetic, nuclear and the weak forces, and suggest the existence of
hitherto undiscovered particles that can act as dark matter dominating the
formation and the dynamics of galaxies. The Casimir force is a macroscopic
manifestation of the quantum vacuum that could be related to the dark energy
responsible for the accelerated expansion of the universe. Thus, any confirmed
deviations from the inverse square law will have a large impact on knowledge of
fundamental physics, astrophysics and cosmology. The experimental effort and the
instrumentation are highly interdisciplinary, involving vacuum technology,
optics, mechanical engineering, signal analysis, and of course, physics. This
project provides an excellent training ground for post-doctoral scholars,
graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, undergraduate students from
technical colleges will be included in this project as a part of the outreach
effort at Washington University.