* 0855741
* Colloidal Interactions and Collective Behavior in Non-Conservative Optical Force Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* David Grier, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** How do molecular motors coordinate their
movements to power our muscles? By what principles do such nanometer-scale
machines exploit molecular chaos to do their work? Answers to these questions
would not only provide valuable insights into natural systems and processes, but
also could provide a basis for developing new technology. This research program
seeks these answers through experimental studies on model systems that
participate in the same physical processes, but whose motivating forces can be
tuned and whose behavior lends itself to detailed analysis. These systems are
created from very small microscopic particles (colloidal particles) moving
through force fields exerted by computer-designed holograms. The colloidal
particles? three-dimensional motions are measured with very high resolution
using holographic video microscopy and analyzed using the latest developments in
the theory of nonequilibrium statistical physics. Recently, this approach has
revealed the existence of Brownian vortexes, noise-driven micromachines that do
work even in quiescent force fields. Insights into activation and
synchronization of natural and artificial micromachines should emerge from a
systematic study of Brownian vortexes created from colloidal spheres and
specifically crafted beams of light. The combination of holographic experimental
techniques used in this project defines the state of the art in this field. In
addition to powering this research program, holographic control over the
microscopic world will continue to take center stage in New York University's
Scientific Frontiers program, a K-12 educational outreach activity that brings
hundreds of New York City schoolchildren to NYU for hands-on laboratory
experiences.

**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This experimental program combines holographic
optical trapping with holographic video microscopy to probe the statistical
physics of individual and interacting colloidal particles moving through non-
conservative force fields. Recent developments of optical micromanipulation
techniques have created new opportunities to exert precisely controlled forces
on microscopically textured systems. Phase gradients in holographically
projected traps can give rise to forces and torques that generically violate
conservation of mechanical energy. Colloidal particles in phase-enabled optical
traps therefore constitute an exceptionally flexible test-bed for new ideas in
nonequilibrium statistical physics. The experimental program will exploit new
methods of holographic video microscopy to measure the three-dimensional
trajectories of optically trapped colloidal particles with nanometer resolution.
The holographic optical traps will be designed to optimize both conservative and
non-conservative forces. The resulting rich data sets will provide direct
insights into the single-particle dynamics, inter-particle interactions, and
many-body collective behavior of driven dissipative steady states. Each element
of this project, from holographic control of light-induced forces, to
synchronization and entropy production in coupled arrays of stochastic heat
engines involves the resolution of outstanding scientific and technological
questions. The techniques developed for this program, furthermore, will continue
to take center stage in New York University's Scientific Frontiers program, a
K-12 educational outreach activity that brings hundreds of New York City
schoolchildren to NYU for hands-on laboratory tours.