* 0855009
* An Evaluation of the Principles of High-Pressure Torsion for Producing Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Terence Langdon, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 08/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

An Evaluation of the Principles of High-Pressure Torsion for Producing
Nanostructured Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: The processing of
metals by severe plastic deformation (SPD) is attracting attention within the
materials science community. This type of processing involves introducing a
large number of dislocations into the sample by imposing intense strain but
without incurring any change in the cross-sectional dimensions of the work-
piece. The primary advantage of SPD processing is that it can lead to
significant grain refinement without the introduction of residual porosity or
contamination. The ultrafine-grained materials processed by SPD exhibit
exceptionally high strength and improved toughness at ambient temperatures
together with the potential for achieving rapid superplastic forming
capabilities at elevated temperatures. This grant is concerned with SPD
processing using high-pressure torsion (HPT) where materials are subjected to
very high pressures under concurrent torsional straining. Preliminary results
around the world demonstrate that HPT processing offers advantages over other
SPD techniques because it leads to a smaller grain size often within the
nanometer range. This research program addresses fundamental areas of HPT
processing: (1) the factors involved in developing homogenization within the
material; (2) the significance of apparent saturation grain sizes; (3) the
formulation of procedures for overcoming the problem of higher strength
accompanied by lower ductility; and (4) the potential for achieving improved
mechanical properties by combining HPT with other processing techniques. NON-
TECHNICAL: The program trains one graduate student and one post-doc in research
methodology and provides opportunities for interactions with other researchers
through national and international collaborations. These collaborations involve
numerous visitors coming to USC either for a few days or for long-term
appointments. Special attempts are made to incorporate members of under-
represented groups into the program. Undergraduate students are involved through
the development of semester-long projects offered within the Senior Projects
Laboratory for students graduating in Mechanical Engineering. Local high school
students and their teachers are exposed to the research activities through
regular poster presentations and special activities such as the annual USC Open
Day during which the campus is open to members of the local community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;