* 0855678
* Multidomain Spectral Methods and Radiation Boundary Conditions with Applications in Numerical Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Stephen Lau, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2013
* USD 93,080.00

This award supports research at the interface between applied mathematics and
computational physics. An immediate goal of numerical relativity is the
simulation of orbiting binaries, such as two black holes, in order to compute
the radiation waveforms necessary to analyze output from gravitational wave
detectors like the Laser Interferometric Gravitational Wave Observatory. The
computational challenge of evolving the Einstein equations also drives modern
research in numerical and applied analysis. This research will focus on spectral
methods for numerical relativity (computer solution of the Einstein equations)
and radiation boundary conditions, chiefly, but not exclusively, for the
Einstein equations. Spectral methods offer superb efficiency, accuracy, and
interpolation freedom. The latter is significant, since coordinate flexibility
is paramount in Einstein's theory. Radiation boundary conditions allow for wave
simulation (gravitational or otherwise) on finite computational domains with
artificial boundaries, and their specification is a fundamental problem in
computational mathematics with broad application in the sciences. Through the
development of novel spectral methods with explicit applications, the goal of
the research is to solve a fundamental wave problem which is intractable from
the standpoint of current methods and computer resources, namely the efficient
time integration of unequal mass binaries. The research program on spectral
methods also includes exploration of the applicability of discontinuous Galerkin
methods to the predominant moving puncture technique for orbiting binaries.
Emphasizing both theoretical understanding and efficient numerical
implementation, the research on radiation boundary conditions considers the
scalar wave, Maxwell, and Einstein equations. Potential applications of the
proposed investigations include high-aspect-ratio phenomena in computational
acoustics and electromagnetics, extreme-mass-ratio binaries and rotating black
holes in numerical relativity, and history-dependent radiation boundary
conditions for the full nonlinear Einstein equations.