* 0855466
* Examining inter- and Intra-Continental Biogeographic Patterns and Processes in the Old World Using a Diverse Avian Subfamily as a Model System
* BIO,DEB
* 08/18/2008,08/31/2010
* Gary Voelker, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Rafael O. de Sa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 180,955.00

Disentangling historical patterns and events that have resulted in the modern
day distributions of living organisms continues to provide a challenge to
biogeographers. This is particularly true in Africa and Eurasia, where our
knowledge of historical events leading to avian speciation is largely restricted
to relatively small portions of each continent. As a model system from which to
conduct biogeographic analyses on these continents, this study will perform a
sweeping DNA study of phylogenetic relationships among the 315 species
comprising the subfamily Muscicapinae (thrushes, chats and flycatchers). These
phylogenies will allow tests of biogeographic hypotheses at inter- and intra-
continental levels, to include assessing the potential roles of climatic cycling
and ecological gradients in driving speciation.

Broadly, this research will lead to improved avian taxonomy, as well as a better
understanding of the origin and maintenance of biodiversity and avian
conservation. This study will further lead to empirical studies seeking to
identify and model the origin, diversification, and distribution of species and
evolutionary lineages, and to determining the tempo and mode of evolutionary
change. The biogeographical studies will be some of the first to establish broad
patterns illustrating how avian biotas are assembled in these little explored
continental regions and will thus serve as a template for future studies of
diverse plant and animal groups.