* 0855191
* II-NEW: miSense: Platform for Medical Sensing Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Andreas Terzis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 675,433.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Given the U.S. demographic trends (aging population, increasing prevalence of
chronic diseases), nursing staff shortages, and decreasing hospital capacities,
it is no surprise that the U.S. healthcare system faces immense challenges on a
daily basis. Multiple studies have shown that the use of inefficient tools in
the patient care process is one of the root causes behind overcrowded and
inefficient hospitals. Thereby, tools that automate the patient monitoring
process will greatly improve the quality and effectiveness of health care. While
these needs are widely accepted, a multitude of problems confront technology
developers. First, a multi-stage infrastructure, including sensing devices,
wired and wireless networks, and back-end servers, is necessary to generate
medically relevant results. Second, healthcare providers have understandably
little time and patience to work with untested technologies and engineering
prototypes. Finally, healthcare facilities and research with human subjects
present unique technical, administrative, and ethical challenges that few
technologists have encountered.

This project will address these challenges through the development of miSense,
an end-to-end platform for medical sensing applications. miSense includes all
hardware and software components to design, develop, and deploy compelling
sensing applications in the healthcare field, including open-platform devices
(miTags) for connecting medical sensors, a wireless mesh network (miNet) for
delivering data, and servers (miStore, miView) to store, analyze, and display
patient data. Furthermore, the project will develop three medical sensing
applications (miLabs) and deploy them in the JHU Emergency Department, the JHU
Children's Center and the University of Maryland Trauma Center. miSense will
revolutionize medical sensing applications and healthcare, as the TinyOS project
revolutionized sensor networks and their applications to the sciences. Finally,
this project will offer opportunities for transdisciplinary learning between
computer scientists, physicians, nursing professionals, undergraduates, and high
school students through involvement in the project and joint course development.