* 0855933
* RUI: The DRIFT Directional Search for Dark Matter with Spin-Dependent Couplings
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Daniel Snowden-Ifft, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2012
* USD 475,000.00

In this era of precision cosmology, measurements suggest that ordinary matter
represents only a fraction of the total matter density in the Universe. The
rest, whose effect we can only see gravitationally, appears to be dark. Particle
physics models suggest that dark matter is composed of relic weakly interacting
massive particles (WIMPs) left over from the Big Bang. Efforts to directly
detect WIMPs are hampered by small interaction probabilities and large
backgrounds that mimic expected dark matter signals. Fortunately, a number of
unique dark matter signatures exist that can be used to discriminate against
backgrounds and decisively identify WIMP interactions. The largest and most
robust of these signatures, based on the predicted behavior of the WIMP flux as
the Sun-Earth system moves through the galaxy, is a day-night modulation of
nuclear recoil directions in the lab frame. The intellectual merit of this
proposal resides in the Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks (DRIFT)
Experiment's unique and powerful capabilities being brought to bear on one of
the most important questions in science today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides funds to support this group and to provide a new gas system to run with
CS2-CF4 mixtures and the R&amp;D for fiducializing DRIFT and retrofitting the
present DRIFT detector with such a system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader
impacts of this work include the training of undergraduates in increasingly rare
small-scale experiments, giving them exposure to a wide range of hardware and
software experience. Finally, the DRIFT detector technology has promising
applications to axion searches, Homeland Security and double-beta decay
experiments.