* 0855758
* MAJOR: Modeling Musical Improvisation to Support Creativity in Education and Performance
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ge Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 762,372.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Music-making is universal and has been
a conduit for human creativity for at least tens of thousands of years, and
music plays an essential role in human social bonding, emotional communication,
and entertainment. Because information technology and entertainment constitute
an increasing share of the total economic output in developed countries,
creativity lies at the heart of the modern economy. Yet the creativity that
underlies musical domains is poorly understood. In this project the PI and his
team will seek to understand, model, and support improvisation, or real-time
collaborative creativity, in the context of music. Most musical traditions in
the world use improvisation as a method of creativity, so analysis and modeling
of improvisation in highly evolved musical systems should provide essential
insights into creative activity. This study will consider a representative
subset of musical traditions, in order to keep the results as broadly applicable
as possible: jazz, Indian classical music, and avant-garde art music. The
research will employ an interdisciplinary approach involving ethnography, music
theory, statistical modeling, machine learning, signal processing and instrument
design, and cognitive studies. The objectives are to develop computational
models of improvisation and to use them to develop new technologies that support
creativity in music and education. To these ends, the PI and his team will
investigate machine modeling of musical improvisation as a means to understand
real-time creativity. They will perform analysis of improvisational traditions
from many cultures and attempt to unify them using a common probabilistic
framework. They will also conduct systematic evaluation of formal models in
realistic performance contexts, and use brain imaging of improvising musicians
to gain insight into highly creative mental activity. Ethnography will be
applied to characterize the diversity of improvisational traditions, while music
theory will help define basic concepts and provide working hypotheses and
frameworks for formal models. Relationships between musical concepts will be
represented using a probabilistic, generative model that seeks to represent the
complex conditional dependencies among musical parameters as well as among
performers; this abstraction will help unify different surface traditions within
a common framework, revealing essential patterns in systems for real-time
creativity. Through modeling, the study will explore how improvising musicians
learn these systems and reference them in performance. Cognitive studies will
elucidate whether a distinct set of cognitive processes are employed during
improvisation; understanding what neural networks are active may be a first step
in engineering systems that foster creativity in other contexts. Taken together,
these studies will improve our understanding of creative
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Studying the arts, where
creativity has been developed, refined, and systematized, will offer insight
into developing systems that foster creativity in other areas such as
engineering and information technology. Improvisation systems built from this
research will be used to create ensembles through which programming,
computational modeling, and creative problem solving may be taught. The
development of technology to support improvisation will also help teach
creativity alongside rote performance skills, and encourage new programming
paradigms. For artists, project outcomes will enable new improvisation systems
to be built using reconfigurable building blocks, thereby catalyzing research in
improvisation and the development of sophisticated systems. Planned
collaborations with world-renowned musicians will expose a broad public to this
research, and will help recruit new students to engineering, turn public
attention to the study of creativity, and hopefully also create satisfying works
of art.