* 0855786
* Collaborative Research:   Industry/University Cooperative Research Center:  Water and Environmental Technology Center
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2009,05/31/2015
* Ian Pepper, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 05/31/2015
* USD 412,000.00

Full Center Proposal (Phase I) for an I/UCRC for Water and Environmental
Technology (WET) Center &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0855881 Temple University;
Rominder Suri &lt;br/&gt;0855786 University of Arizona; Ian Pepper
&lt;br/&gt;0855802 Arizona State University; Morteza Abbaszadegan
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to start a new I/UCRC
"Water and Environmental Technology (WET)" with a focus on water quality and
emerging contaminants. The lead of the proposed Center will be Temple University
(TU) with site locations at the University of Arizona (UA) and Arizona State
University (ASU). The objective of the proposed Center is to advance the
knowledge and understand the effects of emerging contaminants on water quality.
Emerging contaminants generally refer to pharmaceuticals, personal care
products, as well as pathogens detected in the source water environment; thereby
posing a potential or real threat to human health or the environment. The
proposed research aims at developing technologies to detect, understand,
mitigate and/or control emerging contaminants in the environment as well as
other traditional contaminants that can adversely impact water quality. Center
engineers and environmental scientists using microbial, chemical, hydrologic and
mathematical approaches will work collaboratively to conduct this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center and its research activities will involve
faculty, undergraduate and graduate students and industrial representatives; and
the industrial-focused research program will enhance the scientific
understanding and help address a potentially significant health and
environmental problem. Many of the companies of the proposed Center have
overseas installations; thus, students will be exposed to regulatory, social and
cultural aspects of different countries, enhancing their global experiences. All
three institutions plan to engage K-12 students and teachers, and will enhance
the ongoing efforts of integrating research in classroom teaching. WET has a
strong diversity plan that ensures the participation of underrepresented groups
in all levels of the Center. The Center plans to publish results in various
publications as well as present at Conferences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;