* 0855371
* Support of LIGO data analysis activities at the University of Texas at Brownsville
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Soma Mukherhee, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

The emerging field of gravitational-wave (GW) astronomy has entered an exciting
phase with large-scale interferometric GW detectors (LIGO, GEO600, TAMA300, and
Virgo) taking data in either science or engineering runs. The LIGO project
completed its landmark fifth science run (S5) in 2007 and will begin a new one
(S6) in summer 2009. This award supports research in three critical areas
relevant to LIGO data analysis: (i) searches for a cosmological or astrophysical
GW background, (ii) a statistical search for GWs from gamma-ray bursts, and
(iii) detector characterization.

The first project will improve our sensitivity to GW backgrounds that have a
non-uniform distribution of power on the sky. The second will develop methods to
optimally use the information provided by NASA missions (Swift and Fermi) in GW
searches. The third will use advanced data mining methods to develop a better
understanding of real data, which will benefit the sensitivity of all GW
searches. Three graduate students will receive direct training in GW data
analysis, thus adding to the growing community of researchers in this emerging
field. Since the University of Texas at Brownsville (UTB) is an Hispanic serving
institution, the research activities will expose students who are traditionally
under-represented in the areas of science and technology to forefront scientific
research. On-going major outreach programs at UTB will be able to leverage this
research, creating awareness among high-school students about exciting
scientific projects such as LIGO.