* 0855592
* Dynamical Formation and Evolution of Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Frederic Rasio, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 229,106.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Coalescing compact binaries, binary star systems with black
holes or neutron stars in highly relativistic orbits, are the most important
potential sources of gravitational radiation for current laser interferometer
detectors such as LIGO. The theoretical study of gravitational wave sources is
crucial for the interpretation of data to be collected by the interferometers,
and for the planning of future, more advanced detectors. Three related projects
are being supported by this award: (1) Numerical calculations of the final
mergers of compact binary systems containing a black hole and a neutron star, to
be performed using an existing 3-D relativistic hydrodynamics code as part of an
ongoing collaboration between Northwestern and Georgia Tech; (2) The development
of a new parallel supercomputer code for simulating compact binary mergers in
full general relativity, combining a powerful, particle-based algorithm for
hydrodynamics ("smoothed particle hydrodynamics") with a fully dynamic and
nonlinear treatment of space-time; (3) Stellar dynamics simulations of black
holes in dense star clusters, where frequent dynamical interactions can lead to
the formation of large numbers of coalescing compact
binaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coalescing compact binaries are also important in
many other areas of astrophysics, such as the study of gamma-ray bursts and the
production of heavy chemical elements in galaxies. The stellar dynamics and
relativistic hydrodynamics codes to be developed are general tools, which will
be useful for studying many other problems involving relativistic stars and
fluids. The development of new particle-based numerical algorithms for the study
of highly nonlinear and complex multi-physics problems has a strong
interdisciplinary character and can help establish closer ties between
gravitational physics, computer science, and applied mathematics. Outreach
activities are taking advantage of the resources of the nearby Adler Planetarium
and Astronomy Museum in Chicago, allowing the research results and methodology
to be presented to a large and diverse public.