* 0855812
* Collaborative Research:  Design of Equivalent Accelerated Life Testing Plans Involving Single or Multiple Stresses
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Haitao Liao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 01/31/2010
* USD 71,537.00

The surge in the introduction of new products coupled with the significant
reduction in time from product design to manufacturing, as well as the ever
increasing customer's expectation for high reliability and longer warranties
have prompted industry to shorten its product test duration. In many cases, the
testing of the products prototypes can take months and even years before actual
production takes place. In many situations, accelerated life testing which
subjects the product samples to extreme conditions might be the only viable
approach to assess whether the product meets the expected long term reliability
requirements. As a result, the accuracy of reliability estimates from such
testing has a profound effect on the subsequent decisions regarding system
configuration, warranties and preventive maintenance schedules. Inappropriate
implementation of the test might cause delays in product release, termination of
the entire product or catastrophic failures in the actual use of the product. In
a variety of industrial applications, there could be many choices in stress
loadings when conducting testing. Each stress loading has some advantages and
drawbacks. This has raised many practical questions regarding the equivalence
among various accelerating test plans involving different stress loadings. The
problem becomes more difficult when multiple stresses are involved. To overcome
these challenges, we propose to investigate and contribute fundamental and
theoretical models and provide several statistical tools to facilitate practical
reliability tests. New framework for planning accelerated testing under various
stress loadings, especially under complex stress and multiple stresses
conditions, will be established. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
research results will fill a major gap in reliability assessment needed by
industry. Especially, the results will enable industry to design efficient and
economical test plans, yet the results of the test will provide accurate
reliability estimates. The tools to be developed will facilitate and further
promote the implementation of accelerated life testing in modern
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;