* 0855699
* Collaborative Research:   In Situ Examination of Hydrogen Peroxide Sources and Sinks in a Slightly Alkaline Stream
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Durelle Scott, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2011
* USD 97,588.00

Photochemically produced hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is ubiquitous in sunlit
freshwater and may play a number of important biogeochemical roles. Of
particular interest is that H2O2 may be the most important source of hydroxyl
radical (OH) in surface waters via reduction of H2O2 by Fe(II). Oxidation by
hydroxyl radical is an effective mechanism for converting refractory organic
compounds, including contaminants and natural organic matter, to CO2 and
microbial substrates. It is still unclear whether the sources and sinks of H2O2
identified in lakes and marine systems are the most important controls on H2O2
in streams. The role of reduction of H2O2, in particular, remains unexplored in
all but very acidic streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, preliminary
modeling of a theoretical reach-scale stream tracer injection experiment
suggests that H2-18O2, used in conjunction with a conservative tracer, could be
uniquely useful for addressing one of the main problems of modeling
biogeochemical processes in streams (e.g. nitrogen cycling, contaminant
biodegradation, sorption): the need for a tracer that can distinguish flowpaths
involving transient storage in surface water pools from flowpaths through the
hyporheic zone (subsurface). However, H2-18O2's application as a tracer requires
a better understanding of the controls on H2-18O2 decomposition rates in surface
and subsurface waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed
work is to conduct the first comprehensive study of hydrogen peroxide cycling in
a natural stream chosen to be broadly representative of agricultural headwater
streams in the central U.S. Measurement of the fate of natural H2O2 and an
injected isotope-labeled H2-18O2 tracer in mesocosms placed directly into stream
sediments will be used to test our current understanding of H2O2 sources and
sinks in sunlit stream water and the underlying sediment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our results will show whether hydroxyl radical production
from hydrogen peroxide could be a dominant mechanism of indirect photolysis of
organic contaminants and natural organic matter in streams. Photolysis of
natural organic matter is of significance because it produces bioavailable
carbon substrates as well as carbon dioxide, and is thought to be an important
control on ecosystem-scale carbon cycling. Our work could also lay the
groundwork for developing methods to accelerate Fenton's reaction in systems
such as agricultural headwaters, for the purpose of decreasing concentrations of
contaminants such as atrazine. Finally, if hydrogen peroxide turns out to be a
good tracer for distinguishing between surface and subsurface storage in
streams, the proposed work will contribute to the development of better models
of biogeochemical processes such as nitrogen cycling and biodegradation of
contaminants in these environments. The proposed work is a joint effort between
a new investigator (Durelle Scott) and a mid-level female scientist (Bettina
Voelker), and will support one graduate student and one undergraduate researcher
each at the Colorado School of Mines and at the University of Nebraska.