* 0855155
* Collaborative Research: CRI - RUI: II - NEW: ATTRACT: Aerial and Terrestrial Testbed for Research in Aerospace, Computing, and maThematics
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Mohammad Khan, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2013
* USD 348,158.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
inspire students at Tuskegee University and Auburn University in mathematics,
aerospace science engineering, and networking by inviting them to contribute to
a grand project: fly safely and efficiently, in a limited space, a fleet of
autonomous UAVs on a cooperative mission with terrestrial vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of Dr. Sriram Vishwanath at the University of
Texas (UT) Austin will deliver six Proteus modules (terrestrial vehicles) and
will assist the team at Tuskegee University (TU) and Auburn University (AU) to
build for this project six other Proteus modules adapted to the ultimate
objective of this project. Dr. Biaz and his students will develop and implement
at Auburn University the networking protocols that will allow all terrestrial
and aerial vehicles to communicate with each other. The implementation will be
made through series of laboratory exercises and research projects
collaboratively conducted at Tuskegee University and Auburn University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will set up a research
infrastructure that enables laboratory exercises in mathematics, aerospace and
computer networking. For each discipline, students will contribute to the
solution of challenging problems. To this day, most research on mobile ad hoc
networks is conducted through simulation. This research infrastructure will
allow students to test and evaluate the most promising networking protocols with
hardware-in-the-loop. In mathematics, students will realize for example that
solving a system of equations not only can obviously determine the position of a
vehicle but also can be directly used to enable networking coding and improve
communications efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee University is the only HBCU with an ABET-accredited
Aerospace Engineering program and graduates the largest number of African-
American aerospace engineers in the US. This research infrastructure will
contribute to attract and retain students in STEM fields at Auburn University
and Tuskegee University in general and under-represented minorities in
particular. The multidisciplinary collaboration between Tuskegee University, UT
Austin and Auburn University will benefit students from these institutions to
work in a multi-disciplinary environment and will expose them to state of the
art education and research. The results of the collaborative effort will be
disseminated through presentations at engineering education and other
professional conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;