* 0855523
* Examining the Origin of Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Cristian Armendariz-Picon, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 120,000.00

The early universe must have contained tiny initial fluctuations, which later
grew by the attractive force of gravity as the universe expanded, to become the
structures we observe in the universe today. This proposal aims to empirically
examine the properties of these primordial fluctuations, and to refine
theoretical predictions about their properties. On the phenomenological side,
and building on previous work by the PI, the proposal discusses tests of
statistical homogeneity and isotropy. If averages of cosmic density fields are
invariant under translations, we speak of statistical homogeneity; if they are
additionally invariant under rotations we speak of statistical isotropy. Both
are two of the key assumptions that underlie most of our analyses of the origin
and growth of structure, so it is crucial to test both empirically. On the
theoretical side, the PI proposes to further study the predictions of inflation,
the leading explanation for the origin of the primordial perturbations. At the
end of inflation, the inflaton field must decay into the hot radiation of the
Big Bang, in a process known as reheating. The PI plans to study the survival of
non-adiabatic perturbations after inflation, and several aspects related to the
quantum nature of the inflaton decay. These studies are important to unveil the
details of a process that remains hidden by the resulting thermal equilibrium.
Reheating may also have indirect implications on the Gaussianity of the
primordial perturbations. Calculations of the degree of primordial non-
Gaussianity produced during inflation have neglected the couplings needed for
the universe to reheat. The PI intends to include the effects of such couplings,
in order to verify whether they can be neglected, and thus confirm one of the
key predictions of single-field inflationary models. The broader impacts of this
proposal are as follows: As a major component of his efforts in public
education, the PI plans to draw from his Hispanic background to promote the
diffusion of cosmology among Hispanic minorities in the Syracuse area. In
collaboration with the Spanish Action League of Onondaga County he proposes to
extend the multi-disciplinary educational program in astronomy and cosmology
addressed to Hispanic children that he started in 2007. The program is
structured in a series of weekly ninety minute sessions in which children aged
six to ten are exposed to basic concepts in astronomy and cosmology. In the
coming years, the PI intends to build on the successes of the first year of life
of the program, and to correct and address the challenges that have emerged so
far.