* 0855081
* Dynamics of Local Vibrational Modes in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Gunter Luepke, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2014
* USD 357,653.00

Technical. This project addresses hydrogen defects in semiconductors,
ferroelectrics, and insula-tors primarily through vibrational lifetime
measurements. A major goal is to directly measure the vibrational energy
transfer between two local vibrational modes of the same defect utilizing a two-
color pump-probe transient bleaching approach. The project aims for a
comprehensive study of vibrational lifetimes, microscopic dynamics and energy
absorption in model crystalline semi-conductors and metal oxides. The focus is
on wide band-gap and proton conducting oxides, in-cluding ZnO, MgO, SnO2, TiO2,
BaTiO3, SrTiO3, and KTaO3. The ability to directly probe these pathways and
rates allows tests of theory and scaling laws at new levels of precision. Dy-
namical studies will provide new insight into the coupling of the ionic
surroundings to the O-H vibration and the migration of protons within the oxide
crystal lattice. The high-power tunable infrared radiation from the Free-
Electron Laser at Jefferson Laboratory will be utilized to inves-tigate photo-
induced H diffusion in proton conducting oxides. The proposed research is
expected to lead to new fundamental understanding of basic energy transfer
processes in electronic and photonic materials. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The
project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic
and photonic materials science having technological relevance. The project
integrates research and education providing graduate and undergraduate students
with laboratory experience and training while conducting forefront research in
an interdisciplinary field including modern optics, materials science and
computational modeling. &lt;br/&gt;