* 0855163
* II-EN The Human Virtualization Studio: From Distributed Sensor to Interactive Audiovisual Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Takeo Kanade, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 06/30/2012
* USD 600,000.00

The Virtualization Studio spearheads research to reconstruct, record, and render
dynamic events in 3D. The studio creates a ?full-body? interactive environment
where multiple users are simultaneously given a visceral sense of three
dimensional space, through vision and sound, and are able to interact, through
action and speech, unencumbered by 3D glasses, head-mounted displays or special
clothing. The studio pursues the thesis that robust sensors for hard problems,
in this case audiovisual reconstruction of highly dynamic multiple
actors/speakers, can be constructed by using a large number of sensors running
simple, parallelized algorithms. High fidelity reconstructions are created using
a grid of 1132 cameras, and a 128-node multi-speaker microphone array to
localize and associate multiple sound sources in the event space. In addition, a
multi-viewer lenticular display screen, consisting of 48 projectors, and a front
surround sound speaker are used to render interactive environments. The
reconstruction algorithms are parallelized and a cluster is used to process the
data and respond to behaviors in the event space in
realtime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Audiovisual reconstruction and rendering of
scenes containing multiple users will revolutionize research into collaborative
interfaces, and will allow digital preservation of culturally significant
events, like theatrical performances, sports events, and key speeches. In
addition to these core research objectives, the Virtualization Studio will act
as a gathering place for multidisciplinary research, bringing together
researchers from interactive art, human behavior analysis, computer graphics,
computer vision, psychology, big data research, and speech processing. The
infrastructure will be used to develop a new course on Human Virtualization, and
will be used as a pedagogical tool in several existing courses and outreach
projects, introducing the next generation of students to the power of
interdisciplinary research in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;