* 0855890
* Evaporation Assisted Plasma Lithography for Biomimetic Proteins
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Xiaoyi Wu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 351,844.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many proteins in nature, such as silk
and elastin, have superior physical properties. Inspired by the superior
properties of these proteins, the goal of this project is to investigate an
Evaporation-Assisted Plasma Lithography process for assembling biomimetic
protein structures. The parameters that control the assembly process will be
studied systematically. The assembled biomimetic protein structures will be
investigated by different characterization techniques. The proposed work will
lead to a novel nanomanufacturing strategy for biomimetic proteins, and will
provide the foundation for utilizing the potential of biomimetic proteins in
numerous engineering and biomedical applications in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will impact the manufacturing processes of many
biomimetic proteins and nanoscale building blocks. The combination of the unique
characteristics of biomimetic proteins and the innovative nanomanufacturing
technique will open up new possibilities in creating hybrid microsystems by
integrating bottom-up created building blocks and top-down fabricated micro and
nano platforms. The proposed process will form the foundation for a new class of
smart microdevices with broad applicability in manufacturing, bioengineering,
and materials science. In addition, the visualization nature of guided
manufacturing of nanostructures could provide appealing demonstrations to
interest a diverse group of students and the general public. The research
activity will be integrated into different education and outreach activities
including graduate and undergraduate courses, undergraduate research
experiences, and outreach and minority programs. &lt;br/&gt;