* 0855969
* Corrosion of Nanoscale Alloy Electrodes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Karl Sieradzki, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project examines alloy
corrosion processes in nanoscale structures. The program involves a combined
experimental and theoretical approach focused on developing broadly applicable
thermodynamic models of dealloying corrosion. This problem is extraordinarily
rich in that there are two intrinsic length scales that must be considered. One
length scale is set by the alloy composition and the other is set by the
physical dimensions of the sample. The richness of the problem derives from the
interaction of these length scales, which leads to entirely new corrosion
phenomena. Corrosion of such structures is important at monolayer levels and
occurs at compositions which are not vulnerable to attack in corresponding
larger macroscopic scale samples. Thus conventional approaches for
characterizing dealloying corrosion are not applicable at the nanoscale. In
order to perform this work we use a new technique for developing reproducible
alloy nanoelectrodes in the size range of 3 ? 10 nm and employ a variety of
characterization techniques including underpotential deposition for assaying
surface compositions, electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy and high
resolution analytical transmission electron microscopy. The combination of
experimental data generated on well characterized nanostructures together with
our thermodynamic modeling will provide a general fundamental framework for
understanding these important nanoscale corrosion processes. The science
evolving from this research will impact diverse applications in
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines corrosion of nanoscale
structures such as those used as catalysts in fuel cells, nanoparticle based
bio-assays, bio-sensing and environmental monitoring for security and
surveillance. In the case of fuel cells for transportable power the stability of
metal alloy catalyst particles to corrosion is the key problem and to date has
limited this technology to widespread application. This program is evolving new
experimental data and modeling that will provide engineering guidelines for the
design of nanoscale structures that are stable to corrosion. In order to
accomplish these goals students are trained to develop expertise in order to
integrate knowledge in the disciplines of electrochemistry and materials
science. Today there is a dearth of graduate students trained in the U.S. in
this manner. Part of this problem stems from the perception students have that
corrosion science is an old developed field and is separated from the current
hot areas which include fields such as renewable energy and ?bio-nano?. This
research program opens a new arena in corrosion science which should help to get
more high quality students interested in corrosion. In support of this, we are
developing new courses in materials electrochemistry which specifically focuses
on the corrosion and electrochemical behavior of nanoelectrodes. This will be
taught at the senior undergraduate/beginning graduate level and is aimed
specifically at exciting student interest in this field. Both graduate and
undergraduate students are involved in this research program. In addition to
active involvement with the NSF funded Minority Graduate Education @ Mountain
State Alliance (MGE@MSA) program, the PI is getting individuals from
underrepresented groups involved in this research program.