* 0855710
* Partial Support of the Meetings of the Board on Mathematical Sciences and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 03/31/2010
* USD 163,000.00

The National Academies' Board on Mathematical Sciences and their Applications
(BMSA) is a primary interface between the research enterprise and federal
agencies that rely on the mathematical sciences. Through studies and workshops,
the Board's 21 pro bono experts help to ensure that the nation?s decision making
is based on strong mathematical analysis and computational simulations. Recent
BMSA studies have recommended improvements to the way the Department of Homeland
Security assesses bioterrorism risks and steered the Federal Reserve system
toward new ways of thinking about systemic risk, and the Board shared oversight
of a recent Academies study that created a path forward for the nation?s
forensic science enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Board also contributes to
internal cohesion of the discipline by bringing together leaders of mathematics,
statistics, operations research, economics, financial engineering, systems
engineering, risk analysis, computational science and engineering, computer
science, decision analysis, and other mathematical fields for a broad range of
interactions at its biennial meetings and other functions. Through its position
within the National Academies, the Board also strengthens connections between
the mathematical sciences and other fields, because it has ready access to the
leaders in all fields of science, engineering, education, and medicine. This
allows the Board to convene workshops and studies that are truly cross-
disciplinary.