* 0855679
* Realizing gravitational-wave astronomy through low-latency searches for binary black hole mergers with a network of high-precision gravitational-wave interferometers
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Sukanta Bose, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2012
* USD 495,000.00

Current understanding of coalescing binary black holes and neutron stars
suggests that Advanced LIGO (AdvLIGO) should detect somewhere between a few to
several of these systems per year, thus, ushering in the age of gravitational-
wave astronomy. Some of these systems are expected to be visible to
electromagnetic observatories as well. Smart hardware and software tools will be
developed so that an astrophysical signal observed in AdvLIGO and the advanced
Virgo detector can be followed-up rapidly by pointing the electromagnetic
observatories at its source, while it is still active. The complete
characteristics of the signal, as made available recently through a combination
of analytical solutions and numerical-relativity breakthroughs, will be used in
the search for these binaries.

Together, these multi-messenger observations, which use complementary
gravitational-wave and electromagnetic data, promise to resolve some outstanding
puzzles in astronomy, such as the origin of the short duration gamma-ray bursts
and the nature of dark energy. This quest will be aided by the establishment of
an experimental effort at the main campus of the Washington State University
(WSU) in Pullman, and could foster the growth of Physics and Astronomy education
at WSU-Tri-Cities (WSU-TC), located near the site of the LIGO Hanford
Observatory. That campus community has a large Hispanic population with nearby
Native American communities. The co-placement of LIGO and WSU-TC in this
community offers a rare setting for integrating university education with
cutting edge research.