* 0855492
* Bridging the Gap Between the Industry and Academia Thermal Stresses Community: The 8th International Congress on Thermal Stresses 2009; held at U. of Illinois, June 1-4, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2009
* Pier Marzocca, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of The Eighth International
Congress on Thermal Stresses (TS2009) hosted by the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign are to provide a forum, stimulate a scholarly dialogue, and
facilitate the cross-fertilization of ideas among engineers, technologists and
scientists in academia, industry and laboratories whose common interests lie in
thermal stresses and related topics. All areas of Thermal Stress Sciences
related to basic research and industrial applications will be represented.
Keynote lectures will be delivered at the congress by prominent researchers from
all over the world and topical Symposia will be organized to honor distinguished
scientists. The support of the National Science Foundation will facilitate the
organization of the TS2009 Congress, will provide travel funds to scientists,
fellowships to talented students, and will contribute to the overall success of
this planned event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Congress encompasses topics that
are not covered by other national and international conferences. The discussion
of the mainstream topics as well as of the emerging areas is likely to bring
about a substantial contribution in many areas of modern technology, including,
primarily, the aeronautical/ aerospace, materials, nuclear, automotive, civil
and mechanical engineering areas.&lt;br/&gt;The Congress will not only have
significant value for engineering design and applications, but it will also
enhance education. This event will involve a number of students and support
their participation. In soliciting students to participate, women and
underrepresented minorities will be strongly encouraged. The TS2009 proceedings
will be the primary vehicle for dissemination of latest findings and discoveries
in the thermal stresses arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;