* 0855429
* RUI: Neutrino Experiments with the NuMI Beam
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Nathaniel Tagg, Otterbein College
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2012
* USD 113,000.00

Neutrinos (meaning: "Small neutral ones") are elementary particles that often
travel close to the speed of light, lack an electric charge, are able to pass
through ordinary matter almost undisturbed and are thus extremely difficult to
detect. Neutrinos have a minuscule, but nonzero mass. They are usually denoted
by the Greek letter nu. Most neutrinos passing through the Earth emanate from
the Sun, and more than 50 trillion solar electron neutrinos pass through the
human body every second. Neutrinos are most often created or detected with a
well defined flavor (electron, muon, tau). However, in a phenomenon known as
neutrino flavor oscillation, neutrinos are able to oscillate between the three
available flavors while they propagate through space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this RUI project, Professor Tagg and two undergraduate research assistants at
Otterbein College will continue research on neutrino oscillations with the MINOS
long-baseline neutrino oscillation experiment and begin research on the MINERíA
neutrino-nucleus cross-section experiment. MINOS is the flagship U.S. experiment
on neutrino oscillations for the next several years. MINERvA is a valuable and
opportunistic component of the future NuMI program that will coordinate with
NOvA to make measurements of inclusive and exclusive neutrino-nucleus cross
sections with the NOvA beam line with a fine-grained scintillation detector and
the NOvA near detector. Objectives include nuclear structure measurements via a
weak probe justified both on intrinsic interest and to help interpret current
and future experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marvin
Goldberg&lt;br/&gt;PO&lt;br/&gt;MPS/PHY/EPP