* 0855570
* Sympathetic Cooling and Collisions of Atomic and Molecular Ions with Ultracold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Winthrop Smith, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2014
* USD 305,000.00

Sympathetic cooling of trapped atomic and molecular ions is investigated by
using ion collisions with a second (ultracold) species of neutral atoms (e.g.
sodium) which have previously been laser cooled to less than 1/1000th degree
above absolute zero. This research focuses on very low energy ion-neutral atomic
collisions as the cooling mechanism, about which very little is known
experimentally. The boundaries of classical (Newtonian) and quantum
(Schroedinger-Heisenberg) scattering are explored in new ways. The ion-neutral
interaction under study is very general, involving the polarization (charge
separation) of the neutral partner by the electric field of the ion; the
polarized neutral atom then acts back to strongly attract the ion. Molecules
(and molecular ions) are very difficult to laser cool directly, so this work
should open up applications to general energy exchange processes in the solar
system and interstellar space, control of ion-molecule exothermic reactions near
zero Kelvin, generation of Wigner crystals of molecular ions in a lattice,
precision spectroscopy of ions, ultraprecise atomic and molecular ion clocks,
and potentially, quantum computers or quantum memory registers involving arrays
of trapped ions. The project uses a special hybrid ion-neutral trap (MOT and
Paul trap combination) to overlap clouds of alkali-metal atoms and various kinds
of ions (e.g. Ca+, Na2+, Na+) and to allow observation of the rates of cooling
and reactions that occur as a result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This basic research
is relevant to atomic physics, molecular physics, frequency standards, space
physics and astrophysics, quantum information and memories and their many
applications. Atomic, molecular and optical physics (AMO) research at the
University of Connecticut currently involves 10 active faculty and ~38 graduate
students who receive a broad education involving all these areas, through their
individual research, interaction with peers, weekly research seminars and
colloquia, visits from scholars, public lectures and community outreach.
Research results are frequently presented at conferences. One of the PI's
students in undergraduate quantum mechanics for physics majors is now involved
in PhD-level research on this project. Three undergraduate summer students,
along with two exchange students from the University of Heidelberg have been
involved. Undergraduates are encouraged to participate in related independent
study projects. Students on the project receive a broad education in basic
experimental physics techniques, including ultrahigh vacuum, laser cooling and
trapping, optics, laser spectroscopy, ion manipulation and detection, etc.