* 0855087
* Collaborative Research:II-NEW: An Instrumented Data Center Infrastructure for Research on Cross-Layer Autonomics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Salim Hariri, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 09/30/2012
* USD 210,000.00

This project's goal is to acquire and develop an instrumented datacenter testbed
spanning the three sites of the NSF Center for Autonomic Computing (CAC)-the
University of Florida (UF), the University of Arizona (UA) and Rutgers, the
State University of New Jersey (RU). Datacenters are a growing component of
society's IT infrastructure, including services related to health, banking,
commerce, defense, education and entertainment. Annual energy and administration
costs of today's datacenters amount to billions of dollars; high energy
consumption also translates into excessive heat dissipation, which, in turn,
increases cooling costs and increases servers' failure rates. The proposed
testbed will enable a fundamental understanding of the operations of data
centers and the autonomic control and management of their resources and
services. The design of the underlying infrastructure reflects the natural
heterogeneity, dynamism and distribution of real-world datacenters, and includes
embedded instrumentation at all levels, including the platform, virtualization,
middleware and application layers. Its scale and geographical distribution
enables studies of challenges faced by datacenter applications, services,
middleware and architectures related to both "scale-up" (increases in the
capacity of individual servers) and "scale-out" (increases in the number of
servers in the system). This testbed will enable fundamental and far-reaching
research focused on cross-layer autonomics for managing and optimizing large-
scale datacenters. The participant sites will contribute complementary
expertise-UA at the resource level, UF at the virtualization layer, and RU in
the area of services and applications. The collaboration between the university
sites will bring coherence across ongoing separate research efforts and have a
transformative impact on the modeling, formulation and solution of datacenter
management problems, which have so far been considered mostly in terms of
individual layers. &lt;br/&gt;The testbed will also provide a critical
infrastructure for education at multiple levels, including providing students
with hands-on experience via course projects, enable development of new advanced
multi-university and cross-disciplinary courses, as well as multi-site group
projects focused on end-to-end autonomics, which will use the proposed testbed.
Students from underrepresented groups will be actively involved in the research
and their participation will be increased through ongoing collaborations with
minority institutions. Even broader community participation will result from an
evolving partnership with the recently proposed industry cloud initiatives.