* 0855290
* Production of Ultracold Weakly Bound Polar Molecules and Trapping of Ground State Noble Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Charles Sukenik, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is aimed at developing a
better physical understanding of how atoms and molecules interact with laser
light at extremely cold temperatures- including the synthesis of very cold
molecules from very cold atoms, high precision study of the structure of these
molecules, and new techniques for reducing the temperature of these molecules
even further once they are formed. While understanding these interactions is of
fundamental scientific interest, the knowledge gleaned is also critical for
developing the next generation of high-tech applications which are expected to
yield significant advances in computing, communications, medicine, and
fabrication of small-scale objects, for example. The research is also helping to
lay the foundation for understanding chemical reactions at very cold
temperatures where some of the counter-intuitive effects of quantum mechanics
can be used to actually control chemical reactions in order produce desired
reaction products which may be hard to produce by conventional
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, the frontiers of science have
seen a blurring between traditional boundaries, and the realization of
applications which find their way into everyday life has required scientists and
engineers to work in a cross-disciplinary fashion. While the research program
can be fairly characterized as "atomic and molecular physics", it also involves
quantum chemistry and control and so contributes to the development of a growing
interdisciplinary endeavor in addition to answering the very specific scientific
questions posed. Furthermore, the research program makes a very significant
contribution to human resource development. The training of highly skilled
students who upon graduation are capable of tackling- in an interdisciplinary
manner- a wide range of problems within science, technology, and society in
general, provides a broad and immediate return on the federal investments made
in the research.