* 0855529
* Neutrinos and New Particles in High Energy Physics and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Irina Mocioiu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

High-energy physics and particle astrophysics are very dynamical fields, with
new data revealing evidence of physics beyond the standard model through
neutrino oscillations, dark matter and dark energy. This project is aimed at
advancing the theoretical understanding of such aspects of physics beyond the
standard model and at maximizing the amount of information that can be obtained
from the experimental data by considering new analysis frameworks and exploring
new connections between different phenomena. A significant effort in high energy
physics is dedicated to extending the evidence for neutrino oscillations that
has accumulated over the past decade. As part of this effort, the PI plans to
work on optimizing the next generation of neutrino experiments and developing a
better framework for understanding the experimental data and its implications
for theoretical models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical model building is
addressed by emphasizing connections between implications for different
observables in neutrino physics, collider physics, astrophysics and cosmology.
Correctly interpreting available data and testing the underlying physics is
extremely important and will be addressed in the project in the context of the
MiniBooNE experiment. The project also proposes novel uses of already existing
data as well as of data from upcoming experiments. In particular, the plans
discuss how the Ice Cube Deep Core array, which will observe neutrinos from the
galactic center region and neutrinos from dark matter annihilation, can also be
used for detailed studies of atmospheric neutrino oscillations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another research direction discusses high-energy neutrinos
from astrophysical sources. The observation of such neutrinos could have
profound implications for both high-energy physics and astrophysics. An
exploration of possible high-energy neutrino signals and their interpretation is
proposed, emphasizing the importance of flavor composition of the neutrino
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are as follows: High energy
physics, astrophysics and cosmology and the questions they are trying to address
are very exciting and capture the interest of a larger public, providing
excellent outreach opportunities. Penn State University and the Pennsylvania
Space Grant Consortium (PASGC) coordinate an annual series of summer Science
Workshops for Educators aimed at secondary school teachers. In the past two
years the PI has helped develop such a workshop in particle astrophysics. For
the future the PI intends to continue organizing such summer schools. Using the
feedback received from participants, the PI plans to improve the educational
material and develop new interactive activities.