* 0855286
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Continental/Oceanic Transition of Mesoscale Convective Systems and Tropical Cyclogenesis during the African Multidisciplinary Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Sen Chiao, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 01/31/2012
* USD 196,247.00

The primary objectives of this research are: (a) to numerically simulate
important weather features of the West African monsoon system including, the
African and tropical easterly Jets, long-lived mesoscale convective systems, and
tropical cyclogenesis in the Eastern Atlantic; (b) to apply data assimilation
for better quantifying and correcting model biases as they relate to numerical
simulation of mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) and tropical cyclone genesis;
and (c) to conduct sensitivity studies using different microphysical schemes in
the numerical model when simulating cases with Saharan Air Layer (SAL)
outbreaks. This research will advance the understanding of the MCSs transition
processes as well as help identify the strengths and weaknesses of the Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) model as it relates to simulating the West
African monsoon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project will:
(1) Undertake modeling studies of tropical disturbances that exited the African
Coastline and formed Tropical Storm Debby, and Hurricane Helene, which
originated from MCSs in West Africa during the 2006 African Monsoon
Multidisciplinary Analysis (AMMA) period. (2) Incorporate extensive upstream in
situ measurements (e.g., high resolution surface and upper air observation
networks) into data assimilation experiments for selected cases from 2006 and to
validate the simulation results with downstream aircraft measurements (i.e.,
NASA DC-8 and NOAA G-IV and P-3 aircraft) (3) Undertake high-resolution modeling
investigations of MCSs over continental areas and their transition to oceanic
environments under the influence of the SAL. (4) Implement the WRF model at
Cheikh Anta Diop University in Dakar, Senegal for research
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed activity is
important in understanding tropical cyclone formation in the eastern Atlantic,
as well as improving the prediction of these storms. This research will enhance
the partnership and increase the human, technical, and physical capacity,
between Florida Institute Technology, Howard University, and Cheikh Anta Diop
University for undertaking educational and research efforts in the area of
weather and regional climate processes. This project will fund two Ph.D. level
graduate students, one at Florida Institute of Technology and one at Howard
University. On the human scale, students from traditionally underrepresented
groups (African and Hispanic Americans) will have the unique opportunity to work
with data from an international field experiment and at the same time, the
project will directly increase human capacity in the atmospheric sciences for
West African researchers. There will be an effort to extend beyond research as
well as education and address operational issues of weather predictions using
mesoscale models. Finally, this project will open up a new chapter in weather
prediction in West Africa, where mesoscale models currently are not used in
weather prediction; instead, forecasts in these regions are currently based on
numerical weather forecasting models that are run in either Europe or the United
States. The capability to run their own models and adapt them to the
characteristics of their region will significantly improve African forecasting
abilities.