* 0855820
* Guidelines for Enhancing Fire Endurance of FRP-Strengthened Reinforced Concrete Beams
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Venkatesh Kodur, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

The objective of this project is to conduct experimental and analytical studies
to develop test data, validated numerical model, performance-based design
guidelines, and practical solutions for fire-safe design of fiber-reinforced
polymer (FRP)-strengthened reinforced concrete (RC) beams. The proposed
numerical model will be able to account for nonlinear material characteristics
at high temperature, different fire scenarios, different FRP and insulation
characteristics, system-level structural behavior and different failure limit
states. The model will be validated using the test data obtained through a set
of fire resistant experiments on FRP-strengthened RC beams. The proposed model
will improve fundamental understanding of the FRP-strengthened RC beams under
fire and external loading. The verified numerical model will be utilized in a
series of parametric studies to formulate rational and cost-effective guidelines
and practical solutions for fire design of FRP-strengthened RC beams.
Deliverables include database of fire resistance experiments, calibrated
analytical tools and approaches, practical solutions for enhancing fire
performance of FRP-strengthened RC beams, and documentation and dissemination of
research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide designers
with fire safety guidelines and solutions for their use in the new designs as
well as in repair and strengthening of deteriorating infrastructure using high
performance FRP materials. The developed tools and solutions will enable
engineers to demonstrate robust design of structures for fire, which is now high
on the agenda of building owners, occupiers, developers, and society-at-large.
The wide dissemination of the research results and data to researchers,
practitioners and students is planned for quick implementation of the design
guidelines in practice. The project will also train graduate students as the
future generation of engineers for economic design of buildings and civil
infrastructure systems to enhance their fire safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;