* 0855774
* Collaborative Research: High Pressure Experimental Melt Density
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Carl Agee, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2014
* USD 326,845.00

This research is a highly coordinated, multi-lab, collaborative effort to
measure the density and compressibility of magmas that form during melting in
the Earth's interior. The measurements will greatly advance our ability to
predict the conditions under which magmas will rise buoyantly to the Earth's
surface and erupt as lavas or form volcanoes. The measurements will also reveal
the conditions and depths where magmas are too dense to rise to the surface,
remaining either trapped by neutral buoyancy, or sinking further into our
planet's deep interior. The experimental data will also provide new insight into
the way in which the Earth was differentiated into crust, mantle, and core
during its primordial formation stage. The collaborative effort combines
experimental techniques that span the entire range of pressure and temperature
conditions that exist for melting and magma production in the Earth. The highest
pressures, simulating the deepest regions of Earth's mantle, will be done under
dynamic compression at the Caltech Shockwave Laboratory, the intermediate
pressures will be carried out under static compression in large presses at the
University of New Mexico's High Pressure Laboratory, and the near-surface
magmatic conditions will be studied in high temperature furnaces with ultrasonic
techniques at the University of Michigan's Experimental Petrology Laboratory.

The new data will lead to the development of an empirically-based equation of
state and a model for multicomponent silicate melts. This model should allow
precise characterization of the locations of crystal/melt density crossovers in
the upper mantle, transition zone, lower mantle, and D" layer. This equation of
state will be used in models of differentiation of a whole-mantle magma ocean or
in defining the chemistry and dynamics of possible silicate melting at the
modern core-mantle boundary. The investigators expect that the data will also
provide the essential basis for development of next-generation melt models that
encompass explicit speciation and/or non-ideal mixing terms. The data gathered
under this proposal will be a precious resource for all future studies of melt
properties and igneous differentiation at high pressure. Never before have such
a wide range of techniques been applied to a common set of samples; together the
complementary data sets will significantly enhance our understanding of magma
physics within our planet.