* 0855272
* CI-ADDO-NEW: CRCNS.ORG - online repository for high-quality neuroscience data and resources for computational neuroscience
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Bruno Olshausen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,464,999.00

This project will develop and operate a community infrastructure, CRCNS.ORG, to
enable the sharing of data needed by the computational neuroscience community,
to enhance and foster collaborations among theoretical and experimental
researchers, and to further the development and testing of computational
theories of brain function. This infrastructure will widen the spectrum of
techniques applied to brain data, enabling discoveries that go beyond the scopes
of individual laboratories.

The infrastructure targets the communities of neuroscience and related fields
such as computer science, physics, mathematics, statistics, and engineering in
which investigators seek access to high-quality neurophysiology data, including
electrical, magnetic, and optical recordings from single neurons, neural
ensembles, and brain regions. Development activities are aimed at lowering the
barriers to contributing, accessing, and using neurophysiology data.
Standardized methods will be developed for storing and annotating data in a
self-describing, hierarchical format, and enabling flexible on-line access.
Scalable methods will be developed to enable users to find potentially useful
data and to provide means for online visualization and some on-line analysis.
Operations activities will support users and data contributors as well as
community outreach activities. Three summer training courses will be held to
introduce students and researchers to methods and conventions concerning
organization, visualization, and analysis of neuroscience data, and how to use
the specific resources of the repository.

