* 0855603
* Wireless Signal Networks for Subsurface Modeling and Geo-Event Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Liang Cheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 209,835.00

This CAREER proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate
a novel wireless signal network that can function as a versatile sensor to
characterize properties of subsurface geo-media and to monitor indiscriminate
geo-events. The proposed network is based upon algorithmic evaluation of real-
time link quality signals among distributed wireless transceivers.&lt;br/&gt;The
concept of functional signal advocates that the variation of the link quality
between wireless transceivers can be used as an effective sensing mechanism
which reflects characteristics of geo-media subjected to various geo-events.
This novel method aims to integrate wireless signal networks providing a global
geo-media measurement system and to optimize the usage of link quality data from
embedded wireless sensors in distributed configuration. This not only enables to
evaluate and visualize entire geo-system but also helps develop knowledge of
functional-signal map to benchmark such continuums through spatiotemporal
calibrations of wireless link quality. The work plan includes small-scale 1D
calibrations, model design, simulator development, and large-scale laboratory
tests at Lehigh University and Lafayette College. &lt;br/&gt;A modulated course
will be developed for geo-engineering and wireless signal network studies. The
research team will partner with various institutional outreach programs to
target underrepresented groups and participate to a yearly workshop for high
school students.