* 0855560
* Two Experiments Involving Atomic Rubidium: 4D Excited State Absolute Photoionization Cross Section Measurements and 5S-5D Two-Photon Degenerate Four-Wave Mixing Studies
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Alina Gearba, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 09/30/2014
* USD 349,997.00

This award supports two experimental research projects involving atomic
rubidium. The first consists of absolute measurements of the photoionization
cross-section of the 4D5/2 excited state of laser-cooled rubidium atoms.
Photoionization studies are relevant for sensitive and state-selective detection
of trapped atomic and molecular species, as well as for plasma research,
including ultracold plasma formation. Excited D states are of particular
interest for fundamental tests of atomic theory. Rubidium atoms cooled and
trapped in a standard magneto-optical trap will be subsequently excited to the
4D5/2 state via a two-step process and subjected to the photoionizing laser. The
photoionization rate will be measured versus several ionizing laser intensities
and several wavelengths below the photoionization wavelength from which relative
photoionization cross sections will be determined. The photoionization
measurements will be subsequently put on an absolute scale by performing
accurate measurements of the excited state fraction using a charge transfer
technique. The experimental results will be compared for consistency with
theoretical calculations. The second project involves theoretical and
experimental studies of the 5S1/2-5D5/2 two-photon degenerate four-wave mixing
in a rubidium vapor cell. Degenerate four-wave mixing is a high resolution
spectroscopy technique which can be used to investigate phenomena such as
optical pumping, relaxation, diffusion, collision and quenching processes.
Potential applications include phase corrections of aberrant optical wave
fronts, optical computing, image processing, pattern recognition and others. The
two-photon degenerate four-wave mixing signal will be investigated versus the
angle between the probe and the forward pump beams for several rubidium vapor
cells mixed with helium buffer gas at various pressures. The experimental
results will be used in conjunction with a newly developed theoretical model to
obtain numerical values for the 5D5/2 excited state diffusion
coefficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, participation of Mississippi?s
population in science and engineering has been low. Laser cooling and trapping
is one of the most active areas in atomic physics research, and such studies are
not performed anywhere else in the states of Mississippi, Alabama and Louisiana.
The University of Southern Mississippi has a student population that is 25%
African-American and 58% female, which makes the university uniquely positioned
to make a difference for women students and, specifically, for minority women in
science and engineering. The broader impact of the research is reflected in
providing undergraduate and graduate students with experimental research
opportunities at the forefront of atomic physics, which in turn, will improve
science education. In addition, the research will facilitate extensive
involvement in high school outreach and recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;