* 0855486
* Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics with IceCube Data
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Tyce DeYoung, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jean Allen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 986,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IceCube neutrino observatory was
designed to detect high energy neutrinos from astrophysical sources and to
search for indirect evidence of dark matter in the solar neighborhood. The
observatory consists of a three dimensional array of photosensors buried deep in
the Antarctic ice cap, with 59 of the planned 86 strings of sensors now deployed
and operational. We are using data collected by IceCube to search for ultrahigh
energy tau neutrinos. Tau neutrinos are produced when electron and muon
neutrinos from astrophysical sources oscillate as they travel to us, but unlike
electron and muon neutrinos, tau neutrinos are not produced in significant
numbers in cosmic ray air showers in the Earth's atmosphere. Tau neutrinos are
thus essentially guaranteed to come from astrophysical sources, and observing
even a few tau neutrinos would tell us a great deal about astrophysical
accelerators of cosmic rays and neutrinos. We have led the design effort for the
new DeepCore extension to IceCube, which will be completely deployed at the
South Pole in early 2010. Using IceCube and DeepCore, we will observe neutrino
oscillations at higher energies than ever before, measure the spectrum of
atmospheric electron neutrinos, search for sources of neutrinos in the Galactic
plane, and search for dark matter in the Sun's gravitational well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and postdoctoral scholars working on this project
receive strong scientific and educational preparation in the techniques of
particle astrophysics, high energy physics, and the mining of large data sets.
Our graduate and undergraduate students work closely with scientists around the
world, fostering international scientific collaboration. Undergraduate students
conducting research with us have received awards such as Goldwater Scholarships
and are enrolled in graduate programs at institutions such as UC Berkeley. We
also run the Physics and Astronomy for Women program to help remedy the under
representation of women in these fields. Beyond the field of particle
astrophysics, we use our research with IceCube in a professional development
workshop for high school science teachers, offered in conjunction with other
particle astrophysics faculty at Penn State.