* 0855471
* Noise and Complexity in Nonequilibrium Systems: Small Systems, Reaction Kinetics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Katja Lindenberg, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2013
* USD 435,298.00

Many modern technologies rely on complex phenomena in systems out of
equilibrium. Some of the most interesting phenomena arise in small systems in
which fluctuations play a prominent role and the usual laws of (equilibrium)
statistical mechanics do not work. This project focuses on thermodynamic
efficiency in small non-equilibrium devices, and on mesoscopic descriptions of
reaction-subdiffusion problems,in which nonlinearity, stochasticity, and
complexity away from equilibrium are important. The Fluctuation theorem
specifies the probability of fluctuations that cause a system to become more
ordered, an effect that is observable if a system is sufficiently small. This
project will examine whether the Fluctuation theorem can reveal something about
the efficiency of small systems in the non-equilibrium regime, and whether the
ideas of finite time and stochastic thermodynamics can be used to establish new
universal results. These questions will be addressed for mechanical and chemical
transport in the classical regime and, most importantly, for transport
properties in the quantum regime. The focus in the classical regime will include
transport via effusion, and the microscopic description of a chemically driven
Brownian motors and pumps. In the quantum regime the foci include transport of
particles through quantum dots and the relation of the fluctuation theorem to
the theory of quantum measurement. Universality of nonlinear responses that
encompass both regimes will be sought. Measures to differentiate among various
subdiffusive scenarios such as motion in a fractal medium versus motion in a
regular medium with quenched disorder will be sought. A number of analytic and
numerical methods will be applied. While some of the numerical methods are
standard, others will involve the development of multiscale approaches that can
handle the range of spatial and temporal scales required for this work. Solution
of the problems posed in this proposal will lead to new insights to questions
that have seen an explosive growth of interest with the development of new
theoretical, experimental, and numerical methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this work has two aspects. One is the close and extensive
involvement of members of underrepresented groups. The participants in this
efort have long track records in mentoring undergraduate, graduate, and
postgraduate research of members of underrepresented groups and designing a
variety of institutional initiatives to enhance that. They have a strong
commitment to continue these efforts. Another direction lies in the extensive
collaborative interdisciplinary network that the investigators have successfully
established with scientists in Europe and Latin America. This is made possible
by the essential role of one of the senior investigators as one of three
conveners of a major European Science Foundation effort in statics and dynamics,
and the involvement of the P.I. with scientists in Latin America.