* 0855681
* RUI: Studies of Heavy Quarkonium Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Todd Pedlar, Luther College
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 135,000.00

From 1979 to 2008 CESR collided electron and positron beams, producing a spray
of particles observed by the CLEO detector. Together, CESR and CLEO revealed the
important properties of the bottom and charm quarks and the tau lepton. The last
years of operation were dedicated to the charm quark in a program known as
CLEO-c. The CLEO-c data, now under analysis, delve further into the mysteries of
the charm quark, and provide important new information about the strong force,
which binds protons and neutrons and governs quark behavior. In parallel, LEPP
theorists are developing new techniques for calculating strong force phenomena.
Some apply the power of computers to the strong force using so-called lattice
gauge theory techniques, while others seek patterns that relate disparate strong
interaction processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigator proposes to carry
out studies of charmonium and bottomonium spectroscopy with the data collected
with the CLEO experiment at Cornell. These measurements are important to the
understanding of strong interactions. The investigator has had a long and
important involvement in the CLEO experiment. Having now moved to Luther College
in Iowa, he proposes to continue his work on the analysis of the CLEO-c data,
with the involvement of undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator is an expert in the area of charmonium and bottomonium physics,
hence combined with his long term connection with the experiment is well
positioned to carry out a successful program of analysis of the data. The
proposed program of measurements of charmonium spectra and the connection with
the XYZ states found at the B factories is well motivated and the CLEO-c data is
likely to yield unique information in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
of quarkonium states proposed by the investigator is important to the
understanding of strong interactions and to the advancement of knowledge of
particle physics. The data analysis plan outlined in the proposal provides an
excellent opportunity for the involvement of undergraduates in research at a
4-year college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marvin
Goldberg&lt;br/&gt;PO&lt;br/&gt;MPS/PHY/EPP