* 0855405
* Searches for New Phenomena with High Energy Particle Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* David Hedin, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award will fund Northern Illinois University (NIU) group
in their research activities in the D0 experiment at FNAL, the ATLAS experiment
at CERN, detector development (CALICE), as well as sustaining an extensive
outreach program. The research program in D0 involves the search for associated
production of Standard Model Higgs with the Z, top decays, charged Higgs and
lepto-quark searches. As part of the search the group will continue to develop
the muon and tau identification which are crucial for the selection of the
channels of interest and for the rejection of background events. This program
will continue the Tevatron is closed and the data analysis has been completed.
The ATLAS experiment research program at CERN of this group has started and this
proposal will is fund their investigation in to the properties of top production
and decays, inclusive photon production at the LHC. These channels will also be
used to improve the understanding of the detector performance. Once the detector
performance is understood and sufficient integrated luminosity has been
collected the research program will aims to search for neutral and changed
Higgs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Looking into the more distant future the group is
working on developing calorimetry for the International Linear collider. The
effort concentrated on the tail-catcher and muon tracker behind the calorimeter.
The detector consists of small (high granularity) scintillator element readouts
by small solid state photodetectors (Si-PMTs). The push towards higher
granularity in ILC calorimetry is a consequence of the particle-flow algorithm
attempt to identify the electromagnetic components of the shower at all its
stages. The broader interest areas the NIU group will continue an active
outreach program that includes: school visits, physics Olympics, summer camps,
QuarkNet, Halloween Haunted Physics Lab, etc. The university has a STEM outreach
coordinator and several REU students moved on to graduate programs in physics
and other sciences. In addition the group is involved in new initiatives to
train personnel for the proton therapy center.