* 0855656
* RUI: Models of Hadron Structure and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Mary Alberg, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2013
* USD 148,676.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this project we study two topics in theoretical nuclear physics related to
the structure of hadrons (e.g. protons, neutrons and their antiparticles) and to
their interactions. The first topic is the fundamental question of how the
properties of a hadron (e.g. momentum and spin) are distributed among its
constituent partons: quarks, antiquarks and gluons. Two theoretical frameworks
will be used. In the first, a hadron fluctuates into meson-baryon pairs, and the
hadron's parton distribution is determined by the parton distributions of the
mesons and baryons in the fluctuations. In the second, the hadron's parton
distributions are calculated in a statistical model. This study will address one
of the outstanding challenges to theory posed by recent experiment, the
momentum-dependence of light quark distributions in the proton sea. The
calculations will also provide predictions for experiments planned at Fermilab
and JPARC. The second topic is the fundamental question of how spin and
strangeness are related in the production of strange particles. We will consider
reactions in which a hyperon and its antiparticle (e.g. Lambda and anti-Lambda)
are created by the annihilation of an antiproton and a proton. Our calculations
will focus on recent spin transfer measurements at CERN, which disagree with all
theoretical predictions. We will also calculate cross sections and spin
observables for the experiments planned by the PANDA collaboration at GSI/FAIR,
which will extend the CERN measurements to higher energies.

This work will be carried out with undergraduate research assistants from
Seattle University, which has a diverse student population and a high percentage
of women physics majors. The student research experience will be complementary
to coursework, and provide an integration of classroom learning and the
excitement of contemporary research. Students will receive training in research
methods and scientific communication. They will work in teams, mentor younger
students and present their work in papers, posters and talks at meetings of
professional societies. They will also share their work with the local campus
community in seminars and events sponsored by Seattle University student
research organizations.