* 0855268
* CI-ADDO-EN: NetFPGA Community Infrastructure Development and Operations of the NetFPGA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Nick McKeown, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,777,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; The NetFPGA platform makes it easy for students and researchers to
build and deploy high-performance networking systems using Field Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA) hardware. FPGA logic is used to process packets at line-rate,
while software running on an attached host computer implements control
functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators (PIs) began the
beta program in January of 2008 and made the NetFPGA hardware available to any
school by providing a copy of the source-source schematic and printed circuit
board design to a low-cost 3rd party manufacturer. To keep the hardware cost
low, they asked semiconductor companies to donate the components used on the
NetFPGA. Today, every major component on the board is donated as a gift by
Xilinx, Broadcom, Micron, and Cypress. The PIs also made the open-source
software, gateware, courseware, and reference designs for the NetFPGA freely
available on the NetFPGA.org website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The community is growing and contributing back feedback,
creating new courses, and creating new applications for the NetFPGA. Going
forward, the PIs want to continue their outreach program to include deployment
of NetFPGA hardware in backbone networks, other research laboratories, and
classrooms in EPSCoR states. Where possible, they have raised industrial funds
so they can donate NetFPGA systems to under-funded
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
this award the PIs plan to do five things: (1) Pay for professional staff to
continue the operation of the NetFPGA program, (2) Design and develop new
reference designs and applications for the community, (3) Acquire and deploy the
NetFPGA in many schools, particularly in EPSCoR states, and in national backbone
networks, (4) Work with the community to create a self-supporting user-community
within three years, and (5) Explore the design of a NetFPGA-10G ? a 10Gb/s
version of the platform.&lt;br/&gt;