* 0855432
* Radio telescopes and gravitational-wave observatories: Two windows on the same Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Teviet Creighton, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 80,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Over the past few decades, radio astronomy has replaced our
serene, optical view of stars and galaxies with a more dynamic one of exotic
objects and violent phenomena. Today we are on the verge of another revolution
in astronomy, as a new generation of observatories prepare to make the first
detections of an entirely new spectrum of radiation: gravitational waves. This
project will advance the fields of both radio and gravitational-wave astronomy
through a series of coordinated observations between the world's largest radio
observatories (the Arecibo and Green Bank radio telescopes), and the most
sensitive gravitational-wave observatories (the LIGO and Virgo detectors). One
component of the project is to perform detailed radio measurements of exotic
compact rapidly-spinning stars known as radio pulsars. A second component would
be to perform rapid radio follow-up observations of any detected bursts of
gravitational radiation, such as might accompany the collisions of compact stars
and black holes.

By obtaining precise data on known radio sources that may also be gravitational
sources, one can dramatically increase the sensitivity of gravitational-wave
searches targeting these objects. Meanwhile, if a putative gravitational-wave
burst is accompanied by radio emissions, this will significantly improve
confidence in the reality of these early gravitational-wave detections. Both
types of observation will hasten the advent of gravitational-wave astronomy,
giving complementary views of some of the strangest phenomena in the Universe.
These observations will be performed by a specially-trained cadre of student
observers recruited from the Lower Rio Grande Valley, providing unprecedented
educational and technical opportunities to the academically underrepresented and
economically disadvantaged community of this region.