* 0855973
* RUI: Giving the Maestro a Human Heart. Fostering Creativity in a Multi-Disciplinary Undergraduate Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Yunfeng Wang, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 407,279.00

The PI and her team will create, evaluate, revise and repeat a two-semester
multi-disciplinary undergraduate research seminar at The College of New Jersey
for students from the Schools of Science, Engineering, and Arts &amp;
Communication, that fosters creativity, scientific methods, and computational
thinking, by encouraging novel problem-solving approaches. Participants in the
seminar will collaboratively design and build artificial systems that can not
only conduct an orchestra, but that also react and respond to the musicians.
Project outcomes will consist of systems that combine the physical arm movements
of a robotic conductor with animated visual displays that provide feedback
similar to the facial expression of a human conductor, thus giving the robotic
conductor "a human heart." To achieve this goal the PI team will employ a new
model for collaborative learning that stems directly from the research interests
and expertise of the members of the PI team, unlike traditional approaches that
concentrate mainly on pedagogical issues. Students will learn two behaviors that
have been previously tied to increased creativity: collaboration and
computational thinking. The course setting will also be used to analyze the
creative, collaborative and cognitive processes. The course will be specifically
geared toward rewarding creativity, and will compare final products through the
consensual assessment technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project will change the teaching culture in the PI team's respective fields by
integrating research and teaching, and will serve as a model for cross-
disciplinary collaboration in an academic environment. It will bring together
faculty and students for meaningful collaborative work within an innovative
structure for undergraduate education that features novel applications of
computer science and engineering, and which will therefore contribute to an
increase in enrollment, retention and general interest in these areas. It will
foster and reward creativity, by encouraging students to reach beyond the well-
defined boundaries of their individual disciplines and take risks for the
promise of larger rewards; at the same time, the analytical assessments will
improve our understanding of creative processes within an undergraduate
collaborative problem-solving environment. Last but not least, this research
holds out the promise of rejuvenating arts organizations, by affording them a
new role as motivators for science and engineering.