* 0855106
* II-NEW: Infrastructure for model-based security testing, controlled experiments, and education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dianxiang Xu, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2012
* USD 236,000.00

This project focuses on building a test bed that will enable scalable and
automated security testing of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software secure
design and security testing techniques are fundamental to the development of
secure software. Many of the properties, strengths, and limitations of these
techniques, however, can be fully understood only through rigorous, controlled
experiments. This project addresses these challenges. The overall objective is
to help engineers create dependable secure systems. To do this, this project
engages in the following research and development activities:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Development of test generation tools that consist of
three components: a model-based security test sequence generator that generates
tests automatically from a secure design considering two design-level models ?
security and threat models; an executable test code generator that converts
security tests derived from security and threat models to test code that can be
executed together with the implementation under test; a test input generator
that generates actual inputs to complete test cases using a syntax-based testing
approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Development of the testbed that includes
various software artifacts and test automation tools to support controlled
experiments with security testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several tangible results
from this work are expected. The success of this project may open a new avenue
to automated testing for security, which can improve security assurance while
significantly reducing the overall development costs of secure systems. In
particular, this work may make it possible to develop many new strategies for
generating security test code in terms of a rich variety of coverage criteria
for secure design models. This will lay a foundation for evaluating scalability
and cost-effectiveness (e.g., in terms of vulnerability detection capability and
testing cost) of various security testing strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has several broad impacts: the proposed work will support several
graduate and undergraduate students as they work toward their degree goals and
provide them with experience with developing tools and empirical studies. Also,
this proposal is focused on making the resulting infrastructure available to
researchers and educators, enabling them to use tools and perform controlled
experiments as well as train students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota is an
EPSCOR state, thus, support for this project will help meet the goals of the
EPSCoR program.