* 0855332
* Microscopic Description of Strongly Correlated Bose and Fermi Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Doerte Blume, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 225,000.00

Over the past few years the field of cold atom physics has entered a new regime.
The strength of the atom-atom interactions in different partial wave channels
and the confining geometry can now be controlled essentially at will. These
developments open the possibility to answer pressing atomic physics questions
and to exploit cold atom systems for the study of condensed matter and nuclear
physics analogs. Furthermore, these recent break-throughs are crucial for
utilizing cold atom systems in quantum computation applications and as quantum
simulators.

While much progress has been made towards these goals, many open questions
remain. From the theoretical point of view, a key challenge consists in
developing accurate descriptions of strongly-correlated systems. A multi-faceted
microscopic approach will be used that aims at treating strongly-correlated few-
and many-particle systems with high accuracy. Three systems that have become
experimentally accessible during the past one or two years will be investigated:
i) three-component Fermi gases, ii) p-wave interacting Fermi gases, and iii)
dipolar Bose and Fermi gases.

The theoretical results will be directly relevant to optical lattice experiments
that operate in the low-tunneling regime. Additionally, systems consisting of
multiple lattice sites will be considered. The anticipated results for two-site
systems will provide guidance for many-body studies of homogeneous and
inhomogeneous systems. The many-body studies are expected to provide a host of
benchmark results that will be of interest to theorists and experimentalists
alike. The work will benefit science education infrastructure in a number of
important ways beyond the direct improvements to the understanding of cold atom
gases.