* 0855201
* II-EN: A Metro-Scale Vehicular Wireless Testbed with Spectrum Awareness and Spectrum Agility
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Parameswaran Ramanathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 513,765.00

This project builds a unique metro-scale, vehicular wireless testbed, called
MadBed, with capabilities for wide-area wireless connectivity, with specially
designed nodes mounted on Madison area city buses. The testbed is also being
leveraged to provide Internet services to the passengers of these city buses.
Further the testbed is also providing various vehicular communication
services&lt;br/&gt;to the bus network, e.g., tracking of city buses, and some
specialized law enforcement capabilities. The infrastructure is enabling a large
number of specialized wireless and mobile networking research projects in the
UW-Madison campus. A few examples include exploration of new wireless network
management techniques for wide-area wireless networks, exploration in design of
new cooperative MAC protocols, exploration in wide-area spectrum sensing and
their utilization, and in vehicular delay tolerant
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of its educational component, MadBed is
allowing a greater hands-on experience to students in the classroom on design
and performance of wide-area wireless environments. In its outreach component,
the PIs of MadBed are&lt;br/&gt;partnering with a local governmental
organization called Educational Communications Board of Wisconsin to to provide
city-wide broadcasts of certain educational content. The PIs are also organizing
annual visit days for certain&lt;br/&gt;local area high schoolers, and exposing
them to some interesting aspects of careers in computing, through various
aspects of MadBed. Finally, MadBed has also built great synergies with a number
of local, national, and international&lt;br/&gt;industrial partners, e.g.,
Cisco, Sprint, MadCity Broadband.