* 0855535
* The Road to Black Hole Formation and Gamma-Ray Bursts - Bringing together Core-Collapse Supernova Theory and Numerical Relativity
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* E. Sterl Phinney, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2012
* USD 221,957.00

Dr. Christian Ott (California Institute of Technology) will combine the modeling
techniques of numerical relativity and of core-collapse supernova theory to
study black hole formation in the late stages of the collapse of massive star
cores. He and his collaborators intend to establish the dependence of black hole
formation on progenitor star mass, rotational configuration, nuclear equation of
state, and neutrino luminosity/heating. The aims include constraining the
progenitor characteristics that may lead to collapsar-type gamma-ray bursts and
improving estimates of the stellar-mass black hole formation rate in the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project will improve knowledge
of the connection between core collapse supernovae and black hole production,
and should result in improved estimates of the stellar-mass black hole formation
rate. Furthermore, gravitational wave signals extracted from the simulations and
improved rate estimates for compact binary systems will be made available. This
project will contribute to the training of a graduate student in numerical
general relativity, supernova theory, and computational physics. The results,
codes, and microphysics inputs of the project will be made publically available
to facilitate future research and training of students. Visualizations and
animations resulting from the simulations will be used in ongoing outreach
projects of the group.