* 0855343
* The Central Texas 2-STEP:  Attraction TO STEM and Retention and Graduation IN STEM
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* John Idoux, Tarleton State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,215,215.00

This project is increasing STEM graduation rates through targeted recruitment of
two distinct audiences. The first audience is high school students who are dual-
enrolled in community college courses as they are completing the requirements
for a high school diploma. Students in this group are being counseled to enroll
in sufficient STEM courses during their high school years such that they receive
an Associate Degree along with their high school diploma. Upon graduation, they
are being encouraged to pursue a STEM bachelor's degree. The second audience
that is being targeted through this project is recent veterans or soon-to-be
veterans from the armed forces. Capitalizing on the significant improvements in
the GI bill, veterans who have expressed an interest in STEM careers are being
targeted for enrollment in STEM programs. The students who are participating in
the program are being supported by a number of measures shown to increase
student persistence in STEM fields. Undergraduate research opportunities,
seminars with practicing professionals, and meaningful career counseling are all
project components designed to retain students and to prepare them for careers
in STEM. A math-readiness summer experience is also being conducted for
promising STEM students who may need extra support before they begin their
university studies. The results from this project are being rigorously assessed
through a variety of formative and summative measures.