* 0855953
* Conference on Geometric and Combinatorial Methods in Group Theory and Semigroup Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Susan Hermiller, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 01/31/2011
* USD 25,000.00

This grant will support an international conference on geometric and
combinatorial methods in group theory and semigroup theory. The conference will
be held on the campus of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln during the period
May 17 - May 21, 2009. Groups are a useful mathematical tool which originated in
the study of symmetry, including research on symmetries of crystal lattices in
chemistry. Many of the applications of work in semigroup theory also lie in the
study of local (instead of global) symmetries of objects, as well as their use
as an algebraic tool in computer science for studying the operation of finite
state machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this conference is to stimulate
cooperative research among group theorists and semigroup theorists who are using
related techniques. Research in both group theory and semigroup theory has
burgeoned in recent years, with many new tools and ideas connecting these areas
to topology, geometry, dynamical systems, symbolic computation, and
combinatorics. The new methods developed in each of group theory and semigroup
theory have great potential for further &lt;br/&gt;applications in both areas.
The conference will highlight recent developments in these fields, with a focus
on asymptotic and algorithmic properties. In addition to the dissemination of
recent ideas on topics in group theory and semigroup theory, the conference will
provide a setting for the participants to collaborate and establish connections
with each other, bridging group theory and semigroup theory. The conference will
also help recent Ph.D.'s and graduate students to interact with leading
researchers in the area and gain a broader knowledge of their research
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;