* 0855601
* Complexity of Algebraic Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wolmer Vasconcelos, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 129,214.00

The project introduces an approach to the study of theoretical aspects of
certain classes of algebraic structures from the perspective of complexity. The
main objective is the study of algebraic structures--a ring, an ideal, or even a
module--as they undergo smoothing processes. These transformations enable them
to support new constructions, including analytic ones. In the case of algebras,
divisors acquire a group structure, cohomology tends to slim down, and it is an
essential step in the desingularization of singular varieties. At its core is
the inherent interest in those processes that add to the structure the solutions
of collections of equations of integral dependence. Finding these equations,
determining the properties of the assemblage of solutions and understanding the
complexity costs of these tasks is a central region of research for commutative
algebra. The assignments of measures of size, via multiplicity theories recently
discovered by the proposer and his students, to the algebras and to the
construction itself are key aspects of the project. As applications, the
proposer seeks to predict how delicate techniques associated to smoothing
processes will perform when applied to the solution of several problems of
interest, and thereby suggest which mix of methods offer higher performance.
They will also be employed to derive ordinary complexity counts for several of
these problems without previously known classical
counts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commutative algebra, the subject area of the
proposal, is foremost the study of systems of polynomial equations, and of its
generalizations. It has elucidated several structures that occur among such
systems, particularly those tagged as of Cohen-Macaulay type. These encode
theoretical efficiencies in the derivation/prediction of its properties and
offer superb computational economies. Often the full natural set of equations is
not known at the outset so that methods and processes must be developed to find
and analyze it. This proposal is focused on one central process, that of
smoothing transformation. It will develop methods, grounded on the Cohen-
Macaulay case, to predict properties of the closure, devise algorithms to find
it and examine the limits of the behavior of arbitrary (even unknown)
algorithms. The results and methods developed will be used for interaction where
the subject meets algebraic geometry, combinatorics, geometric modeling, number
theory and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;