* 0855274
* II-NEW: A Dedicated Computing Platform for Large Spatiotemporal-scale Atomistic Simulations of DNA Translocation and Self-Assembly
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Aiichiro Nakano, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2011
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a dedicated
computing platform for microsecond simulations to study DNA self-assembly and
translocation through solid-state nanopores. The project uses a predictive
hierarchical petascale simulation framework to study: Translocation kinetics and
dynamics of DNAs through solid state nanopores; electronic properties of
translocating DNAs for sequencing nucleotides; ionic screening of surface
charges in nanopores; pressure-driven DNA transport in confined silica channels;
and shear-induced DNA self-assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computing platform
will also support computer science research in techniques for the
parallelization of such simulations, and for the integration of multi-scale,
multi-phenomena simulation codes for molecular biology and biological materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Petascale simulations of DNA translocation through
solid-state nanopores and nanofluidic channels underlie "lab-on-a-chip"
technology and solid-state nanopore "microscopy" for molecular structure and
high-speed sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure will help in
training a new generation of graduate students. Students participate in a dual-
degree program in which they do a PhD in physical sciences or engineering and a
master's degree in computer science. The infrastructure also strengthens the
annual computational science workshops for underrepresented groups, in which
undergraduate students and faculty mentors from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities and Minority Serving Institutions acquire hands-on experience in
parallel computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on the project can
be found at the project web page: http://cacs.usc.edu/cri/index.php