* 0855351
* Modeling Cloud Responses to Global Atmospheric Circuit Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2014
* Brian Tinsley, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 11/30/2014
* USD 305,116.00

Prior work has shown consistent correlations between changes in atmospheric
circulation and current flow in the global atmospheric electric circuit. The
current in this circuit is modulated by external factors, such as variations in
the solar wind, and internal factors, such as the variation of ionospheric
electrical potential due to variation in occurrence of thunderstorms and other
highly electrified cloud generators. The nature of these correlations eliminates
several proposed sun- earth weather links, and requires a mechanism that also
explains atmospheric responses to global circuit changes due to internal
processes. The proposed mechanism is that changes in cloud processes are
produced by the effect of varying electrical charge in the atmosphere on rates
of aerosol scavenging processes in liquid water and ice clouds. Variations in
this electrical space charge are associated with variations in the vertical
current density of the global circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
extend previously published models describing this ion-cloud interaction. It
will result in creation of a comprehensive data base of collision rate
coefficients for scavenging of aerosol particles by cloud droplets and ice
particles. The outcome will be improved parameterization of electrical effects
on aerosol scavenging that will be suitable for introduction into a range of
cloud and atmospheric circulation models. Once incorporated into these models,
these parameterizations will improve quantitative treatment of electrical
effects on precipitation, atmospheric radiation balance, and other aspects of
atmospheric behavior in which clouds are involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project also will enhance an existing model of the global atmospheric electric
circuit by better accounting for the resistive effects of clouds in the total
ionosphere-earth column resistance. Better treatment of processes responsible
for charging of layer clouds will be developed that include the effects of
turbulence in distributing the charge within the cloud, and better describe of
charge exchange between droplets, aerosol particles, and ions. The global
variation of cloud responses to changes in cosmic ray flux will be evaluated
using this global circuit model. Model results will be compared with available
observations and laboratory work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
work includes improved understanding of the role of scavenging and processing of
aerosol particles in clouds. Electrical effects on scavenging are not a part of
present cloud models. Electrical processes are likely to be responsible for some
of the present lack of agreement between models and observations, especially for
primary ice nucleation in clouds. Better treatment of these processes will lead
to improvements in forecasting weather, and to better understanding of weather
and climate changes due to human aerosol production and due to changing solar
activity inputs. The project includes the training of graduate students in
computer modeling techniques. The subject of human and solar influences on
climate is of wide community interest, and project scientists will continue
educating University of Texas-Dallas students and faculty, the community, and
the media on this topic.