* 0855924
* Measurement of Mass-Loading Effects On Transport Processes in the Earth's Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kazue Takahashi, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 09/30/2013
* USD 375,000.00

Variations in the mass density in the magnetosphere can have significant effects
on a number of important magnetospheric phenomena. Mass loading is expected to
effect the rate of magnetic reconnection and it effects the processes related to
Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves. Mass loading effects the growth rate and
frequency of Kelvin-Helmholtz (K-H) oscillations at the magnetopause and in the
low latitude boundary layer (LLBL). Although the effects are important, it has
been difficult to get a quantitative measure of the mass loading and the
associated effects. This project will develop a database of events for two
classes of solar wind inputs. In each case, the event will begin with a
prolonged period of northward interplanetary magnetic field (IMF), which will
establish a "ground-state" of the magnetosphere. The first class of events that
will be examined is Corotating Interaction Regions (CIRs) and the second class
is periods of prolonged southward IMF. The mass loading effect on dayside
magnetic merging will be examined by statistically comparing the rate of
magnetic flux crossing the polar cap boundary as a function of the
magnetospheric density. The project will use data from the Geotail and THEMIS
satellite missions in conjunction with ground-based magnetometers and incoherent
scatter radar data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include research
activities for a graduate student or advanced undergraduate student. The results
will be of importance to the Geosapce Environment Modeling program as well as to
our understanding and ability to forecast space weather events.