* 0855144
* II-NEW:  Advancing Access and Home Networking Research in NEULab
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mung Chiang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2012
* USD 304,500.00

With this instrumentation grant, the principal investigator will build a
realistic access and home networking environment in Princeton's Networked End
User Lab (NEULab) including a DSL access system, a cable modem access system,
and a home network with triple screens: HDTV with set-top box, computer, and a
variety of mobile devices. This testbed will be connected to national backbone
testbed VINI via GigE links and a configurable router. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will run a variety of experiments, based on theoretical foundation and in
turn shaping the development of theory, on network architectures, protocols,
algorithms supporting media-rich triple-play applications over constrained last
hop and heterogeneous home networks. Through this proposal, several key parts of
NEULab will be established, especially on DSL access network, cable modem access
network, and triple-screen home network. The key equipments include DSLAM, CMTS,
Spirent channel emulators, copper-farm, home gateways, two stages of switches,
and consumer electronics with WLAN
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Existing mathematical
theories and algorithms developed in the following areas will be validated or
falsified, and future ones inspired by the proposed testbeds: Broadband access
fiber/DSL networks, P2P content distribution, content-aware networking,
distributed scheduling algorithms, joint power control and scheduling,
stochastic network utility maximization, and green information technology. Open
issues involving metrics that are difficult to be analytically characterized,
such as delay, jitter, and rate of convergence, will also be addressed. A list
of 9 challenging questions that can be answered in the testbed is provided under
these 7 research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposal
represents a strategy built on top of the PI?s industry collabora- tions and
technology transfers to accelerate the transfer of theory into practice, through
a set of experimental platforms under the umbrella of NEULab within Princeton
University. The PI will also actively involve undergrad students in the
construction and running of the experimental facilities through their
independent work and undergrad theses, and hold summer undergraduate program
open to 10 undergrads outside Princeton every year. &lt;br/&gt;