* 0855265
* Collaborative Research in IPY: Abrupt Environmental Change in the Larsen Ice Shelf System, a Multidisciplinary Approach -- Cryosphere and Oceans
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2015
* Erin C Pettit, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 04/30/2015
* USD 268,566.00

Scambos/0732921&lt;br/&gt;Pettit/0732738&lt;br/&gt;Gordon/0732651&lt;br/&gt;Truf
fer/0732602&lt;br/&gt;Mosley-
Thompson/0732655&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like no other region on Earth,
the northern Antarctic Peninsula represents a spectacular natural laboratory of
climate change and provides the opportunity to study the record of past climate
and ecological shifts alongside the present-day changes in one of the most
rapidly warming regions on Earth. This award supports the cryospheric and
oceano-graphic components of an integrated multi-disciplinary program to address
these rapid and fundamental changes now taking place in Antarctic Peninsula
(AP). By making use of a marine research platform (the RV NB Palmer and on-board
helicopters) and additional logistical support from the Argentine Antarctic
program, the project will bring glaciologists, oceanographers, marine geologists
and biologists together, working collaboratively to address fundamentally
interdisciplinary questions regarding climate change. The project will include
gathering a new, high-resolution paleoclimate record from the Bruce Plateau of
Graham Land, and using it to compare Holocene- and possibly glacial-epoch
climate to the modern period; investigating the stability of the remaining
Larsen Ice Shelf and rapid post-breakup glacier response ? in particular, the
roles of surface melt and ice-ocean interactions in the speed-up and retreat;
observing the contribution of, and response of, oceanographic systems to ice
shelf disintegration and ice-glacier interactions. Helicopter support on board
will allow access to a wide range of glacial and geological areas of interest
adjacent to the Larsen embayment. At these locations, long-term in situ glacial
monitoring, isostatic uplift, and ice flow GPS sites will be established, and
high-resolution ice core records will be obtained using previously tested
lightweight drilling equipment. Long-term monitoring of deep water outflow will,
for the first time, be integrated into changes in ice shelf extent and
thickness, bottom water formation, and multi-level circulation by linking near-
source observations to distal sites of concentrated outflow. The broader impacts
of this international, multidisciplinary effort are that it will significantly
advance our understanding of linkages amongst the earth's systems in the Polar
Regions, and are proposed with international participation (UK, Spain, Belgium,
Germany and Argentina) and interdisciplinary engagement in the true spirit of
the International Polar Year (IPY). It will also provide a means of engaging and
educating the public in virtually all aspects of polar science and the effects
of ongoing climate change. The research team has a long record of involving
undergraduates in research, educating high-performing graduate students, and
providing innovative and engaging outreach products to the K-12 education and
public media forums. Moreover, forging the new links both in science and
international Antarctic programs will provide a continuing legacy, beyond IPY,
of improved understanding and cooperation in
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;