* 0855881
* Collaborative Research: I/UCRC - Water and Environmental Technology (WET) Center
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Rominder Suri, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 01/31/2015
* USD 732,187.00

Full Center Proposal (Phase I) for an I/UCRC for Water and Environmental
Technology (WET) Center

0855881 Temple University; Rominder Suri 0855786 University of Arizona; Ian
Pepper 0855802 Arizona State University; Morteza Abbaszadegan The purpose of
this proposal is to start a new I/UCRC "Water and Environmental Technology
(WET)" with a focus on water quality and emerging contaminants. The lead of the
proposed Center will be Temple University (TU) with site locations at the
University of Arizona (UA) and Arizona State University (ASU). The objective of
the proposed Center is to advance the knowledge and understand the effects of
emerging contaminants on water quality. Emerging contaminants generally refer to
pharmaceuticals, personal care products, as well as pathogens detected in the
source water environment; thereby posing a potential or real threat to human
health or the environment. The proposed research aims at developing technologies
to detect, understand, mitigate and/or control emerging contaminants in the
environment as well as other traditional contaminants that can adversely impact
water quality. Center engineers and environmental scientists using microbial,
chemical, hydrologic and mathematical approaches will work collaboratively to
conduct this research.

The Center and its research activities will involve faculty, undergraduate and
graduate students and industrial representatives; and the industrial-focused
research program will enhance the scientific understanding and help address a
potentially significant health and environmental problem. Many of the companies
of the proposed Center have overseas installations; thus, students will be
exposed to regulatory, social and cultural aspects of different countries,
enhancing their global experiences. All three institutions plan to engage K-12
students and teachers, and will enhance the ongoing efforts of integrating
research in classroom teaching. WET has a strong diversity plan that ensures the
participation of underrepresented groups in all levels of the Center. The Center
plans to publish results in various publications as well as present at
Conferences.