* 0855489
* Automated Computation of One-loop Scattering Amplitudes
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Giovanni Ossola, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 02/29/2012
* USD 111,450.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest and most powerful particle
collider ever built, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), is ready to start its
operation at CERN. This will present a big challenge for the whole high energy
physics community, both on the experimental and the theoretical side. A huge
amount of data will need to be processed, analyzed and then compared with
theoretical models and predictions. On the one hand the LHC will test in depth
the current Standard Model (SM) of particle physics and search for the last
missing particle predicted in the model, the Higgs boson. On the other hand, LHC
will give particle physicists the possibility to explore the TeV energy scale
for the first time and it will hopefully bring evidence for new phenomena that
are not incorporated in the SM. The main objective of the research work
presented in this proposal is the development of new theoretical tools for the
calculation of multi-particle NLO scattering amplitudes, as well as the direct
computation of theoretical predictions for scattering processes necessary for
the interpretation of the results at the LHC. For the last two years, the PI has
been working on the problem of calculating one-loop scattering amplitudes
efficiently. A new method, known as OPP-reduction, has been developed. The PI
will use the innovative OPP-method to compute theoretical predictions for
processes of interest at the LHC. The PI will also optimize the existing
numerical codes used to perform the calculations, in order to improve their
efficiency and flexibility. He then hopes to automate the whole process for one-
loop computations.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are many. As a discovery
machine, LHC will have a strong impact on the media. The PI will organize public
presentations, not only directed to science major but to the broader community.
A first presentation will explain the main features of the LHC and the
challenges of the current models in particle physics and cosmology. A second
presentation, ideally during the second year of activity of the LHC, will give
an update on the scientific progress, at a very general level. The New York City
College of Technology (CUNY) plays a leading role in the education of minorities
underrepresented in the sciences and engineering. The PI will provide high-
quality teaching, resources, and possibilities for students to participate in
the scientific enterprise, where they can contribute with the technical skills
that they developed during their studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;