* 0855360
* Research on Gravitation and Quantum Fluctuation Phenomena
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Lawrence Ford, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project will involve theoretical studies of several
topics relating to quantum fluctuations and gravitation. Particular attention
will be paid to issues relating to the correlation and anti-correlation of
fluctuations of the quantum stress tensor that describes, among other things,
the local energy density in a quantum field. The topics to be investigated
include the effects of quantum stress tensor fluctuation in cosmology,
especially in inflationary models. Previous work by the PI and his collaborators
has indicated that these effects may be able to slowly accumulate, and thereby
have a potentially significant role in the evolution of the universe. This
possibility will be further studied. A closely related topic is the search for
the probability distribution for stress tensor fluctuations, which is of
interest in inflationary models, including ones which explore the possibility of
a "multiverse" much larger than the observable universe. Other aspects of this
project will seek to propose new laboratory experiments looking for negative
energy density and related "sub-vacuum" phenomena, where some quantity
fluctuates below its usual value in empty space. The project will examine
selected aspects of the Casimir force, especially its fluctuations, and of
fluctuations in condensed matter systems. These topics are of interest both for
their own sake, and as analog models to better understand quantum effects in
gravity theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have a broader
impact through possible benefits to other fields of science, to education, and
to technology. The insights and techniques of this work may be useful outside of
the specific subfields of physics being investigated. The project will further
education through the training of graduate students and by the involvement of
faculty at primarily teaching institutions. It should also produce examples
which can be used to explain some of the concepts of quantum theory and
relativity to students on a variety of educational levels. The work on Casimir
forces may eventually be useful in nanotechnology. A better knowledge of Casimir
forces is likely to become important for the construction of small scale
devices. Similarly, the study of quantum correlations in this project may have
applications to quantum information and quantum computing.