* 0855944
* Collaborative Research:  IUCRC Center Proposal: Net-Centric Software and Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Farokh Bastani, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 02/28/2015
* USD 418,807.00

Full Center Proposal for an I/UCRC for Net-Centric Software and Systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0855939 University of North Texas; Krishna Kavi
&lt;br/&gt;0855944 University of Texas at Dallas; Farokh Bastani&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to start a new I/UCRC "Net-Centrics
Software and Systems (NCSS)" with a focus on rapid development of highly
dependable systems for critical net-centric defense, civil infrastructure,
commerce, and other application domains. The lead of the proposed Center will be
University of North Texas (UNT)) with site location at the University of Texas
at Dallas (UTD). Net-centricity is the key to enabling increased productivity,
performance, agility, and dependability in several areas that can have
significant positive impact on modern society. The net-centric paradigm enables
a rich pervasive computing environment, and enables applications to leverage a
variety of relevant information, knowledge, services, and other capabilities in
real-time to achieve breakthrough enhancements. The proposed Center will develop
capabilities to enable rapid high-assurance integrated modeling, analysis,
design, implementation, verification and validation, deployment, and evolution
of critical net-centric systems. The formation of the proposed Center will
significantly enhance the existing research collaboration and greatly leverage
the research capabilities of the participating institutions and industrial
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will encourage
collaboration, and the research will expose students and faculty to state-of-
the-art research projects of value to the industry. Graduate and undergraduate
students at the participating universities and engineers from the various
industrial members will benefit from the I/UCRC infrastructure and industry-
driven net-centric research and development projects. By joining the diverse
capabilities and expertise of the participating institutions and the real world
experiences of innovative high tech companies, the proposed Center will
revolutionize our national research competence. As a leading technology
innovator and a Center for technology commercialization, it will contribute to
the economic growth of the nation.