* 0855787
* Ultrafast and Robust, Resettable Threshold Sensors Based on Discontinuity-Induced Nonlinearities
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Harry Dankowicz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 02/28/2015
* USD 302,001.00

Threshold sensors are input-output devices that switch operating state in
reaction to the crossing of a threshold value of their input. These are used to
monitor and control critical values of temperature, voltage, pressure, etc. in
both consumer and industrial settings. The change in operating state might be
permanent, such as when a fuse burns out, or capable of being reset, such as
with a circuit breaker. This research effort aims to analyze, design, fabricate,
and experimentally characterize a class of ultrafast and robust, resettable
electromechanical threshold sensors. The fundamental design principle proposed
here relies on predicted changes in system response particular to piecewise-
smooth dynamical systems including impact- and friction-like discontinuities.
The proposed research will validate these theoretical predictions and
demonstrate the successful regulation of switch rates using active feedback
control in macro- and microscale electromechanical devices.

This research effort makes original contributions to a nascent effort in
nonlinear dynamics that will transform the field from a tool for modeling and
analysis of observed behavior to a tool of intentional synthesis of engineered
systems. The engineering of man-made devices to exhibit desirable nonlinearities
has the potential to dramatically broaden the toolbox of the applied engineer
and to change the performance characteristics in existing applications by orders
of magnitude. The present work is a basic and comprehensive effort to establish
the so-called nonsmooth fold bifurcation associated with the onset of low-
velocity contact in vibro-impacting systems as an exploitable nonlinear
phenomenon in device design, e.g., capacitively-driven circuit protection
devices. Preliminary results on the ultrafast response following this
bifurcation show a significant potential for dramatic improvement in sensor
performance.

This research is an international collaboration with research groups at the
Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden and at La Sapienza University
in Rome, Italy and will include several extended visits of project graduate
research assistants to the international sites.