* 0855237
* II-NEW: Acquisition of FPGA-Based Emulation Hardware for Research in Computer Systems Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Aleksandar Milenkovic, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 12/31/2010
* USD 161,868.00

A recent shift from single-core to multi-core and many-core architectures and
rising complexity of both hardware and software pose a number of challenges to
computer systems industry. Computer architecture research is crucial in finding
new approaches for designing, programming, debugging, and operating future
computer systems based on multi-core processors.&lt;br/&gt;Computer architecture
research has predominantly relied on software simulations for quantitative
evaluations of new architectural ideas and design space exploration in the last
two decades. However, simulation-based research cannot keep pace with growing
demands of new architectures and new benchmarks, suffering from extremely long
simulation times, over-burdening complexity, and limited credibility. FPGA-based
hardware emulators provide an attractive and cost-effective alternative to
simulation: they address key weaknesses of software simulators - scalability,
speed, and credibility, while offering similar levels of flexibility,
observability, and reproducibility. Modern FPGAs can accommodate up to 16
processor cores running at clock speeds of over 200 MHz. At these speeds, they
enable full-system emulation of complex multi-core architectures, run operating
systems and real-world applications, and are several orders of magnitude faster
than corresponding simulators.&lt;br/&gt;This project will acquire new FPGA-
based emulation hardware infrastructure at the University of Alabama in
Huntsville. It will be used by researchers in the Laboratory for Advanced
Computer Architectures and Systems (LaCASA), to help their ongoing research
efforts targeting new architectures for increasing programmers? productivity and
dependability in both single-core and multi-core computer systems. The
infrastructure will also be used in several graduate and undergraduate computer
engineering courses to improve academic training and learning experience, and
help recruiting efforts. &lt;br/&gt;