* 0855490
* Matterwave Interferometry with Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Dallin Durfee, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 05/31/2012
* USD 169,517.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion interferometers will be a
completely new type of device, utilizing the quantum-wave nature of matter to
detect electromagnetic fields with unprecedented sensitivity. In an ion
interferometer a laser-cooled gas of atoms will interact with a pair of laser
beams which will strip an electron off of each atom to create positively charged
ions. The ions will then pass through a set of three precisely tuned laser beams
that will split the quantum wave of each ion, send both pieces of the wave along
a different path, and then bring the two halves of the quantum wave together and
cause them to interfere with each other. By measuring the resulting
interference, the fields present in the apparatus can then be determined. Ion
interferometers will be functionally similar to the optical interferometers used
in applications such as inertial navigation of aircraft, the detection of
chemical spectral signatures, and the search for gravity waves generated by
colliding black holes. However, the electrostatic charge of the ions will make
ion interferometers sensitive to electric and magnetic fields which optical
interferometers cannot detect. This new approach should result in a device that
can detect electrostatic fields thousands of times smaller and with thousands of
times finer precision than any previous device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
applications of such a precise field sensor are numerous. For example, these
devices will be used to search for deviations from the currently accepted
theories of electromagnetism and to search for a tiny amount of previously
undetected rest mass that photons of light might possess. Properties of
electronic materials such as superconductors and semiconductors, as well as
nano-structures will be studied by using the ions to induce minute electric
currents and to measure the resulting fields generated just outside of the solid
material. In addition, the technology developed in the process of realizing the
first ion interferometer will have impact in other fields. For example, the slow
ion beam techniques may improve the precision of ion implantation in the
manufacture of semiconductor chips, and laser cooling and photo-ionization
techniques developed in this project could improve the accuracy of atomic
clocks. Because this pioneering work will be carried out at an institution with
a reputation for excellent undergraduate science education and with an emphasis
on undergraduate involvement in research, this project will also help train a
new generation of scientists.