* 0855676
* Theoretical investigation of molecule-intense laser interactions using quantum chemical approaches
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Xi Chu, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 09/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-fast
intense lasers can be developed into powerful tools for imaging electronic
structures, probing ultra-fast dynamics, and controlling the electron population
and molecular fragmentation. So far proof-of-principle experiments for these
applications have been demonstrated for only a small number of molecules.
Theoretical understanding of the intense laser-molecule interaction is crucial
for the generalization of these applications and it has been limited to over-
simplified models. This work explores quantum chemical (QC) methods for two
important types of such interactions: multiphoton ionization and high harmonic
generation. To properly treat them, the involvement of highly excited electronic
states and many-electron effects have to be addressed. This is beyond
conventional applications of the QC methods that treat only ground or low-lying
excited states. A series of benchmark calculations will be performed to validate
the methods and to identify the physics that dominates these processes. Possible
improvement of the methods at theoretical level will be in collaboration with
two European theoretical chemists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have
an impact in both strong field molecular physics and theoretical chemistry. It
will help the development of new tools to study chemical reactions with state of
the art lasers. In addition, it will also be integrated into the undergraduate
physical chemistry education in the University of Montana. Junior year students
will have their first experience with computational chemistry to enhance their
understanding of electronic structure and matter-radiation field
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;