* 0855460
* XVIth International Congress on Mathematical Physics, August 1 -- 8, 2009, Prague, Czech Republic
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Bruno Nachtergaele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 04/30/2010
* USD 69,660.00

This proposal requests support for participation of junior researchers from US
institutions to the XVIth International Congress on Mathematical Physics, August
1- 8, 2009, in Prague, Czech Republic. A substantial portion of the researchers
in mathematical physics from all over the world are expected to attend the
meeting. The plenary speakers and the topical session organizers are highly
regarded. The main criteria for awarding travel support will be scientific
excellence, promise for future research, and evidence that participating in the
congress will contribute to the professional development of the applicant.
Preference will be given to advanced graduate students and recent PhDs. Special
attention will be given to groups underrepresented in the mathematical physics
community. Intellectual Merit: This series of triennial ICMP conferences,
sponsored by the International Association of Mathematical Physics, uniquely
aims at covering the most important recent developments in all areas of
mathematical physics. The Young Researchers Symposium, immediately preceding the
main congress, will provide junior participants with a series of overview
lectures on mathematical physics topics of the greatest current interest.
Broader Impacts: Participation by talented junior researchers will have a major
impact on their careers, and hence on the continued leadership role of the US in
this area. The Young Researchers Symposium will enhance the educational aspect
of the conference. Mathematical physics has close connections to all branches of
pure and applied mathematics and of theoretical physics, and has stimulated some
of the most exciting recent developments in mathematics. Mathematical physics is
a training ground for researchers in new fields such as mathematical biology and
quantum computation.