* 0855350
* The Stanford Advanced Gravitational Wave Detector Research Program
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Robert Byer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2012
* USD 950,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award extends the Stanford LIGO group's ongoing program
on advanced gravitational wave detectors to address risk mitigation for Advanced
LIGO and to provide research for enhancements to Advanced LIGO to increase
observatory sensitivity. In particular, research will focus on improved optical
coatings, control of electrostatic charging, and tilt sensing for the seismic
isolation system. (1) The team will include new expertise in NMR spectroscopy of
amorphous oxides in the earth's crust and Raman spectroscopy, to obtain micro-
structural information on bond configurations in the selected coating materials.
Thermal noise due to mechanical noise in these coatings will limit the
sensitivity of any future interferometer beyond Advanced LIGO. Thus the goal of
this research is to understand the physics of the mechanical loss mechanisms so
that we can inform other researchers in the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC)
on the mitigation of this noise source. (2) The team will also work with the LSC
to develop requirements for a charge management system for Advanced LIGO.
Scaling arguments will be used to predict which sources of potential
electrostatic charge accumulations might be dominant. Numerical calculations
will prioritize them and identify those that merit full finite-element modelling
of their contribution to the noise budget. Development of mitigation techniques
will include research on alkali ion in-diffusion to achieve weakly conducting
test mass surfaces that will allow spurious surface charges to relax to
equipotentials without impacting the optical and mechanical coating losses. A
localized UV LED conduction channel to allow passive charge equilibration
between the test mass and the grounded frame without damage to the UV-sensitive
optical coatings will be evaluated. 3) Research will be initiated to develop
improved tilt sensors for increasing the performance of the active seismic
isolation systems in Advanced LIGO using externally excited, passive ring
optical gyroscopes which could be used to directly measure the ground rotations
and improve the performance of the isolation systems which would lead to
improved operational reliability of Advanced LIGO. This research program
includes participation from many disciplines including mechanical, electrical
and control engineers, physicists and materials researchers. The nature of this
multidisciplinary effort makes it ideal for training graduate students. High
school students and university undergraduates are encouraged to participate in
these projects, integrating research and education. In addition, the program
will develop and transfer technologies to the commercial stream.