* 0855314
* CUORE and MAJORANA:Next Generation Neutrino-Less Double-Beta Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Frank Avignone, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,060,338.00

A program in neutrino-less double-beta (NLDB) decay is very timely. One
principal conclusion of the APS Multidivisional Study stated: "We recommend, as
a high priority, a phased program of sensitive searches for neutrinoless nuclear
double-beta decay." NLDB decay is the only practical way to determine if
neutrinos are their own antiparticles and it is the most sensitive test of
lepton-number conservation, an important symmetry in elementary particle
physics. If neutrinos are Majorana particles, an accurate measurement of the
NLDB-decay half-life might well be possible; it would yield the effective
Majorana mass of the electron neutrino which, when combined with the results of
neutrino oscillation experiments, would determine all three neutrino-mass
eigenvalues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funds to support the
USC group to continue their involvement in the Cryogenic Underground Observatory
for Rare Events (CUORE), an array of 988 tellurium oxide bolometers, at Gran
Sasso (LNGS), Italy. CUORE is the successor to CUORICINO, currently the most
sensitive NLDB decay experiment in operation. The USC team is responsible for
the procurement and production of the CUORE electronics from the detector to the
data acquisition system. The PI is the U.S. Task Coordinator for the
construction of CUORE-0, the first of the 19 towers of CUORE. It will test the
specific construction procedures of CUORE, will operate in the CUORICINO
cryostat and will yield physics results beyond those of CUORICINO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Broader Impacts, these proposed tasks provide
excellent Ph.D. research topics. Another broader impact is, and has been, new
detector technology for national and homeland security. A third broader impact
is new cryogenic and Ge-detector technology for other basic/applied sciences.