* 0855210
* II-EN: Mobile Manipulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Kostas Daniilidis, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2011
* USD 298,050.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides infrastructure to
the University of Pennsylvania to build from their existing work into the area
of mobile manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRASP Lab is an internationally
recognized robotics research group at the University of Pennsylvania. It hosts
14 faculty members and approximately 60 Ph.D. students from the primary
departments of Computer and Information Science (CIS), Electrical and Systems
Engineering (ESE), and Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics (MEAM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GRASP recently launched a multidisciplinary Masters
program in Robotics and involves these students, as well as many Penn
undergrads, in its research endeavors. The research conducted by the members of
the GRASP laboratory includes such areas as vision, planning, control, multi-
agent systems, locomotion, haptics, medical robotics, machine learning and
modular robotics. This proposal requests funding for instruments that would
enable us to broaden our research to include the important new area of mobile
manipulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An increasing amount of research in robotics
is being devoted to mobile manipulation because it holds great promise in
assisting the elderly and the disabled at home, in helping workers with labor
intensive tasks at factories, and in lessening the exposure of firemen,
policemen and bomb squad members to dangers and hazards. As concluded by the
NSF/NASA sponsored workshop on Autonomous Mobile Manipulation (AMM) in 2005, the
technical challenges critically requiring the attention of researchers
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? dexterous manipulation and physical
interaction&lt;br/&gt;? multi-sensor perception in unstructured
environments&lt;br/&gt;? control and safety near human beings&lt;br/&gt;?
technologies for human-robot interaction&lt;br/&gt;? architectures that support
fully integrated AMM systems &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers at GRASP
fully support these recommendations and want to help lead the way in addressing
them. Though GRASP conducts a great deal of research on similar challenges in
related areas, this group has not worked on the unique and potentially
transformative topic of mobile manipulation. The primary inhibitor to pursuing
these challenges is that research in mobile manipulation critically depends on
the availability of adequate experimental platforms. This group is requesting
funding that would allow them to acquire such equipment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this group is requesting funding for
&lt;br/&gt;(a) one human-scale mobile manipulator consisting of a Segway base,
Barrett 7-DOF arm, and 3-fingered BarrettHand equipped with tactile sensors and
a visual sensing suite; and &lt;br/&gt;(b) four small Aldebaran Robotics NAO
humanoid robots capable of locomotion and manipulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These instruments will allow the GRASP community to
perform research in such areas as autonomous mobile manipulation, teleoperated
mobile manipulation, navigation among people, bipedal locomotion, and
coordination of multiple mobile manipulation platforms. Advances in this area
are beneficial to society in a variety ways. For example, mobile manipulation is
one of the most critical areas of research in household robotics, which aims at
helping people (especially the elderly and the disabled) with their chores.
Mobile manipulators will also see great use in office and industrial settings,
where they can exibly automate a huge variety of manual tasks.&lt;br/&gt;