* 0855184
* CRI CI-P:  Building a Community Resource for Temporal Inference in Chinese
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2012
* USD 99,695.00

Temporal inference is the task of identifying the location of an event and the
ordering of events in a temporal sequence. To perform temporal inference
adequately, linguistic information from a variety of sources must be exploited.
For example, to determine the temporal location of an event, one needs to look
at the time expression (``at ten o'clock") associated with the event, tense
(past, present) and aspect (perfective, progressive) markers, and temporal
adverbials (``already"). To conduct temporal inference automatically, the
dominant research paradigm in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community is
to provide a large corpus of human annotated data for supervised machine
learning algorithms, which are capable of combining the divergent sources of
linguistic information to infer the temporal location and order of events. Under
the planning grant, the PIs are funded to work with the research community to
define an annotation methodology for a large-scale Chinese corpus that can
support research in multilingual temporal inference in conjunction with existing
resources for English. This involves gathering input from the research community
on (1) the extension of the existing temporal annotation framework for English
to Chinese and possibly to other Asian languages, (2) the methods to bootstrap
the temporal annotation automatically through existing linguistic resources. A
workshop attended by influential researchers in this area is a central part of
this planning grant. Chinese is chosen as the primary language for this project
because of its distinctive linguistic properties and the lack of necessary
linguistic resources to perform temporal inference in this language, although
the methodologies developed in this effort are expected to be readily
generalizable to other Asian languages. Temporal inference is a fundamental
technology that supports many natural language applications, including but not
limited to Information Extraction, Question Answering, Text Summarization and
Machine Translation. With the rise of China as a global power, advancing
temporal inference technology will enable greater information access in a
language that has strategic importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;