* 0856133
* Collaborative Research: Mechanical and Electrical Response of  Novel Conductive Polymer Grafted  CNT Reinforced Copolymers under Quasi-static and Dynamic Loadings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sze Cheng Yang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 05/31/2013
* USD 237,911.00

The goal of this collaborative project is to develop smart polymeric materials
that can report critical material deformation in the 10 to 500 nm range through
an embedded electrically conductive network. Nano-structured building blocks
will be synthesized to generate such network. The building block has a brush-
like structure with electrically conducting polymers as the bristles, and carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) as the backbone of the brush. When the nano-brushes are blended
into the host matrix, the conducting polymers will be entangled with the host
polymers. The brush structure is designed to enhance the signal in response to
nano deformations. The electrical signals obtained from the conductive network
will be far richer in details than traditional plots of mechanical stress-strain
behavior. The details will be used to verify or refute the mechanisms previously
proposed to explain the mechanical stress-strain curves under various types of
quasi-static and dynamic loading conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome
of this project can be used as smart sensors that include structural health
monitoring in bridges, hydropower plants, aircrafts, vehicle crumple zones and
smart body-armor responsive systems. This collaborative research project will
greatly benefit both graduate &amp; undergraduate students by interacting with
faculty and students in science and engineering from two different universities.
The students will be asked to visit local high-schools for demonstrating simple
experiments on proposed conductive systems under various loads. The results from
this project study will also be posted regularly on web pages of principal
investigators for speedy dissemination of information.&lt;br/&gt;