* 0856428
* Heterogeneous Oxidations of Chemically Diverse Organic Species Relevant to Tropospheric Aerosol Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Franz Geiger, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2013
* USD 481,988.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the chemistry of organic
compounds that are part of atmospheric aerosols is crucial for assessing the
impact that aerosols have on climate and the chemical composition of the
atmosphere. Given the rich, well documented organic C=C double bond oxidation
chemistry, and given the abundance of stereocenters in atmospherically important
organic compounds, stereochemistry could play an important role in tropospheric
chemical processing, including heterogeneous reactions on aerosol surfaces.
However, surprisingly little is known about atmospheric stereochemistry. This
project begins to fill this void by applying nonlinear optical spectroscopies,
specifically second harmonic generation (SHG) and vibrational sum frequency
generation (VSFG) to study the interaction of ozone with surface-active,
tropospherically relevant chiral organic compounds, as they yield not only
important spectroscopic, structural, and thermodynamic information with surface
and molecular specificity, but also the kinetic parameters that are vitally
needed for obtaining reliable climate change models. Real-time kinetic
measurements, combined with surface spectroscopic studies, allow elucidation of
heterogeneous organic oxidation reaction mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to expanding the fundamental understanding of real-world heterogeneous
chemistry in the context of environmental contamination the results of this
project also enable advances in existing theoretical and mechanistic frameworks
for interfacial phenomena found in nature. This, in turn, advances molecular-
level concepts of the fundamental processes governing heterogeneous chemistry in
general and helps improve the reliability of predicting the impacts of human
activities on the environment. By directly and indirectly interacting with
students and policy makers, the integrated research, education, and public
outreach activities are powerful tools for communicating the scientific outcomes
to the general public.