* 0856774
* Bering Sea Sub Network: A Distributed Human Sensor Array to Detect Arctic Environmental Change
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Victoria Gofman, Aleut International Association
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,499,989.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the continued
implementation of the Bering Sea Sub-Network (BSSN), a regional initiative of
community-based organizations in Western Alaska and Northeast Russia. The
"Intellectual Merit" of BSSN lies in its operation as a distributed network
which employs people as individual, coordinated sensors for local environmental
observations of socio-ecological change. BSSN will address the following
questions: (1) how have economically significant species changed over the past
century and what strategies have residents used to cope with these changes; (2)
what key biophysical variables and indicators may be correlated to changes in
distribution and properties of ecologically significant species; (3) how well do
indigenous and traditional knowledge and Western science show spatial/temporal
convergence and statistical correlation at local and regional scales; and (4)
what are the major trends, patterns and constraints in individual and community
adaptation to changes? The "Broader Impacts" of this award include a better
understanding of Arctic environmental system change and resilience, and how to
develop appropriate adaptation strategies to change for Arctic communities. BSSN
will leave a legacy for a broad community of arctic residents striving to
organize an observing system that is a valid partner in pan-Arctic environmental
system observations. A key product will be a widely disseminated and highly
accessible publication entitled "The State of the Bering Sea Bioresources:
Perspectives of Local Residents", an assessment based on observations of local
and indigenous observers. Other products will include a tool kit for communities
to develop their own observing programs based on the framework of BSSN, and an
annual illustrated magazine aimed at the village and regional levels.