* 0856099
* New statistical methods for neutral phylogenetic reconstruction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Volodymyr Minin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,199,723.00

Phylogenetic inference comprises a set of important statistical techniques that
allow researchers to reconstruct evolutionary histories of genomic sequences.
Most phylogenetic model-based methods implicitly assume neutral evolution of
molecular sequences. However, selection often drives genetic material to the
same state, making phylogenetic methods erroneously conclude that some sequences
are more closely related than they really are. Although it is widely accepted
that such selection-driven convergent evolution biases phylogenetic estimation,
no statistically rigorous treatment of this problem exists. The investigators of
this project develop a radically novel neutral phylogenetic reconstruction
method that remedies the convergent evolution problem by excluding signatures of
selection from observed data. The method is based on a new framework for
estimating partially observed continuous-time Markov chains. Although the focus
of this proposal is evolutionary biology, the novel estimation principle opens a
new direction in the field of inference for stochastic processes and covers a
wide range of Markov chain applications. The investigators apply the newly
developed framework to several important problems in evolutionary biology.
First, they infuse neutral phylogenetic reconstruction into population genetics,
which critically depends on the assumption of neutrality. Next, the authors use
their new estimation framework to distinguish recombination and convergent
evolution, an urgent problem in evolutionary studies of human pathogens. Lastly,
the investigators employ their neutral phylogenetic reconstruction method to
study the functional role of convergent evolution in the core genes of
Escherichia coli. This last analytical task is accompanied by deep sequencing of
hundreds of genes across a large number of pathogenic Escherichia coli
strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viruses and bacteria can rapidly adapt
their genetic material in response to changes in the environment. This amazing
genetic plasticity enables many human pathogens to develop drug resistance and
escape our immune system even when the latter is assisted by the infusion of
appropriate vaccines. Therefore, understanding evolution of viruses and bacteria
is critical for developing therapies and vaccines aimed at suppressing harmful
effects of these pathogens on the human body. The investigators of this proposal
develop novel statistical tools aimed at improving our ability to reconstruct
evolutionary histories of rapidly evolving pathogens. These new methods,
implemented in freely available software packages, will find extensive use in
biological laboratories that study human pathogens such as hepatitis, influenza,
human immunodeficiency virus, Escherichia coli, and Salmonella. In addition to
the theoretical part of the project, the investigators will undertake an
extensive analysis of Escherichia coli genes in order to illuminate evolutionary
mechanisms that allow this bacteria to adapt to new environments. This new
knowledge will allow the investigators to shed light on biochemical processes
that transform Escherichia coli, normally a harmless resident of the human
intestine, to a dangerous pathogen in other parts of the human body.