* 0856796
* Arlington Undergraduate Research-based Achievement for STEM  (AURAS)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2017
* J Carter Tiernan, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,999,994.00

The Colleges of Science and Engineering are collaborating to increase retention
of incoming first-time first-semester freshmen in these colleges by 15%, to
produce a total of about 100 additional STEM graduates per year. The goal of the
Arlington Undergraduate Research-based Achievement for STEM (AURAS) is to use
research-based approaches and best practices to increase the retention of STEM
majors, particularly women and minorities. Strategies being used include (1)
implementation of the recognized best-practice Emerging Scholars program in
high-loss courses in math (specifically, Pre- and Calculus I) and chemistry
(Chemistry for Engineers and General Chemistry) courses, and (2) undergraduate
research opportunities ("authentic experiences") pairing first- and second-year
undergraduates with faculty mentors in laboratory experiences. A significant
correlation between mathematics performance/readiness and student retention in
STEM fields has been established and is being targeted by these strategies. The
impact of these programs is being evaluated, especially the use of Emerging
Scholars techniques at the pre-Calculus level and the use of authentic
experiences at this early stage of students' academic careers. &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is that it is grounded in current
research on the causes of attrition among STEM majors. A previous assessment of
those factors among STEM students at the institution has determined the
interventions to be used in this project. Attrition among engineering and
science majors at this institution and elsewhere occurs largely in the first two
years. If successful in improving retention in this large public, urban
university, the combination of an intensive focused-study program in high-loss
introductory science and math courses for STEM students and subsequent authentic
experiences motivating students for STEM study could be applied at other
institutions. The evaluation plan will determine the effectiveness of these
components in increasing retention. The components, if successful, are expected
to become self-supporting by the end of the funding period. A contribution to
the Emerging Scholars body of knowledge at the Precalculus level is another
merit of this program.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is twofold.
First, the primary target population for increased retention is first-year
college students that graduated from high school in the majority minority school
districts of Arlington, Grand Prairie, Dallas and Ft. Worth, TX; thus the
increased retention is expected to be in those groups that are under-represented
in STEM fields. These graduates are expected to be exceptionally well prepared
with significant authentic research and work experiences that will help in their
careers or post-graduate education. Second, the results of this project will be
disseminated widely at national conferences and in the scientific and
educational literature, contributing to the body of best practices that can be
adopted elsewhere.