* 0856761
* Wearable Micro-Sensors for Digital Palpation Tonometry and Soft Tissue Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Eniko Enikov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 269,815.00

Measurement of intraocular pressure (IOP) is an important diagnostic tool in
clinical ophthalmology. Elevated IOP is the leading cause of Glaucoma, a disease
leading to damage of the optic nerve and subsequently, to blindness. Currently
IOP is measured via the Goldman?s applanation tonometer, a mechanical device
that measures the force required to flatten the cornea to a prescribed contact
area. Palpation (digital) tonometry measures the intraocular pressure through
the eyelid and therefore, does not require anesthesia and instrument
sterilization. The objective of this proposal is to demonstrate a wearable
tactile sensor that can be used for frequent measurements of IOP at home. The
proposed tissue modeling and analysis will generate a 3D stiffness map of the
eye and improve our understanding of the mechanical properties of the eye and
its tissues. Societal benefits of the proposed research include reduced need for
hospital visits and better management of episodes of elevated IOP and glaucoma.
Further potential applications include prostate and breast cancer screening.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. An innovative application of LEGO
Mindstorms educational robotics to the task of testing of the proposed sensors
will provide participation opportunities for undergraduate students and STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;