* 0856801
* Microbially-Induced Cementation of Sands by Denitrification
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Bruce Rittmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2014
* USD 335,054.00

&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate the use of oxidation of organic
compounds by denitrifying bacteria (?denitrification?) to induce carbonate
cementation in sand. Microbially induced carbonate precipitation (MICP) offers
the promise of a sustainable, non-disruptive and energy efficient engineering
solution to a variety of important infrastructure development and geologic
hazard mitigation problems, including remediation of liquefaction potential,
improving foundation bearing capacity, and reducing (or even eliminating)
excavation and tunnel support requirements. MICP through ureolysis is being
investigated by several research groups in the U.S. and abroad. However,
denitrification is potentially superior to ureolysis as a MICP process in that
denitrifying bacteria are ubiquitous in the subsurface and the process works
under anaerobic conditions, e.g. below the water table, while ureolysis requires
oxygenation. Denitrifying bacteria and nutrients will be introduced into a
laboratory soil column with pore water containing calcium carbonate in solution.
Carbonate precipitation will be monitored by mass balance measurement of calcium
concentrations in the pore fluid and the development of cementation will be
monitored by shear wave velocity measurements in the soil column. These column
experiments will be used to refine a biogeochemical model for denitrification,
establish an optimal nutrient mix for denitrification, and establish
precipitation and cementation rates for MICP by denitrification. Triaxial and
simple shear tests on specimens from the column experiments will be used to
evaluate the relationship between the amount of MICP and changes in the
strength, stiffness, and liquefaction potential of the specimens. The proposed
research has the potential to transform geotechnical practice, not only by
development of a new, sustainable approach to ground improvement but also by
advancing the emerging field of biogeotechnical engineering. This work is a
continuation of work initiated under a National Science Foundation Small Grant
for Exploratory Research (SGER).