* 0856707
* Magnetic Anisotropy in Nanoscale Systems Produced by Fast Laser Processing: Fundamental Mechanisms,  Control and Novel Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Ramki Kalyanaraman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 05/31/2012
* USD 268,115.00

TECHNICAL: The objectives of this high-risk exploratory research are (1) To
determine the role of external magnetic field during laser-induced self-
organization on the nanostructure and magnetic anisotropy and (2) To develop a
phenomenological model to understand the external field dependent effects. PIs
will realize these goals through an integrated activity involving experiments of
nanosecond laser-induced self-organization, measurement of nanoscale magnetism,
and phenomenological modeling of magnetization in these nanoscopic systems. The
control of nanoscale magnetic anisotropy, which prompts the magnetization to
point in desired directions, can be viewed as a fundamental requirement towards
realizing functional nanomagnetic materials. Thus far, magnetic anisotropy has
been realized primarily through the manipulation of two contributions: (i) shape
anisotropy, i.e. with large aspect ratio structures; and (ii) magnetocrystalline
anisotropy via crystallographic orientation through epitaxy or textured growth.
Recently, PIs have discovered that near-hemispherical polycrystalline single-
domain nanomagnets created by fast laser-induced self-organization show stable
and size-dependent magnetic anisotropy in various directions. This behavior was
universally present in all magnetic materials investigated, including Co, Ni, Fe
and an Fe-Co alloy. In this project, PIs aim to achieve a fundamental
understanding of magnetic anisotropy and its control in nanoscale materials
through the following activities: (i) Investigate the role of thermal and
uniaxial strain, and hydrostatic pressure on magnetic anisotropy in fast laser
self-organized nanoparticles. (ii) Investigate the role of external magnetic
field on magnetic anisotropy, microstructure, and nucleation and growth. (iii)
Develop a phenomenological model of nanoscale magnetism for fast laser self-
organized nanostructures. The intellectual merit of this integrated experimental
and theoretical activity will stem from the following features: (a) This will be
the first definitive work exploring the coupling between fast laser self-
organization, thermal strain, external magnetic field and nucleation and growth
on nanoscale magnetic anisotropy. This will result in ?nanoparticle phase
diagrams? that accurately describe this coupling and the resulting
microstructure and magnetic anisotropy. (b) PIs anticipate the design and
synthesis of novel magnetic materials that could impact areas of data storage,
sensing and information processing. NON-TECHNICAL: The broader impact from this
activity will be through commitments to broadening research and education
experiences of graduate, undergraduate and high-school students. Specific
impacts include: (a) The training of undergraduate and graduate students in a
multidisciplinary area comprising materials science, laser-materials processing,
condensed matter physics and magnetism. (b) The phenomenological model developed
through this activity could permit researchers and innovators to undertake a
design and discovery based program to synthesize new materials. (c) Active
participation of university and high-school students (through the Pfizer/Solutia
STARS program) will help train future scientists in the area of nanoscience,
which is of core national interest, and thereby help the US continue its
leadership in science and technology.