* 0856479
* AON:  Continuation of the of Ice-Tethered Profiler contribution to the Arctic Observing Network
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Mary-Louise Timmermans, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 07/31/2014
* USD 4,622,113.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toole
0856479&lt;br/&gt;WHOI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this proposed
project is to continue sustained sampling of the Arctic Ocean water properties
during all seasons using Ice-Tethered Profiler (ITP) instruments in conjunction
with companion instrument systems (proposed separately) sampling meteorological,
sea ice and ocean mixed layer parameters. This combined Ice-Based Observatory
monitoring program represents a major contribution to the Arctic Observing
Network. It is specifically proposed here to construct and deploy 6 ITP
instrument systems annually throughout the Arctic Ocean and to acquire, process
and make the data from these instruments open, free and immediately available to
all interested parties to support science and operational activities (as has
been done in previous years). At regular intervals throughout each year the PIs
will continue to produce calibrated, edited data products to support detailed
science activities which will be made available on the WHOI ITP web site and
archived at Cooperative Arctic Data and Information Service (CADIS) and other
U.S. national data archives. Over the course of this project, the PIs will work
to transition support of the basic U.S. ITP program to an operational agency
(ideally NOAA). In parallel, they will continue to evolve the ITP instrument
design and capability to both improve long-term functionality and to return
additional oceanographic information. A particular focus for the latter effort
will be adding sensors to monitor biogeochemically-relevant ocean properties
such as dissolved oxygen levels, phytoplankton biomass, and dissolved organic
matter concentrations in addition to the properties already sampled by the
current generation of ITPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;