* 0856221
* Small Business Demise and Recovery After a Natural Disaster
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Maria Marshall, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2013
* USD 417,583.00

The process of business recovery from disaster has yet to be studied
comprehensively. Understanding this process is important not only to
characterize and reduce attrition post-disaster but also to determine whether
private and government disaster relief policy, business owner practices and
family and community factors are leading to recovery. Research to date has
narrowly focused on business characteristics and not on the interactions and
interdependencies among businesses, the business owner's family, and the
community. A systems theory approach advocates considering simultaneous
stressors on the business, family, and community to understand what leads to
business demise or recovery. Comprehensive data on business owners and their
families will be gathered to assess the extent to which family considerations
and owner patterns of adjustment to change impact business recovery or non-
recovery. The study will also examine disaster aid practices and policy and the
role of community in business owner decisions post-disaster. The study will
further the development of a systems theory based model of sustainability in
small businesses when the stressors impact not only the business but also the
family of the owner, and the community where the business is located. The study
offers a method of locating owners of demised businesses and will provide
results that include the experience of owners of these businesses, something
that has not been reported in the literature. Survival analysis will be utilized
to follow owners and their businesses (recovered or not) over time to
characterize the process of recovery and demise and examine the predictors and
timing of demise. It is clear that some businesses fail immediately, but some
appear to be survivors but fail at a later date. Thus, this study of recovery
from disaster will to be conducted over time to monitor the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four broad impacts will result from this study.
First, this comprehensive over-time assessment using a large number of business
owners (recovered and demised) will provide direct, comparative data that will
enable assessment of current disaster assistance policy. It will significantly
extend past research by including the experience of owners of demised
businesses. Second, the study will provide a new lens for understanding the
process of both recovery and demise of small businesses, and what may be
necessary to increase survival rates. This information will be valuable to
educating business owners, families, and government agencies on strategies to
improve business survival rates. A third key impact is the opportunity to assess
whether minority and women-owned businesses were disadvantaged in recovery
compared to majority business owners, and if so, in what ways. Finally, the
study will extend development of the systems theory based Sustainable Family
Business Model by enabling simultaneous disruptions on the family, the business,
and the community. The model has never been tested to include the impact of
simultaneous stressors to interacting systems.