* 0856558
* Automating the Creation of As-built Building Information Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Burcu Akinci, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 439,990.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building information models (BIMs),
which represent the three dimensional (3D) geometry and high-level semantics of
a facility, are increasingly used in the Architecture, Engineering,
Construction, and Facility Management (AEC/FM) industry. Most BIM work focuses
on representing the as-designed conditions of a facility, but the actual as-
built or as-used conditions can differ significantly from the design due to
changes during construction or renovations. Currently, the utilization of as-
built BIMs is limited because they are difficult and time-consuming to create
and because existing BIM standards do not fully support representing as-built
conditions. This research will address these barriers by developing algorithms
to automate the creation of as-built models from point cloud data collected
using laser scanners and by developing new representations that support the
needs of BIM stakeholders. The modeling objective will focus on three aspects of
the points-to-BIM transformation process: Geometric modeling, in which raw
points are segmented into geometric components, such as planar regions, and
modeled parametrically (e.g., plane parameters and boundaries); Semantic
labeling, in which modeled components are assigned meaningful labels, such as
"wall" or "ceiling"; and occlusion inference, in which surfaces that are not
visualized are estimated based on the geometry of visible surfaces. The
representation objective will focus on two aspects of the problem of
representing as-built BIMs: levels of detail addresses the difficulty of
handling large 3D point sets inherent in as-built models. Representations will
be formalized that support multiple levels of detail, which will enable
efficient high-level analysis, while supporting detailed analysis down to the
level of raw data points. Metadata representation targets development of
descriptions of how information is derived from raw data and how raw data is
collected. Approaches will be formalized to support the representation of
secondary data, such as deviations from idealized models, missing data due to
occlusion, and sensor configuration and placement. Taken together, these
objectives comprise an end-to-end approach to streamline the points-to-BIM
conversion process and it is likely that it transform the current way of
using/leveraging BIM and 3D imaging technologies. Evaluation of these approaches
will be conducted using laser scan data from different types of scanners used in
case studies generated by our group and by our
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to transform the
way that BIMs are created and utilized. The algorithms and representation
strategies developed under this research are intended to drastically simplify
process of creating of as-built BIMs and will create new opportunities of
analyzing and utilizing BIMs during construction and facility management. The
reverse engineering aspects of this research will also advance the general area
of generic 3D scene interpretation, with impact in diverse domains, including
robotics (e.g., creating building models for indoor mobile robots), building
safety (e.g., automatic mapping of buildings for first responders), and
construction site monitoring. This research will be incorporated into existing
Carnegie Mellon courses as well as a new project course on as-built BIMs, to be
co-taught by the PIs. The visual nature of the project lends itself to inclusion
in K-12 and minority outreach programs in which the team participates. We plan
to make the products of this research available via the Internet, including data
sets and software, which is beneficial, since 3D data sets of this kind are not
generally available and are difficult/costly to create.