* 0856611
* Thermoformed Composite Structures with Knitted Fiber Reinforcement
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Herman Nied, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2012
* USD 315,845.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objective of this award is to design, fabricate and test,
thermoformed composite structures reinforced with knitted textile materials. The
knitted reinforcement will be engineered to improve formability in conventional
thermoforming machines and to optimize the energy absorption capability of the
final formed part during high-impact loading. The two main deliverables in this
project are: 1) Accurate characterization of the mechanical behavior of
thermoformed knitted composites through experimental measurements, and 2)
Development of the necessary theoretical/computational tools to predict the
behavior of this class of composites when subjected to large deformations and
impact loading. The experimental characterization is needed to formulate
suitable constitutive relationships for the biaxial deformation mechanisms of
thermoplastics with knitted reinforcement in thermoforming processes and impact
loading. These constitutive relationships will in turn be used to design
manufacturing processes for complex knitted composite structures that exhibit
optimal energy absorption characteristics using specialized computational
models.

If successful, the results of this research will result in the development of a
new thermoplastic processing technology for manufacturing large load-bearing
flexible composite structures optimized for high-impact applications. Adding
additional functionality to thermoformed composite structures, by maximizing
energy absorption capability, should be of value to U.S. manufacturing
industries interested in developing cost effective techniques for manufacturing
lightweight loading-bearing composite structures. It is anticipated that the
development of a knitted reinforcement technology for thermoformed load-bearing
structures will be particularly valuable in automotive, marine, and aerospace
applications. The training of undergraduate students in designing with composite
thermoplastic materials for load-bearing applications, and graduate students in
the development of advanced finite element software for simulating complex
manufacturing problems, is an important contribution to the state of technology
that ultimately improves the competitiveness of US industries.