* 0856377
* Collaborative Research on the State of the Arctic Sea Ice Cover: Sustaining the Integrated Seasonal Ice Zone Observing Network (SIZONET)
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Matthew Sturm, Department of Army Cold Regions Research & Engineering Lab
* Interagency Agreement
* Roberto Delgado
* 12/31/2015
* USD 603,615.00

Perovich 0856377&lt;br/&gt;US Army Cold regions research and Engineering
Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided to build on activities of the
Seasonal Ice Zone Observing Network (SIZONet). SIZONet Phase I led to the
development of the sea-ice system services (SISS) concept, describing societal
benefits (and potentially negative impacts) derived from the ice cover. By
assessing the nature and extent of SISS, the PIs are able to build a sea-ice
observing network that is responsive to the needs of both the scientific
community and key stakeholders. SIZONet builds on collaboration with several
international partners, and spans the entire latitudinal extent of the Arctic
seasonal ice zone (SIZ). Based on common protocol and coordinated observation
strategies developed in the context of an international working group led by the
project team, SIZONet Phase II refines and narrows the scope of the project and
focuses on sustaining core observations. The aim is to provide data and
information to scientists and stakeholders that: (1) address the most urgent
information needs identified by the Study of Environmental Arctic Change
(SEARCH) and related efforts; (2) meet sea-ice user information needs, centering
on access, use of ice as a platform, and ice as coastal hazard and regulator of
coastal erosion; (3) contribute to development of down-scaling approaches for
climate modeling and remote sensing; and (4) are directly tied to SISS, allowing
existing collaborations to grow into partnerships that can help track and
predict Arctic environmental change and meet long-term information
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations include shore-based and drift-ice
measurements of ice motion, key mass-balance variables and critical snow and ice
properties such as albedo, as well as airborne ice thickness and property
surveys. Measurements in coastal ice, of greatest interest to key stakeholders,
include hydrographic moorings, survey measurements and integration of satellite
imagery. Local ice observations and joint ice-trail mapping provide a link
between sea-ice geophysics and indigenous sea-ice expertise. All SIZONet data is
ingested into an archival and dissemination system linked to the Alaska Ocean
Observing System, the Geographic Information Network of Alaska, and the
Cooperative Arctic Data and Information System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;