* 0856007
* Application of the CAM/CARMA Aerosol Model to Simulate Smoke, Dust and Sea Salt Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Owen Toon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,587,712.00

This project is creating a carefully validated global model that addresses how
sea salt from the oceans, soil dust from major deserts, and smoke particles from
natural fires enter the atmosphere, are transported and then impact the climate.
The work makes use of the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) global
climate models, together with a sectional microphysical model, to perform
simulations of real events. It compares the simulations with satellite and
ground-based data to determine how well the model can simulate the properties of
these particles. Marine aerosols, including sulfates and organics are being
investigated, as is smoke primarily from tropical African and boreal forest
fires, as well as dust mainly from Asian sources. This work complements the
principal investigator's previous work on smoke from South America and South
Africa, and dust from the Sahara Desert. Toward the end of the project these
three aerosol types will be merged along with sulfates, nitrates and organics of
terrestrial and anthropogenic origin into a comprehensive sectional model for
aerosols that will become available to the wider
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has a number of broader impacts. Much
of the work is being done by graduate students from underrepresented groups.
Each student has advisors from NCAR on her thesis committee so that she has the
unusual chance to work with scientists beyond the university. The project will
also enhance the infrastructure for research and/or education by developing the
Community Aerosol and Radiation Model for Atmospheres (CARMA) aerosol model
within the Community Atmosphere Model (CAM) and Whole Atmosphere Community
Climate Model (WACCM) frameworks. CARMA is already a community model, previous
versions of which have been distributed for decades. It has a large user base at
NASA, in the U.S. Air Force, and at numerous universities in the U.S., Canada,
and Europe. It is used for cloud and aerosol physics, and also for planetary
studies. The project also provides benefits to society at large by helping
reduce the uncertainty in climate forcing due to aerosols and by helping create
national tools to address such issues. This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).