* 0856565
* Multiscale, Beamlet-Based Data Processing for the Solution of Shortest-Path Problems with Applications to Embedded Vehicle Autonomy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 185,000.00

The research objective of this award is to apply multiresolution analysis ideas
for path- and motion planning of autonomous vehicles. Special basis functions
are used to efficiently encode all possible paths inside the environment the
vehicle operates in. The key idea behind the approach is the fact that paths
have lower dimensionality than the ambient space, and hence, a more efficient
encoding of the problem data than standard 2D and 3D cell decompositions is
possible. The main mathematical tool used is beamlets, whose unique properties
capture directionality, in addition to scale and locality. The result is reduced
computational complexity algorithms for embedded control systems. Deliverables
include new software to encode obstacles in the environment, demonstration and
validation of the approach via numerical simulations, documentation of research
results in peer-reviewed publications and via presentations at national and
international conference, and engineering student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results will allow the
reduction of current dynamic-programming based search algorithms by an order of
magnitude, thus allowing increased levels of intelligence for a large class of
small-scale vehicles and systems encountered in aerospace, military, and
industrial application, which must operate at the limits of their performance
envelope (e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles, high-speed autonomous wheeled
vehicles, robots, etc), and which have limited on-board computational resources.
The proposed line encoding scheme may lead to new sensors with built-in
capability of automatic image edge detection, promoting the state-of-the-art in
image processing technology. By leveraging established partnerships with local
industry, the results will be transitioned to commercial autonomous (primarily
aerial) vehicles. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the
results of this research through classroom instruction and through their
involvement in the proposed research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;