* 0856399
* Liquid Composite Molding
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Suresh Advani, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 272,618.00

The research objective of this award is to further the manufacturing science of
three dimensional (3D) composites fabricated using Liquid Composite Molding
(LCM) processes. In LCM, a fiber preform consisting of many layers of two
dimensional fabrics or one or two layers of 3D fabric is placed in a closed mold
and resin is impregnated by vacuum or/and by positive pressure to cover all the
empty spaces between the fibers of the preform. Any voids in the composite can
be detrimental to its properties. Under this award (i) models and measurement
techniques for permeability characterization of 3D preforms will be developed
and used in a simulation software developed at the University of Delaware to
describe resin flow in net shape and complex structures in Liquid Composite
Molding (ii) Our modeling and simulation efforts will be validated with flow
visualization experiments and (iii) A methodology to inverse the simulation
process will be formulated so instead of simulating the flow for known preform
properties, a permeability map to ensure robust filling without voids will be
developed. This permeability map can then be used to design the 3D perform which
is insensitive to processing parameters as well as provide the desired
mechanical properties. Deliverables will include a characterization method for
permeability of 3D preforms, analysis tools to simulate flow in 3D complex
composite structures, inverse simulation methodology for creating permeability
maps, documentation of research results, engineering student education, and
engineering research experiences for high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
allow the process designer to apply the existing flow simulation tools to three
dimensional preforms. Secondly, this research will create methodologies for the
inversion of the simulation to formulate the permeability property map which can
be translated into preform architectures that can be manufactured and used in
fabrication of composites structures thus providing a new paradigm that preform
design should not only focus on performance but also on ease of manufacturing.
Once the properties of 3D preforms are well understood they will be accepted
into general use, fulfilling their potential in range of application from
transmission housings to infrastructure applications such as bridges and beams.
Use of 3D preform will also lead to reduction in hand labor for ply layup in
LCM, where instead of placing hundreds if not thousands of individual layers of
fabric, only a few pieces of advanced 3-D preform material is sufficient.
Further still, as these preforms are near-net shape, the touch labor associated
with cutting, darting, draping, and otherwise manipulating fabric placement is
almost eliminated, ensuring reliability and repeatability. The results and the
technology will be transferred to industries that work with the Center for
Composite Materials at the University of Delaware to allow the creation of
improved 3D preforms that have tailored properties for the desired application
with reduced cost, reduced prototype development time, and improved reliability.
Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit through classroom
instruction and involvement in the research. High School students and teachers
will be engaged to provide them with research experience.&lt;br/&gt;