* 0856540
* GOALI: Mechanics of Permeation Barriers in Flexible Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Teng Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 04/30/2012
* USD 308,830.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the durability and hermeticity
of multilayer organic/inorganic permeation barriers in flexible electronics
under large mechanical deformation and environmental moisture attack. Flexible
electronics is being developed for an exciting array of applications, such as
paper-like displays and organic light emitting diodes. The functional organic
materials used in flexible devices are extremely vulnerable to moisture, thus
result in a sharply limited device lifetime to a grand challenge to the future
success of flexible electronics technology. Multilayer organic/inorganic
permeation barriers are emerging as a promising solution to the stringent
barrier requirement of flexible electronics. The mechanical failure of the
multilayer permeation barriers, however, could be fatal to the barrier
performance. To date, the mechanical durability of multilayer permeation
barriers is largely unexplored. In this project, a collaborative research
framework (from modeling and experiments to design) will be built to explore the
yet-unexplored mechanisms that govern the mechanical durability and barrier
performance of multilayer permeation barriers. &lt;br/&gt;By advancing the
understanding of permeation barrier technology, this project will pave the way
for the development of viable flexible electronics, whose widespread use
addresses a wide range of societal needs. The proposed program also includes
integrated outreach and education efforts. The summer internship at the industry
partner provides the students a unique opportunity to interact with
multidisciplinary industrial experts on a cutting-edge research topic.
Furthermore, by disseminating research findings via iMechanica.org and
macroelectronics.org, the project will also increase public awareness about
flexible electronics technology.