* 0856021
* Integrated Framework for Operational Planning and Scheduling Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 02/28/2013
* USD 312,353.00

Integrated Framework for Operational Planning and Scheduling under Uncertainty
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Professor C.A. Floudas &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding for the development of
systematic approaches based on novel optimization methods and tools for the
effective integration of operational planning, short-term scheduling and medium-
term scheduling under uncertainty for large scale batch and continuous processes
in the chemical process industry. The developed computational methods and tools
will determine the optimal operational plan and detailed production schedule of
batch and continuous processes, as well as establish the trade-offs between
operational planning and scheduling in the presence of uncertainty in the
product demands, costs, and processing times and rates. A new modeling approach
for the operational planning with production disaggregation will be introduced
that can address large scale batch and continuous plants. A framework for the
integration of operational planning and medium-term scheduling, applicable to
large-scale single-site and multi-site batch and continuous plants will be
developed. A robust optimization approach for operational planning under
uncertainty in product demands will be developed and applied to large scale
batch and continuous chemical plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead into significant improvements in the
operational planning and production scheduling under uncertainty of chemical
processes. The primary goal of this work is to develop novel optimization
methods and tools that address the complexity due to different types of
uncertainty; material balances on raw materials, intermediate and final
products; intermediate/final storage and cleanup requirements; variable
processing times and rates; treatment of alternative stations; intermediate due
dates; and resource constraints. The proposed work will also contribute to
attaining faster response to market demand of chemical, pharmaceutical, and
discrete manufacturing processes.