* 0856419
* GOALI: Freeze-form Extrusion Fabrication of Composite Structures Using Ultra High Temperature Ceramics and Refractory Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ming Leu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 07/31/2012
* USD 312,000.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) project is to apply and integrate theories in mechanical
engineering and materials science to the Freeze-form Extrusion Fabrication
process for fabrication of graded composite structures. Missouri University of
Science and Technology in partnership with Boeing will research the science and
technology of using this novel additive manufacturing process to fabricate
graded composite structures having controllable gradients between zirconium
carbide (an ultra-high temperature ceramic) and tungsten (a refractory metal).
Multiple colloidal pastes will be made from combinations of different raw
materials (zirconium oxide, carbon, tungsten, carbon and tungsten carbide), and
they will be extruded by multiple extruders in varying ratios, simultaneously
and continuously, to produce components containing a graded zirconium
carbide/tungsten architecture as designed after reaction sintering. The research
will focus on understanding rheology and surface chemistry for development of
high solids loading and well dispersed colloidal pastes; modeling, analysis and
control of the freeform fabrication process; and evaluation of the dimensional
accuracy, mechanical properties and microstructure of the fabricated parts after
post-processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to generate
scientific and technical knowledge on the Freeze-form Extrusion Fabrication
process for fabricating graded composite structures. This knowledge will be
useful to other extrusion-based freeform fabrication processes. The developed
technology will enable tool-less fabrication of 3D components with functionally
graded materials, thereby increasing material flexibility and reducing
manufacturing costs and times for low-volume components that have complex
geometry and demand high performance.