* 0856187
* A Mechanically Based Polymer Microfiber Approach to Probe Mechanotransduction in Calcium Response of Stem Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Philip LeDuc, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 05/31/2013
* USD 444,398.00

TITLE: A Mechanically Based Polymer Microfiber Approach to Probe
Mechanotransduction in Calcium Response of Stem Cells &lt;br/&gt;PI: Philip
LeDuc, Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to probe the
response of living cells to mechanical stimulation is directly tied to material-
based technology. There is though no one unique technology, which can imitate
the physiological environment perfectly. It has also been suggested that optimal
tissue recovery is vitally related to the mechanics of cells and that essential
understanding can be achieved through building new materials based technology.
Furthermore, stem cells have been used in therapy for mechanics based systems
such as in cardiac disease, but the mechanisms of the associated recovery
process are debated. This project will develop a material-based approach to
investigate the biomechanics of stem cells and associated live-cell calcium
response. This project will have important results in areas including mechanics
of materials, imaging, and cell mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be transformative through providing future researchers with the ability to
optimize mechanical stimulation for stem cell therapy, which may ultimately
contribute to successes in medical applications including cardiac therapies and
tissue engineering that could potentially save and make better millions of
lives. The project also will build an education and training pipeline for
preparing future leaders in engineering and science. This will be accomplished
through work with K-12 students, undergraduates, and graduate students. These
efforts will include one of the most academically challenged public schools in
Pennsylvania, whose minority population is greater than 95%. This work will also
be integrated with the Sloan Foundation Minority PhD program in continuing to
build diversity efforts.