* 0856161
* Collaborative Research: Blast Resistance of Polyurea-Steel Composite Structures for Infrastructure Protection
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Haim Waisman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 190,000.00

The objective of this research is to understand the failure mechanisms of
polyurea-coated metallic structural systems when subjected to blast loads.
Polyurea, a class of polymeric materials, was shown to exhibit outstanding
properties in mitigating impact and blast hazard in structures. This research
will result in the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms behind the blast
resistance properties of polyurea-steel composite systems. This fundamental
understanding is needed for innovation of advanced structural protection
systems. Deliverables of the project include state-of-the-art computational
models to predict the response of polyurea-steel composite system under blast
loads, novel structural designs for improved blast protection, dissemination of
research results as well as education of graduates and undergraduate students
with particular emphasis on minorities and underrepresented groups in science,
engineering and technology.

The investigations will lead to better protection systems for global and
national energy supply routes, such as oil and gas pipelines against natural
disasters and terrorist attacks; civilian and military vehicles against
improvised explosive devices, and ship hulls in the event of an under or above
water explosion. Polyurea-steel composite structural systems will offer the
advantages of low cost, and easy implementation to new and existing structures.
Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from this project through
participation in research activities and new courses. Graduate students will
broaden their education by exposure to faculty, classes and facilities at the
collaborating universities. Undergraduate students, with particular focus on
minorities and underrepresented groups, will contribute to and gain from this
project through programs already established at the participating universities.

