* 0856045
* Major: Enhancing Creativity and Authoring in STEM Education-Based Virtual Worlds through Concept-Oriented Design
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Clint Bowers, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2014
* USD 795,845.00

This research will explore how concept-oriented design - a methodology for the
design and development of complex 3D user interfaces - can be utilized in Lunar
Quest, a massively multiplayer online game (MMOG) designed to support learning
of physics concepts. MMOGs such as World of Warcraft, and virtual worlds such as
Second Life, have become increasingly popular in recent years, providing hours
of entertainment to millions of people. Given their popularity, it is also clear
that, if used properly and constructively, these virtual worlds and MMOGs have
the potential to significantly enhance learning in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) education. Students can actively engage each other
and the world to solve interesting problems that reflect STEM disciplines and
collaborate on larger problems they individually could not solve. These vehicles
not only provide interesting learning environments, but also present an
excellent opportunity for creativity in the learning process where students,
based on their knowledge, can author in-game quests with intriguing narratives
that focus on STEM topics, and educators and parents can monitor and guide
learning. By authoring these quests, students can effectively learn though
teaching their peers in a collaborative setting while teachers can create
exciting scenarios that students can explore beyond the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key research challenge in supporting
creativity and authoring in virtual worlds and MMOGs is developing a set of
tools which make it easy for both student and teacher to create in game quests
tailored to STEM education without the need for software development and complex
programming. Concept-oriented design focuses on the author's envisioned behavior
and conversational causal language, to develop a multi-tiered representation
that will guide authors to their final design and modularizes ideas into
understandable, reusable concepts. These concepts are executed at runtime,
maintaining the intended ordering of the developer's causal relationships. In
addition to authoring tools, this research also use a participatory design
process to explore how best to author content and establish best practices for
developing in-game quests that are rewarding and entertaining, yet are able to
achieve intended learning goals that all stakeholders involved with teaching
students can agree upon. Finally, the project will investigate the pedagogical
implications of concept-oriented design as it relates to authoring content in
Lunar Quest and sparking creativity. This work has the potential to benefit
thousands of students at the middle, high school, and college levels.&lt;br/&gt;