* 0856091
* Vibration Mitigation in Inchworm Nanopositioners for SPMs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Santosh Devasia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 161,980.00

The challenge to increase range without loss of bandwidth is a common problem in
nanopositioning systems. The proposed research will address this challenge by
developing inchworm positioners that achieve high-resolution positioning within
each step of the inchworm while allowing large range with multiple steps.
Towards this, the research will develop novel vibration mitigation tools for
systems with switched dynamics. The research will: (1) develop optimal output
transitions without vibrations which improve on current state transition
approaches; (2) invert switched dynamic systems that arise due to the changing
of boundary conditions in the inchworm; (3) account for hysteresis input
nonlinearities using inversion methods; and (4) develop preview-based techniques
for the integrated tracking/resetting problem. The resulting optimal approach
will be used to mitigate transitional vibrations caused by each inchworm step.
Thereby, the proposed work will achieve large-range, high-bandwidth positioning
without loss of resolution due to movement induced vibrations during
transitions. The vibration-mitigation strategy for the inchworm will be
evaluated during nanoscale positioning. In summary, the proposed research will:
(1) develop new tools for vibration mitigation in systems with switched
dynamics; and (2) increase the bandwidth without loss of range in
nanopositioning systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will have broad impact on nanotechnology since it improves nanopositioning in
scanning probe microscopes, which are key enabling tools in nanoscience and
nanotechnology. The proposed research will provide training and education in
nanotechnologies through novel senior-level capstone design projects in
nanopositioning and vibration mitigation. Additionally, the proposed work will
offer research and educational experience to undergraduate students and promote
the involvement of minority students in research. Thus, the proposed work will
help to build the research and human resource infrastructure needed in emerging
nanotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;