* 0856753
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Miniaturized Gas Sensors with Hybrid Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Marija Gajdardziska-Josifovska, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Collaborative Projects&lt;br/&gt;0856753 &lt;br/&gt;Junhong
Chen&lt;br/&gt;University of
Wisconsin/Milwaukee&lt;br/&gt;And&lt;br/&gt;0856719&lt;br/&gt;Steven
Lewis&lt;br/&gt;University of Georgia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pair of
collaborative projects will be awarded using funds made available by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this collaborative project is to
investigate a novel sensing platform of a carbon nanotube (CNT) coated with
discrete SnO2 nanocrystals for miniaturized gas sensors. The project will
combine experiments (atomic, electronic, electrical, and spectroscopic
characterizations) with theoretical modeling to establish the composition-
structure-processing-sensing relationship for revealing the novel sensing
mechanism. Through the marriage between high-performance CNTs and the popular
sensing material SnO2, the proposed hybrid SnO2 nanocrystal-CNT platform allows
for the room-temperature sensing of various gases at high sensitivity, which is
otherwise unattainable with either SnO2 sensors (high-temperature operation
required) or CNT sensors (only sensitive to selected gases).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project research results are expected to lead to
miniaturized gas sensors that can rapidly and accurately detect and
differentiate trace amounts of chemical species for various applications. The
detailed experimental investigation of the atomic structure, electronic
properties, electrical characteristics, surface chemistry, and surface dynamics
of nanosensors, together with first-principles models, will not only illuminate
the underlying mechanisms of the novel sensing platform but also contribute to
the fundamental understanding of transport phenomena in low-dimensional
materials and hybrid systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create a
unique interdisciplinary learning and research environment to train students in
materials science, surface science, and nanodevice engineering. The project also
will attract underrepresented groups through engagement with Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;