* 0856421
* The Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring Network--CALM III (2009-2014): Long-term Observations on the Climate-Active Layer-Permafrost System
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2009
* Frederick Nelson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Martin Jeffries
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,662,201.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the
continuation of the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) program as an
integral part of the Arctic Observing Network (AON) and the Study of
Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH). The active-layer network of 168 sites
represents the only coordinated and standardized program of observations using
standard measurement protocols designed to observe and detect decadal changes in
the dynamics of seasonal thawing and freezing in high-latitude soils. The
'Intellectual Merit' of this study lies in the need for long-term time series of
active layer depth, ground temperature, and thaw settlement measurements at the
same locations and across diverse terrain types and regions in order to identify
scales of spatial variation, establish trends, and validate models. The data
will also contribute to detailed process studies, and validating and developing
climate change, ecology, hydrology and geocryology models. Education and
outreach are essential components of the 'Broader Impacts' of CALM. The project
will provide opportunities for field experience and educational participation at
levels ranging from elementary school through postdoctoral. Local, predominantly
indigenous people, will assist with the observations at remote sites. CALM will
continue to incorporate data into its Web-based database, and transfer all
existing and new data to the AON archive CADIS.