* 0856122
* Novel Processing of WC/Co Hardmetals with Simultaneous Improvements in Hardness and Toughness Derived From Nanocrystalline Powder
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Leon Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 311,999.00

The research objective of this award is to develop innovative manufacturing
methods that can produce novel materials derived from nanocrystalline powder
with low costs and superior mechanical properties simultaneously. Specifically,
a novel manufacturing process, termed as the Integrated Mechanical and Thermal
Activation (IMTA) process, will be utilized to make low cost nanostructured
WC/Co powder which will subsequently be densified using the innovative sintering
strategy to allow the conversion of nano-WC particles to submicrometer-sized WC
platelets. The dense WC/Co cermets with submicrometer-sized WC platelets are
expected to offer unprecedented simultaneous improvements in hardness and
toughness. To achieve the best improvements, WC platelets will be fabricated to
have both high aspect ratio and thin thickness. The thin thickness will limit
the slip distance of dislocations and thus provide high hardness, while the high
aspect ratio of platelets will offer effective crack deflection and thus result
in high toughness. Thin and high aspect ratio WC platelets will be produced via
detailed and comprehensive studies of the effects of sintering conditions, the
size of the starting WC particles, the Co concentration, the free carbon
concentration, and addition of a small amount of dopants. The microstructure of
WC/Co with and without doping sintered under various conditions will be
characterized in detail to elucidate the formation mechanism of WC platelets and
the effect of various dopants and processing conditions. Deliverables include
mechanistic understanding of the effects of sintering conditions, the size of
the starting WC particles, the Co concentration, the free carbon concentration,
and a small amount of dopants on the formation of WC platelets, dense WC/Co
cermets with simultaneous improvements in hardness and toughness, engineering
students education, and research experience for middle/high school
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will produce a new generation of low cost and high
performance WC/Co cermets with superior hardness and toughness for advanced
structural applications by many industries. These novel WC/Co cermets could also
open up new opportunities in areas outside their current application windows.
The understanding developed from this research will lay a scientific foundation
for enhancing anisotropic growth of crystals and can be applied directly to
other hardmetals such as WC-Ni, WC-NiCo, and WC-CoCr. The scientific principles
discovered can also shed light on the processing and microstructure design of
advanced ceramics with the anisotropic grain growth property (e.g., Ti3SiC2,
Ti3AlC2, and liquid-phase-sintered Si3N4, SiC and Al2O3). Graduate and
undergraduate engineering students will benefit from this project through
classroom instruction and involvement in the research. Through specially
designed summer programs, middle/high school underrepresented minority students
will participate in the research. These summer programs will nurture
underrepresented minorities towards positive thinking, increase their interest
in science and technology, and motivate them to pursue higher education and
become future leaders of the society.&lt;br/&gt;