* 0856256
* Collaborative Research:  Combining Gradient and Adaptive Search in Simulation Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Steven Marcus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 350,004.00

"Combining Gradient and Adaptive Search in Simulation
Optimization"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research project aims to make
significant theoretical and practical advances in simulation optimization.
Specifically, we plan on doing the following: (i) develop new simulation
optimization algorithms based on different sequences of the so-called
``reference distributions" in a recently developed approach called model
reference adaptive search, and new hybrid global-local search algorithms
integrating local gradient search and problem structure; and (ii) conduct
rigorous theoretical analysis of the resulting algorithms, both finite-time
behavior using an adaptive search framework and asymptotic behavior using a
novel connection to stochastic approximation methods. We will also develop
efficient computational selection methods for implementing these algorithms in
simulation optimization, where the objective function requires multiple
simulation replications, which are computationally expensive, in order to
estimate system performance. A wide variety of applications from supply chain
management to financial engineering will be tested for the purposes of
investigating specific gradient search algorithms and problem structure, and
evaluating the effectiveness in terms of empirical behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulation is used throughout the US industry, so if
successful, the resulting optimization algorithms will have broad practical
applicability. To attack difficult problems arising from large, complex
stochastic discrete-event simulation models will require significant new
methodologies, leading to research advances in both algorithmic development and
convergence analysis. In terms of theory, the rigorous analysis will explore
connections to a rich body of results in stochastic approximation and stochastic
adaptive research that have never been employed in this manner before, yielding
new insights into both finite-time performance and asymptotic rates of
convergence. In terms of practice, this line of research fills an important part
of the "analytics" computational tool kit that has led to increased
competitiveness for US businesses from manufacturers and retailers with global
supply chains to financial services managing complex risk factors.