* 0856046
* Collaborative Research:  I/URC Planning Grant - Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Rhett Smith, Clemson University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0856032 Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University; Daniel Inman &lt;br/&gt;0856046 Clemson University; Stephen Foulger
&lt;br/&gt;0855891 University of Texas, Dallas; Bruce Gnade
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks a planning grant for a new multi-
university Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems to focus on
recovery (harvesting) of unused energy from various sources such as radio and
television towers, satellites and various portable electronics. Virginia
Polytechnic Institute (VT), Clemson University (CU) and the University of Texas,
Dallas (UTD) are collaborating to establish the proposed center, with VT as the
lead institution. The research plan includes developing new products and designs
in the following areas: Energy Harvesting for Vibration Measurement, PiezoCell
and Panels for Harvesting Wind Energy, VLSI Circuit Design, Materials for "Self-
Powered" Position and Speed Sensors and Electrical Energy Storage, Micro-Scale
Thermal to Electric Energy Conversion, Magnetic to Electric Energy Conversion in
Ocean Environments, On-Chip Energy Source Using Indium Nitride Quantum Dot Solar
Cells, Piezoelectric Cantilevers Based Energy Harvesters, and Roll-to-Roll
Printing of Organic Energy Harvesters. VT, CU and UTD plan to use the NSF
planning grant fund to hold a meeting with prospective industrial partners, and
to develop an initial research agenda for CEHMS of sufficient commercial
interest that attendees will be willing to invest in and sustain the Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center has the potential to improve
sustainability and profitability of US manufacturing firms by developing new
technologies that will reduce energy consumption and harvest energy that is
normally wasted. Industrial members will benefit from the research conducted at
the Center in areas of materials synthesis, thin-film deposition, energy
conversion devices, micro/nano electronics, electrochemical storage systems,
sensor development, system design, integrated hybrid architectures,
computational and theoretical modeling, and nano-scale fabrication techniques.
Students and faculty members of CEHMS will gain valuable experience by
interaction with industry partners.