* 0856262
* Mechanics of Self-assembled Peptide Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Justin Barone, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 230,452.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to elucidate
important self-assembly mechanisms and peptide molecular interactions in nature
that could be easily exploited to make high performance materials. These
materials could have properties meeting or exceeding keratin, silk, or collagen,
which have a unique combination of rigidity, toughness, low density, and
biocompatibility that is difficult to match synthetically. The research will
result in a model of peptide performance based on morphology and will describe
how nature utilizes many weak interactions rather than a few strong ones to
build high performance materials. Outcomes include a fundamental thermodynamic
model relating peptide performance to morphology, property measurement of
peptides and enhancement of methods to obtain those properties, training and
mentoring of undergraduate and graduate engineering students, and high school
science lessons that meet current standards of learning developed through
collaborations with science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
research results will allow for the design of high performance biomimetic
materials from sustainable sources that are abundant and inexpensive. The
spectrum of applications for these materials ranges from biodegradable plastics
to highly texturized foods to materials that can be implanted into the human
body. Dissemination of results would allow for a simple paradigm of bio-based,
non-petroleum materials that could be processed in low energy ways similar to
the processes nature employs. This paradigm could be used by the chemicals and
materials industries. High school, undergraduate, and graduate students will
receive personal mentoring and hands-on experiences in emerging engineering
disciplines related to biotechnology. High school teachers will have the
opportunity to develop laboratories and curricula on the latest bio-based
technologies to stimulate student interest in topics of current relevance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;