* 0856626
* Measuring Thermomechanical Material Response During Micromachining by In Situ Scanning Electron Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* M Ravi Shankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2014
* USD 325,386.00

The objective of this research is to elucidate the deformation mechanics of chip
formation in micromachining using in situ scanning electron microscopy. In this
study, metal cutting will be performed on a customized sub-stage within the
sample chamber of a scanning electron microscope in a configuration that enables
direct visualization and characterization of the deformation zone in secondary
and backscattered electron imaging modes. Subsequently, the mechanics of
deformation will be delineated in situ through digital image correlation of
sequences of secondary electron micrographs of the micromachining process. The
microstructural consequences of micrometer-scale surface generation will be
studied using electron backscattered diffraction techniques. Together, these
characterizations can enable a detailed demarcation of the thermomechanical
material response during material removal at small length-
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research may significantly
enhance the current level of understanding of the micromachining process and
possibly supplant the extant experimental paradigms which offer at best, a post-
deformation, ex situ scheme entirely devoid of the dynamic details of the
operative micromechanisms. It is envisioned that the interdisciplinary framework
inherent to this research may offer unique opportunities for multi-faceted
development of graduate students by bringing together elements of vacuum device
design, quantitative electron microscopy as well as computational image
processing methodologies. An impact on advancing undergraduate education is
envisaged via integration with existing courses in manufacturing and creation of
a new course aimed at seniors and juniors in the Industrial, Mechanical and
Materials Science disciplines.