* 0856588
* A Functional Approach for the Analysis of Peak Wind Loads on Houses Exposed to Hurricanes and Validation of Wind Tunnel Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Muhammad Hajj, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 230,998.00

Field data collected under the Florida Coastal Monitoring Program (FCMP) during
recent hurricane seasons on prototype buildings has revealed that measured
pressure coefficients exceeded the provisions of building codes and that wind
damage occurred at wind speeds well below the design wind speeds presented in
these codes. Because the current code provisions for wind loads are based on the
reduction of many wind tunnel observations into a few numbers, the question
arises as to what constitutes a proper wind tunnel simulation of the flow in the
atmospheric surface layer and associated wind loads on low-rise structures and
what procedures should be followed in translating pressure coefficients as
measured in these simulations to full scale applications. The objective of the
proposed research is to determine whether generic wind tunnel simulations of
low-rise structures can predict wind loads under hurricane conditions. This will
be achieved by contrasting full scale peak pressure and wind load coefficients
measured during recent hurricane seasons with model scale measurements with the
same probability of non-exceedence. The comparison will be based on a
probabilistic procedure that will be employed to obtain the distribution of peak
pressure and load coefficients from single sample records. Different methods
will be implemented and compared to determine the parameters of the probability
distribution function of the peaks. The different limiting factors, including
effects of turbulence intensity and differences between open and suburban
terrain exposures, will also be addressed. The recent measurements conducted in
Florida provide a unique database that can be used to assess the reliability of
simulated wind loads. The proposed effort provides a probabilistic approach for
contrasting full and model scale pressure and wind load coefficients. This
approach redefines a peak wind load as measured in a single record by
associating a non-exceedence probability with its value. The intellectual merit
of this project is that it will enable a better comparison of field data with
data from wind tunnel simulations. With respect to broader impacts, the proposed
research will contribute to a more reliable prediction of wind loads and thus to
the goal of reducing losses due to wind damage. The project team will work with
the Institute for Business and Home Safety, a non-profit U.S. corporation
established to support research and promote construction techniques for loss
reduction from natural hazards. The project team will also work with the
Multicultural Academic Opportunities Program (MAOP) at Virginia Tech to enable
involvement by undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups
in this wind research.