* 0856710
* Arctic Observing Networks: Collaborative Research: Sustaining and amplifying the ITEX AON through automation and increased interdisciplinarity of observations
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Steven Oberbauer, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,200,070.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to maintain
the existing ITEX AON and increase the applicability of the data collected to
the greater scientific community. The International Tundra Experiment (ITEX)
network has collected data on phenology, plant growth, community composition and
ecosystem properties as part of a greater effort to study environmental arctic
change. The network, started in early 1990?s, has played a key role in advancing
knowledge related to the likely impacts of a warmer arctic through the use of
experimentally warmed and un-manipulated plots (i.e., the controls) across a
range of sites and ecosystems that span the major vegetation types of the
Arctic. While of great value, most ITEX measurements are labor intensive and
time consuming, which limit the frequency and spatial extent of sampling. Recent
advances in sensor technology hold the promise to allow sampling of surrogates
of these manual measurements rapidly and over larger areas. This work will
continue the ITEX AON observations and initiate a suite of related, non-
intrusive measurements using robotic sensor platforms (networked infomechanical
systems, NIMS). These new measurements will enable scaling of measurements to
the regional level by linking to existing 1 km2 sample grids and satellite
imagery. These data are urgently needed to improve our capacity to monitor the
impacts of changing tundra vegetation on the arctic system. This work should
improve our understanding of the exchange of carbon and water across the land
atmosphere interface and provide information on forage quality for
herbivores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;