* 0856205
* Tracking Individual Biomolecules via Fluorescence Modulation and Feedback
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Hideo Mabuchi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

The research objective of this award is to utilize advanced methods of control
engineering to enable a new performance regime for feedback tracking microscopy.
Feedback tracking microscopy is a powerful new technique for studying the
dynamics of individual macromolecules, which has already begun to make
significant new contributions to our understanding of biological macromolecules
such as DNA. Prior experiments in this area have been limited to the study of
relatively large molecules and have required the use of many fluorescent dyes to
label the molecule under study. The technical advances we will pursue under this
NSF award will make it possible to apply feedback tracking microscopy to a wide
range of molecules of moderate size using only a few fluorescent dyes for
labeling. We will make these advances by applying modern methods of control
theory to design improved feedback tracking algorithms, and through the
development of advanced signal-processing electronics and motion-control
hardware. Deliverables will include publications on the improved algorithms and
apparatus, as well as more detailed technical documentation to be made freely
available in electronic format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results
of this research will enable new experiments in single-molecule biophysics and
biochemistry, making it possible to apply feedback tracking microscopy for
example to individual enzymes and ribozymes. Feedback tracking can be used
greatly to enhance the sensitivity of traditional optical measurement techniques
such as fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET). It is reasonable to hope that tracking-FCS and tracking-
FRET measurements on single enzymes/ribozymes will deepen our understanding of
stochastic kinetics and persistent heterogeneity in these important classes of
biomolecules. The PI will incorporate the results of such work in his
introductory-graduate level course on applied control theory, and the graduate
student funded by this NSF award will benefit from a highly interdisciplinary
training at the interface of modern engineering and biophysics/biochemistry.