* 0856471
* Passive Nonlinear Automatic Balancing of Flexible Rotordynamic Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Hans DeSmidt, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 191,883.00

Imbalance vibration is a significant concern in virtually all rotating
structures and is an important problem in engineering. Strategies for imbalance
vibration mitigation traditionally fall into two categories; i) passive
balancing via attached eccentric masses, and ii) vibration suppression using
tuned-mass absorbers or active bearing actuation. The aim of this project is to
advance an alternative approach based on the principle of passive, nonlinear,
automatic balancing. This approach requires use of a special class of balancing
devices know as Autobalancers which have eccentric masses that freely revolve
around the rotor?s axis of rotation. Automatic balancing is achieved through
nonlinear dynamic interaction between the rotor?s lateral vibration and the
balancer mass motions. At certain supercritical rotor speeds, the balancer
masses naturally adjust their positions to cancel the rotor?s imbalance. A key
advantage of the automatic balancing approach is its ability to naturally adapt
to imbalance changes without requiring power, sensors or a control system. The
overall goals of this project are to; a) develop a nonlinear dynamic analysis
for predicting stability and limit-cycle behavior in flexible shaft and bladed-
disk rotors fitted with autobalancer devices, b) explore novel kinematically
modified autobalancer concepts to stabilize unwanted non-synchronous limit-cycle
orbits in autobalancer systems, c) and explore placement and interaction of
spatially distributed autobalancers to achieve multi-mode automatic balancing of
flexible rotors. These analyses will be experimentally validated using a
flexible-rotor/autobalancer testrig. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear dynamic
analysis methods developed in this project will have important scientific
impacts in other active research areas such as coupled fluid-structure dynamics,
machine tool vibrations, and rotor-stator interaction problems. This research
will also have future benefits on the safety, reliability and efficiency of many
civil infrastructures, power generation, transportation and aerospace systems
which depend on smooth operation of critical rotating machinery. For example, by
gaining an understanding of automatic balancing behavior in bladed-disks, this
research will reveal new insights and approaches into the use of autobalancers
to enable self-adjusting blade-loss compensation in gas turbine engines which,
in turn, will enhance aviation safety. This project also has a significant
educational mission. By performing this research, the graduate student involved
in this project will be trained with strong analytical and experimental research
skills and will develop deep knowledge in areas of rotordynamics, structural
vibrations and nonlinear dynamics. Additionally, during high school outreach
activities at the University of Tennessee, the laboratory setups in this project
will provide a hands-on demonstration which will facilitate an entr√©e point to
motivate and inspire younger students to pursue a scientific career. These
efforts will have broad impacts on teaching the next generation workforce and
will have a positive influence on education in the East Tennessee
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;