* 0856635
* Collaborative Research:   Motivated Engineering Transfers-STEM Talent Expansion Program (METSTEP)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Phil McBride, Eastern Arizona College
* Continuing Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 08/31/2015
* USD 94,000.00

The project is a collaborative effort between a four-year school (Arizona State
University) and five non-metropolitan feeder schools (Arizona Western College,
Central Arizona College, Cochise College, Eastern Arizona College, and Mohave
Community College). The team is working to significantly increase the number of
transfer students, especially women and underrepresented minority students, that
graduate in engineering and computer science. In order to accomplish this, they
are: 1) providing scholarships to students in the feeder schools and to transfer
students at Arizona State University , 2) supporting student outreach activities
at the feeder schools, 3) supporting engineering courses at the feeder schools
by providing materials, tutoring, local engineering speakers, and tuition
scholarships, 4) conducting "Be an Engineer" events at the feeder schools for
both students and their parents, 5) providing classes, workshops, and seminars
using live broadcast and videotape, 6) providing an engaged community of mentors
with extensive experience and commitment for all students, 7) hosting an
orientation at Arizona State University for engineering transfer students, 8)
managing a center where engineering transfer students can study together and get
the support needed to survive, and 9) working with transfer students through a
time-tested "career shaping" academic scholarship workshop program. The project
is building on an earlier successful program between Arizona State University
and a set of metropolitan community colleges with similar goals. Evaluation
efforts, involving formative and summative aspects, are being conducted by
internal and external evaluators who are developing and monitoring indices for
enrollment, persistence, and graduation. Broader impacts include the development
and dissemination of models for collaboration between community colleges and
four-year schools and the efforts to increase the number of women and minorities
in engineering.