* 0856431
* Estimating Probability of Improvement in Next Cycle of Surrogate Based Design Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Raphael Haftka, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 256,000.00

The research objective of this award is to provide accurate estimates of the
probability of achieving a target level of improvement in the next surrogate
based design optimization cycle, hence increasing the cost-effectiveness of the
overall design process. A major challenge in the design optimization of complex
engineering systems such as those found in the automotive (e.g.,
crashwordiness), aerospace (e.g., liquid rocket injector), oil (e.g., chemical
flooding) and biomechanical (e.g., knee implants) industries is how to meet the
conflicting objectives of improved performance, reduced costs and enhanced
safety considering the time constraints present in industrial environments.
Surrogate-based design optimization (SBDO), which proceeds in stages or cycles,
has shown to be an effective approach to address this challenge. It refers to
design optimization that relies on the use of surrogates or metamodels
(computationally inexpensive) built/updated on reduced samples of
computationally expensive/high fidelity simulations collected at each of the
cycles. Each cycle is costly, and in spite of the progress, the current state-
of-knowledge regarding SBDO lacks statistics-based stopping criteria for
assessing the merit of investing in another cycle of optimization versus
accepting the present best solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
research will address the shortcomings of present industrial practice through
the use of alternative surrogate model estimation and appraisal information to
provide a rigorous stopping criterion for SBDO. The research will be validated
addressing one of the most significant problems in biomechanical engineering:
the design of artificial knees for minimizing wear and hence avoiding the need
for a second replacement. Wear analysis of artificial knees is computationally
very costly and the limit on number of simulations makes it an ideal application
of SBDO. The results are expected to be disseminated through computational tools
which will be freely available via the internet, and conference presentations,
journal publications and engineering design optimization courses. The research
will benefit from an ongoing collaboration with Brazilian, Venezuelan, and
French researchers.