* 0856368
* Geometric Methods in the Control of Bipedal Walking Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Mark Spong, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 05/31/2012
* USD 159,999.00

The object of this project is to develop control algorithms for bipedal walking
robots using concepts of geometric reduction. Geometric reduction takes
advantage of certain symmetry properties in the dynamic equations of bipedal
robots and facilitates the computation of lower dimensional models for analysis
and control design. The goal is to enable control concepts developed for two-
dimensional, or planar, bipeds to be applied to fully three-dimensional bipeds.
In this way, the complexity of the control problem for three-dimensional walking
robots is greatly reduced. The project will also investigate the effects of
asymmetries in leg parameters, such as leg length and leg mass, on the existence
and properties of passive gaits. Preliminary investigations indicate that
asymmetry in leg parameters, such as leg mass, results in qualitative changes in
gait, such as period-doubling bifurcations and chaotic motion. Deliverables from
this research include new control algorithms, new simulation models and
graphical simulation tools for visualization of simulation
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical application of this research is in the
design of walking robots that have improved performance capabilities over
existing machines. Current walking robots have limited range due to poor energy
utilization and are limited in their ability to navigate uneven terrain. More
practical and more efficient walking machines will result once the full power of
available theoretical tools is brought to bear on the analysis and design
questions in this project. The tools developed in this project will also
contribute to a better understanding of human locomotion, which will result in
applications in biomechanics and biomedicine, such as the design of improved
prosthetic devices, the development of falls prevention programs for the
elderly, and rehabilitation techniques. The study of bipeds with parameter
asymmetry is motivated by the desire to understand the effect of asymmetry of
human gait on walking stability, performance, and gait disorders. Our research
results will also be used to create demonstrations and presentations for middle
school and high school students to be used as recruiting tools. Our past
experience has shown that robotics is an excellent vehicle to attract and retain
students in engineering.