* 0856213
* Analytical and Experimental Investigations of Feedback Control Designs for Bipedal Walkers and Runners
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Jessy Grizzle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 460,000.00

Objective: The objective of this research program is to develop systematic,
model-based feedback design procedures for a class of bipedal robots that take
advantage of compliance in order to enhance locomotion efficiency and robustness
when running on smooth terrain and walking on rough
terrain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: It is estimated that 70% of
the earth's landmass is inaccessible to wheeled or tracked vehicles. With legs,
robots can step over obstacles or use sparse footholds. Bipedal robots are
complex, hybrid systems. The associated feedback control algorithms that realize
and stabilize these motions must be hybrid as well. This research thus
contributes very concretely to the general theory of hybrid systems. The ability
of the theory to tolerate model imperfections will be evaluated in the
laboratory on an bipedal robot named MABEL. The successful operation of this
innovative machine requires equally innovative feedback control theory that
works in concert with the natural dynamics of the system to achieve stability
and robustness of the implemented behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has the potential to transform our ability to design, build and control robots
that are capable of realizing locomotion behaviors that are more agile and
human-like than ever before. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research on
bipedal robotic locomotion can improve prosthesis design and lower-limb
rehabilitation robotics. The anthropomorphic nature of bipedal robots makes them
a wonderful vehicle for motivating very challenging problems in engineering,
without having to assume familiarity with advanced mathematics or physics.
Professor Grizzle gives presentations on his research results to lay groups,
including high schools, junior high and grade school science camps, civic
organizations, retirees and the like, and organizes field trips to see feedback
control in action on his bipedal robot, MABEL. &lt;br/&gt;