* 0856754
* International Research Fellowship Progr.:  Development of In-situ Spectroscopic Characterization Techniques to Understand  & Optimize Catalytic Conversion Routes for Biomass Va
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Joseph Zakzeski, Zakzeski                Joseph         J
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 07/31/2011
* USD 192,100.00

0856754 Zakzeski

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Joseph J.
Zakzeski to work with Dr. Bert M. Weckhuysen at Utrecht University in the
Netherlands.

The conversion of biomass, such as wood, agricultural crops, and agricultural
wastes, into transportation fuels and other valuable chemicals is becoming
increasingly important as a way to transition energy consumption away from
fossil fuels. Lignin is an important fraction of biomass, which has received
little attention to date in the field of renewable catalysis, and its
valorization for fuel and chemical applications is in its infancy. The relevant
issues that arise during catalytic development include structure-reactivity
relationships, active site design by tuning the ligand characteristics, and
routes to catalyst deactivation and poisoning. Rational catalyst design requires
a detailed understanding of these issues, which strongly depend on reaction
conditions, catalyst composition, and solvent characteristics. Fortunately, the
development of a wide range of characterization techniques has provided
important new insight into many of these issues, which has subsequently allowed
improvements in catalyst design with wide-spread industrial implications. The
most pertinent spectroscopic information is obtained in-situ because it concerns
the study of the catalyst material in its active form, where structure and
electronic considerations dictate catalytic performance. The objective of this
work is to test the hypothesis that rational alterations of structural and
electronic properties of transition metal complexes, monitored by in-situ
spectroscopic techniques, and appropriate choice of solvent system can allow
low-temperature (<100°C) and low-pressure (<10 bar) biomass valorization
processes with high catalytic activity and selectivity. In order to achieve
these ambitious goals, various in-situ spectroscopic analytical techniques,
including UV-visible, Raman, ATR-IR, and XAFS spectroscopy, are being used to
correlate changes in catalyst properties to catalyst performance in a wide range
of solvents ranging from water to ionic liquids. The successful development of
these in-situ techniques provides critical information necessary for rational
catalyst design and important structural/activity relationships for the
production of a wide-range of industrially important chemicals from lignin.

This work contributes to the understanding of structure-reactivity
relationships, ligand characteristics, conditions and factors that cause
catalyst deactivation including poisoning, and catalyst re-usability for biomass
valorization processes. The development of in-situ techniques for characterizing
first-row transition metals provides strategies for the design of industrial
catalytic systems, especially those that involve strongly adsorbing solvent
systems. Results from this work contribute to the production of transportation
fuels and other useful chemicals from biomass, a resource of which the United
States has ample supply, and diversifies fuel production away from fossil fuels.
In addition, this work benefits society through sustainable energy production,
safer process operation using milder conditions, and fewer undesirable
byproducts and greenhouse gas emissions.