* 0856657
* Science Partnership for Undergraduate Recruitment, Retention, and Success (SPURRS)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2017
* Connie Heimann, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 05/31/2017
* USD 999,294.00

Science Partnership for Undergraduate Recruitment, Retention, and Success
(SPURRS) is increasing the quantity, quality, and diversity of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) graduates through recruiting,
retaining, and graduating students, especially students from traditionally
underserved groups. The goal of SPURRS is to increase over a five year period
the number of STEM majors and graduates by 20%. The objectives are to: (1)
Recruit at least 50 STEM majors from populations of undecided incoming college
students and from populations of high school students with potential who may not
have considered themselves college bound, (2) Increase the retention of students
entering STEM majors and minors from 32% to 40%, and (3) Increase five and six
year STEM degree graduation rates from 19.1 and an estimated 20.2% respectively
to 24 and 25% respectively. At Angelo State University, the difference between
the overall percentage of students majoring in STEM fields and the overall
percentage of STEM degrees awarded is attributed to the low retention of
students in STEM majors. Less than 40% of incoming STEM students who are
retained at the university remain in a STEM major. Because this attrition occurs
during their first year, it is hypothesized that this may be a result of
difficulty in, and the lack of preparation for, the introductory course
sequences in these majors. The SPURRS initiative is investigating the efficacy
of instituting 'First Year Experience' cohorts specific to STEM majors through
student participation in a 'Critical Thinking Boot Camp' designed to provide
students with the basic training in skills and strategies for succeeding in
introductory STEM coursework. The Boot Camp is being followed by a first
semester Critical Thinking Seminar, mandatory tutoring for introductory sequence
STEM coursework, and a Peer Mentoring program. In addition, students retained
through to graduation are participating in career and graduate school
preparation. The project is also investigating undergraduate learning in
introductory science courses to better understand the driving factors behind
successful student transition from high school to college. The SPURRS program is
being proactive in its efforts to provide support for students traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields including a large number of first-generation
college students, many of whom are Hispanic. The partnership with San Angelo
Independent School District and the Education Service Center Region XV also
serves as a model for recruiting and transitioning underserved and
underrepresented students into 4-year STEM degrees.