* 0856128
* Surface Crystallization to Optimize Nanostructure of Proton Conductors in Hydrogen Membrane Fuel Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthew Yates, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The project objective is to develop proton conducting
ceramic membranes with enhanced transport properties for use in hydrogen
membrane fuel cells. The proposed synthesis method involves chemically growing
ceramic crystals onto palladium substrates covered with nanometer-scale seed
crystals. The crystal growth is controlled by additives that strongly adsorb on
specific facets of the crystals. Facets of the crystals that are covered with
adsorbed additives grow slower than other facets. Therefore, the crystal size
and shape can be controlled. A novel muti-step crystal growth process is
proposed to create a very thin and dense ceramic membranes in which crystal
domains are aligned and oriented to promote proton transport through the
membrane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project will enable the
creation ceramic membranes with improved performance at temperatures lower than
required for state of the art ceramic membranes currently used in fuel cells.
Lower temperature operation could potentially significantly lower fuel cell cost
and increase device lifetime. In addition, by integrating the hydrogen membrane
into the fuel cell, the device may operate directly on hydrogen in gas mixtures
produced by reforming renewable fuels such as ethanol, rather than solely on
pure hydrogen. The novel synthesis approach may be applied to other classes of
ion conducting ceramics to improve performance in sensors, gas purification
membranes, and fuel cells. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
will benefit through involvement in the research project and through summer
internships. Undergraduate summer interns will be recruited through the
University of Rochester Virtual Institute of Energy and the Rochester Eisenberg
Fellowship program. High school summer interns will be recruited through the
Pittsford school district career internship program.&lt;br/&gt;