* 0856199
* Relations between Structure, Phase Formation and Phase Transitions in Supercooled Metallic Liquids and Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2013
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Bulk metallic glasses, which can be formed at cooling rates similar to those
used for common silicate glasses, are of significant basic and practical
interest. The liquids that form these glasses contain short-range order that
generally increases significantly upon cooling below the equilibrium melting
temperature (supercooling). This evolving order can couple to the nucleation
barrier for the crystal phase, helping to stabilize the supercooled liquid
against crystallization, making glass formation easier. Icosahedral short-range
order is frequently dominant in transition metal liquids and underlies the glass
transition in some Zr-based glasses. However, it is clear that different types
of short-range order are dominant in other metallic liquids, raising the
question of what underlies glass formation and the glass transition in those
cases. Also, there are suggestions of maxima in the specific heat of many
metallic-glass-forming liquids, and in some cases sudden changes in density have
also been noted on supercooling. The origin of these phenomena is unclear. They
may signal the onset of mode coupling, indicate a liquid/liquid phase
transition, or correspond to a fragile-to-strong transition. Whether such
anomalies in the liquid are a common feature of all bulk-metallic-glass-forming
liquids is unknown. To address these and related questions, structural
measurements will be made at multiple length scales in select bulk metallic
glasses by high-q x-ray diffraction, fluctuation electron microscopy and 3d atom
probe studies. Also, high-q diffraction and thermophysical property measurements
will be made on liquids that form these glasses, using a new electrostatic
levitation facility that has been constructed at Washington University in St.
Louis. These data will be correlated with glass formation and crystallization
kinetics and the results of TEM-based studies of the time-dependent nucleation
rates. The results of these studies will lead to a deeper understanding of the
relations between the structures of metallic liquids and glasses and phase
transitions, including crystal nucleation and the glass transition. The insight
gained will lead to methods for improved control of glass formation and
microstructure development during glass crystallization.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

In crystals the atoms are arranged in regular patterns that repeat over long
distances, while only local ordering among neighboring atoms occurs in liquids
and glasses. Traditional glasses, such as window glass, contain atoms such as
silicon and oxygen. Recently, glasses made entirely of metal atoms, which can be
formed and blown into intricate shapes like traditional glasses, have been
discovered. These metallic glasses are stronger and more corrosion resistant
than the widely used crystalline metals. However, the reasons for metallic glass
formation and the atomic structures of the glasses are poorly understood. To
address these questions, we will make measurements of the structures and
physical properties of select metallic liquids and glasses. These data will be
correlated with glass formation. Glass crystallization during heating, which
frequently produces composite materials with even superior properties, will also
be studied. This investigation will give a deeper understanding of the relations
between the liquids and glasses, and will lead to improved methods for glass
formation and crystallization control. The research will provide valuable
training for graduate and undergraduate students. The principal investigator
will incorporate this research into presentations given to local schools, and
will offer opportunities for high school students to visit and work in his lab,
exposing those students to the exciting possibilities of a career in the science
of materials.