* 0856613
* PRISM: Positive Routes Into Science and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* David Clark, Alma College
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,569.00

The Alma College PRISM project, Positive Routes Into Science and Mathematics, is
designed to increase the number of STEM graduates through a positive retention
program that creates a first-year STEM learning community and engages students
by a focus on undergraduate research in the first year of study. This learning
community is based upon a progressive series of freshman seminars and research
opportunities. Selected STEM students are invited to participate in a summer
research experience prior to their freshman year. All potential STEM enrollees
will be invited to begin their PRISM experience with a pre-term PRISM seminar
that occurs during the week long orientation session held for all new students
preceding the start of the fall term. PRISM seminars will continue in the fall
and winter terms. These seminars are especially designed to engage students in
scientific inquiry and to introduce them to the excitement and opportunities
available in the natural sciences. Alma's unique four-week spring term is being
used to offer PRISM inquiry-based courses that are designed to provide direct
laboratory and field research experience. STEM students may then apply for a
summer research opportunity under the direction of a faculty member. In addition
to the PRISM Program, curricular changes, especially at the freshman level, are
being made to introduce innovative improvements in teaching and learning in the
STEM classroom and laboratory. A college-wide PRISM research community has been
created to support research efforts at a variety of levels involving students
and faculty mentors. To attract students and faculty into the research community
and extend the reach of PRISM, high school teachers, along with some of their
best rising seniors, are being invited to participate in summer research teams.
&lt;br/&gt;High school students entering Alma are recruited into the PRISM
program by engaging them in research activities and by creating an exciting
vision of joining a STEM learning community that focuses on undergraduate
research as soon as they walk onto Alma College's campus. This design of this
project has developed by a variety of campus constituents and from expert advice
received by faculty members employed on other campuses. &lt;br/&gt;Few colleges
are currently offering research opportunities to first year students. The Alma
College PRISM program (either selective aspects or in its entirety) has the
potential for becoming a model for other colleges and universities, especially
small liberal arts colleges.