* 0856325
* Debonding in Bi-layer Material Systems under Moisture Effects : A Multi-scale Fracture Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Oral Buyukozturk, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 353,884.00

Bi-layer material systems are present in various applications ranging from
nanometer thick thin films in circuit boards to large structural elements in a
building. Fracture behavior in a bi-layer material system is a complex
phenomenon and current analytical and numerical techniques are unable to
describe its physical behavior when environmental effects, such as moisture, are
present. The objective of this research project is to develop an experimentally
validated new simulation technique in order to understand the fracture behavior
of bi-layer materials under the effect of moisture. The proposed research is
motivated from the durability concern of epoxy-concrete systems that are widely
used in retrofitting concrete structures. A framework for multi-scale simulation
combining behavior at atomistic scale, and finite element method at structural
level, will be developed through an optimization technique and extensive
laboratory experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will significantly
advance the scientific knowledge in the area of fracture mechanics in bi-layer
material systems with moisture and chemical effects, and introduce a new
paradigm in engineering analysis of complex material systems. Application and
development of this methodology to infrastructure problems involving bi-material
systems, such as concrete and epoxy systems, will lead to a better design,
reduced maintenance cost, and help ensure public safety against unanticipated
structural failures. Knowledge and methodology developed in this project will be
integrated into education via course curricula and made available for public
through the OpenCourseware website of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
specialized research websites. Every effort will be made to involve
undergraduates, females, and minority students, in the conduct of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;