* 0856093
* Studies of Plasmashere Boundary Layer with Distributed Arrays of Radio Instruments
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anthea Coster, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2013
* USD 470,721.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plasmasphere boundary layer (PBL)
is a critical region for dynamic processes in the mid-latitudes that couple the
Earth's ionosphere and magnetosphere. It is the region which separates two
distinct plasma flow regimes, one convecting sunward, the other co-rotating with
the Earth. Some of the consequences of the dynamics in this region are the
development of electric fields which couple the ionosphere, plasmasphere, and
magnetosphere, the structuring and redistribution of thermal plasmas, and the
formation of different scale-sizes of irregularities. Understanding the nature
of PBL phenomena, including their magnitude and spatial and temporal
characteristics, is critical to characterizing the PBL region and its underlying
geophysics. The primary research goal of this project is to experimentally
investigate the PBL to characterize its electron density gradients,
perturbations, flows, and electric fields from micro to meso-scales (meters to
1000 km) under a range of geomagnetic conditions. A secondary goal of the
project is to develop and investigate the capabilities of distributed arrays of
small radio instruments for observations of the ionosphere. These investigations
will continue through the upcoming rising phase of the solar cycle. The primary
scientific questions that will be addressed are: 1) where and how often do
density irregularities form at mid-latitudes that result in scintillation?, 2)
is there a seasonal, longitudinal, or solar cycle dependence in the development
of mid-latitude storm enhanced density (SED) features during geomagnetically
disturbed conditions?, and 3) what are the strengths and variations of PBL
electric fields, and how do they vary with geomagnetic conditions? This research
will exploit existing distributed instrument arrays during the rising phase of
the solar cycle to make unique experimental observations in a collaborative
campaign oriented approach. Data will be obtained both from the Global
Positioning System (GPS) receiver network and from the recently deployed
Intercepted Signals for Ionospheric Science (ISIS) array. The GPS network
provides total electron content (TEC) information available from many locations
around the world. The ISIS array is based on high performance coherent software
radio receivers which can intercept a wide range of signals with extremely
precise time and frequency synchronization. The intercepted signals can be used
for propagation studies, spectrum monitoring, scintillation observations,
passive radar, and multistatic active radar. The intent is to establish the
utility of distributed arrays of scientific instruments, such as GPS and ISIS,
in system-science investigations of the atmosphere. Distributed arrays enable
the visualization of atmospheric information with high spatial and temporal
resolution over large areas. The broader impacts of the project are several.
Several of the research activities will be incorporated into existing
educational programs at the MIT Haystack Observatory, including the research
experience for undergraduates (REU), the research experience for teachers (RET),
and high school internships. Some of the areas of student effort include high
performance computing, real-time signal processing, and scientific data mining.
ISIS nodes are located at Cornell University, Siena College, Dartmouth College,
and University of Washington and the research will enhance collaboration and
educational outreach activities at these institutions. Additional impacts of
this research include the creation of a large database of ionospheric
observations. Both the ISIS array and GPS TEC mapping will provide diagnostics
which aid understanding of the space weather impact of sharp TEC gradients.