* 0856605
* Collaborative Research: Generating Stronger Cuts for Nonlinear Programs Via Orthogonal Disjunctions and Lifting Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jean-Philippe Richard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 202,691.00

The award is funded under American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expressive power of nonlinear programs
allows the formulation of a remarkable number of application problems from
business, science, engineering, and economics. In the presence of nonconvexity,
global optimization of such programs poses unmistakable challenges. The
objective of this project is to explore how lifting and orthogonal disjunctions
can generate computationally tractable cutting planes and convex relaxations for
nonlinear programs. The proposed research departs from existing techniques in
two crucial dimensions. First, instead of relaxing the left-hand-side and right-
hand-side of an inequality independently of each other, tighter relaxations are
derived by considering them simultaneously. Second, the techniques do not add
new variables, a feature with obvious computational advantages over existing
approaches. The objective is to (i) derive, preferably in closed-form, new
strong cuts or relaxations for commonly occurring nonlinear structures in areas
such as process design and bi-clustering, (ii) characterize structures of
nonconvex inequalities where the proposed techniques yield provably tight
relaxations, and (iii) design computational procedures that automatically
generate strong cuts and evaluate the impact of integrating them in a branch-
and-bound algorithm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will
provide an impetus to theoretical, algorithmic, and computational advances in
deterministic global optimization through research on convexification
procedures. A significant expected outcome of this research project is the
improvement of the branch-and-bound algorithm for nonconvex programs through the
derivation of new and stronger convex relaxations. This project will invigorate
the research at the interface of integer programming and global optimization and
benefit both communities. The proposed relaxation schemes will be implemented in
software enabling the solution of larger nonconvex problems, which, in turn,
will impact many application contexts in science, engineering, business, and
economics. Work on solving specially-structured problems will bring operational
efficiencies in those contexts.