* 0856086
* Collaborative Research:  Center for Biophotonic Sensors and Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Dennis Matthews, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 02/28/2011
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Biophotonic Sensors and Sensor Systems

0855971 Boston University; Thomas Bifano 0856086 University of California-Davis;
Dennis L. Matthews The proposed Center plans to establish a natural resource for
Biophotonic Sensors and Sensor Systems (CBSS) where photonics provide the
enabling technologies for advances in methods to detect/sense and identify
biological properties, conditions, or changes at the molecular and cellular/sub-
cellular level. The research efforts will be anchored by Boston University's
Photonic Center as the lead institution, partnered with the University of
California-Davis' Center for Biophotonic Science and Technology. Both BU and UC
have mature photonics research Centers and a track record of achievement in
managing translational research activities. The proposed CBBS will build on the
respective University's research talent and technology transfer skills to
attract industrial partners who will subsequently play a significant role in
planning, selecting, and implementing the output of the research. The
collaborative effort between BU and UCD will consist of three research areas: In
vivo Platform Sensing, Label Free Sensing and Point of Care Diagnosis.

The proposed Center's focused expertise in developing photonic methods for
bacterial and viral detection will enhance the existing inter-disciplinary
teamwork and enable an exceptionally strong foundation for Sensors and Sensor
Systems development. The industry participation will enhance the students?
educational experience by providing a pipeline for talented engineers and
scientist to industry. BU and UCD are committed to developing the academic
potential of under-represented groups in STEM fields. The success of the
proposed Center will enable new photonics sensor technologies that can improve
public healthcare, food and water safety, and homeland security.