* 0856648
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Development of a Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm for Retrieving Aerosol Properties and Their Uncertainties from High Spectral Resolution
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Benjamin Herman, Herman                  Benjamin       R
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2011
* USD 153,010.00

0856648 Herman

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Benjamin
Herman to work with Drs. Johanna Tamminen and Gerrit de Leeuw at the Finnish
Meteorological Institute in Finland.

Atmospheric aerosols have an important impact on our environment due to
processes that result from their interaction with cloud formation and how they
reflect and absorb solar and thermal radiances. They affect climate change
through their affects in the radiation budget both directly from their own
influence and indirectly from their effects in cloud dynamics. The role of
aerosols in cloud dynamics also has an influence on precipitation and thus also
the water cycle, which has its own effect on climate in addition to its
importance in water resources. A high spectral resolution lidar (HSRL)
instrument has already been developed at NASA-Langley that can measure range-
resolved aerosol optical properties, specifically back-scattering and
depolarization coefficients at infrared (1064nm) and visible (532nm)
wavelengths, and extinction coefficient (the degree to which light is
attenuated) at 532nm. This project addresses the problem of how to determine
other aerosol properties, specifically volume and surface area concentrations,
optical absorption, and total scattering from these measurements. The complexity
of aerosols means that the five optical properties measured by this lidar
instrument cannot give a single definitive description of an aerosol. Instead
what is available is a probability distribution that represents uncertainty and
is based on measurement errors and knowledge of probable aerosol states in the
absence of measurements. The goal of this project is to develop Markov chain
Monte Carlo algorithms and aerosol models for processing data from the HSRL
instrument to estimate aerosol properties and assess their uncertainties. The
project is in collaboration with Dr. Johanna Tamminen and Dr. Gerrit de Leeuw at
the Finnish Meteorological Institute and the University of Helsinki. Their
combined expertise is an excellent contribution to the development of these data
processing algorithms. Dr. Tamminen is experienced in Markov chain Monte Carlo
methods while Dr. de Leeuw?s experience is in optical sensing of aerosols. This
project is also parallel with the research interests of the Finnish
Meteorological Institute, which has a Raman lidar instrument that takes
measurements similar to the HSRL.

Ultimately, these algorithms may provide the foundation for constructing
additional algorithms that analyze data from multiple instruments in the
worldwide earth observing system, enabling a better understanding of
environmental processes.