* 0856671
* Low-Cost, Manufacturable Approaches for Wafer-Level Generation of Nanoscale Device Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sungho Jin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2013
* USD 455,999.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the use of a novel
inexpensive printing approach for patterning wafer-level, parallel assemblies of
nanoscale electronic materials for biological and chemical sensing from DNA
templates. To address features smaller than 20 nm yet still maintain low
manufacturing costs, the proposed research will combine a novel soft lithography
stamping technique with patterned silicon surfaces to build ordered, spatially
defined arrays of DNA and peptide-DNA based scaffolds on flat
polydimethylsiloxane. These patterns can then be easily transferred to any
receiving flat substrate, such as thermal oxide, metals, or polymers. Limiting
the number of nanostructured oxide or silicon substrates needed in the
fabrication process will dramatically lower manufacturing costs, while
biomolecular scaffolds, such as DNA templates, can address features below 20 nm.
The four main research objectives of the proposal are to 1) integrate low-cost,
high-throughput inking and stamping methods to generate large area patterned
arrays of DNA scaffolds, 2) engineer larger, well-controlled assemblies of DNA
scaffolds, 3) incorporate specific molecular recognition motifs to bind
nanoscale electronic materials in high yields and with minimal defects, and 4)
fabricate fabricating multiplexed parallel, addressable biosensing electrical
arrays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An inexpensive, high throughput method to generate
wafer-level arrays of nanoelectronic devices and sensors via benign chemistry
and engineering would have an enormous impact on both the electronics and
healthcare industries. Despite the wealth of nanoscale materials available, the
current limitations of photolithography have prevented the realization of their
potential in these applications. The proposed education and research plan will
also draw and encourage active participation from teachers and students to help
young students learn more about nanoscience and its impact upon society and
their everyday lives. In addition, various seminars and interactive
demonstrations related to the proposed research will be integrated into existing
and new curricula, and open laboratory sessions will be held during university
open-house days and on-campus science festivals. &lt;br/&gt;