* 0856292
* Coordination, Data Management and Enhancement of the International Arctic Buoy Programme
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Ignatius Rigor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The International Arctic Buoy Program (IABP) is one of the
oldest continuously-operating environmental monitoring networks in the high
Arctic. This proposal is for the renewal of NSF of the IABP under the auspices
of the Arctic Observing Network (AON). Funds from this proposal will be used for
the coordination, data management, and deployment of the buoys. Observations
from the IABP are essential for (1) monitoring Arctic and global climate change
(many of the changes in Arctic climate were first observed or explained using
data from the IABP; including surface temperature increases throughout the
Arctic Ocean, changes in ocean currents, and thinning of sea ice), (2)
forecasting weather and sea ice conditions, (3) forcing, assimilation and
validation of global weather and climate models, and (4) validation of satellite
derived estimates of sea ice motion, surface temperature, and sea ice thickness.
New technology in air-droppable buoys will be employed, and deployment will
emphasize regions where there have historically been data gaps. IABP data,
presently archived at the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) and the
National Ice Center (NIC) will be migrated to the Cooperative Arctic Data and
Information System (CADIS), in direct support of AON objectives.