* 0856374
* Collaborative Research: Noisy Nonlinear Microscale Oscillators for Novel Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John Yelton, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 06/30/2013
* USD 204,923.00

The goals of the proposed project are to develop a fundamental understanding of
the interplay of noise and nonlinearity in micro- and nano-scale
electromechanical system (M/NEMS) resonators, and to exploit this knowledge for
the development of novel applications in the areas of sensing and signal
processing. The fundamental work will be geared towards the generation of
predictive analytical and computational tools that can be employed in device
development, and these results will be used to design M/NEMS devices with
unprecedented selectivity and sensitivity. The methods to be employed include
those from the fields of nonlinear dynamical systems, the theory of
fluctuations, and experimental methods for M/NEMS. Fluctuations in M/NEMS arise
from thermal and/or quantum noise, or can be intentionally injected from
external sources. Even small noise can induce large changes in nonlinear system
response, resulting in high sensitivity to external signals or environmental
conditions. By careful tuning of the system parameters and inputs (periodic
and/or noise), and with an understanding of how parameter changes affect
switching, one can attain dramatic, predictable, and measurable changes in the
system response. For sensor applications these changes are tied to environmental
sources, while for signal processing the changes are linked to the modulation of
an external signal. This proposal develops systematic methods for predicting
these quantities for nonlinear M/NEMS resonators, based on the theory of noise-
activated switching. The results from the analysis will guide the experimental
efforts, which will implement the proposed techniques in novel schemes for mass
and magnetic field detection, and for amplification of targeted signal
quantities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research
include the cross-disciplinary collaboration and training of students between
physics and engineering, and the integration of existing computational,
analytical, and experimental techniques to develop new concepts and approaches
for sensing and signal processing. The fundamental aspects of the work also have
potential applicability in other fields in which there is inherent interplay
between nonlinearity and fluctuations, such as epidemiology and other areas of
quantitative biology. In addition, the PIs will actively participate in outreach
programs to high school students, including the High School Engineering
Institute at Michigan State University and the Student Science Training Program
at the University of Florida. The general topics of micro-and nano-technology,
and the applications developed in the proposed work, will be used to help
promote science and engineering to high school students in these programs.
&lt;br/&gt;