* 0856009
* Materials World Network: Local Surface Chemistry and Atmospheric Corrosion of Cu-Zn Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2013
* Steven Baldelli, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 11/30/2013
* USD 405,000.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research to University of Houston is to
study the role of microscopic heterogeneities in the corrosion of metal alloy
surfaces. This Materials World Network award is cofounded and managed by the
Metals and Metallic Nanostructures program. This proposed research involves the
use nonlinear optical spectroscopy and scanning probe techniques to study the
atmospheric corrosion of a model metal alloy surface based on Cu:Zn alloy. Main
objectives of the project are: 1) Study the local atmospheric corrosion of Cu:Zn
alloys; and 2) Compare the reactions on protected alloys surfaces with the
initiation of corrosion reactions. To probe local regions of the alloy surface,
Sum Frequency Generation Imaging Microscopy will be used as a local probe on the
surface species formed under reaction conditions. This technique has the ability
to identify sub-monolayer of surface adsorbates based on their vibrational
spectra. In addition, Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy will be used to
identify cathodic and anodic regions of the surfaces where the corrosion process
occurs. These techniques will be applied to bare and protected surfaces to study
the effect of inhibition on local corrosion. These studies will be carried out
in collaboration with scientists at Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden. The results from these studies are expected to provide chemical maps of
corrosion activity related to molecular speciation in those locations, and thus
a molecular-level description of local corrosion events. Students on this
project will be developing experimental and scientific skills through designing
of the research project, and writing and presenting results at national
meetings. International exchange, travel, research experience by students and
faculty in the collaborating institutions are salient features of this
collaborative multidisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary research program is expected to positively impact both
undergraduate and graduate student members of the research team In addition,
students will be exposed to in the use and application of a number of analytical
methods including advanced spectroscopic methods to study the atmospheric
corrosion at the surface. They also will be trained in material surface
characterization with an emphasis on the chemistry of corrosion at a microscopic
level. Finally, this project will greatly enhance our younger scientist skills
and development using modern laser techniques. The knowledge gained will provide
a detailed model on the local chemistry of corrosion that has been very
difficult to characterize until now. The planned International collaboration
with Royal Institute of Technology in Sweden will provide opportunities for
students and faculty to do research in the collaborating laboratories.