* 0856285
* Algebraic Geometric Approaches to Biological Complexity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeremy Gunawardena, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,356,266.00

The biochemical reactions within cells follow the principle of mass action--the
rate of a reaction is the product of the concentrations of the reactants--so
that their behavior can be represented by a polynomial dynamical system. The
steady states of a network of reactions are therefore solutions to a set of
polynomial equations and form an algebraic variety. Despite the powerful
mathematical tools that have been developed to analyze algebraic varieties, this
feature has never previously been exploited in studying biological systems. The
research team recently showed that for a particular class of biological
networks, arising in multisite protein phosphorylation, the steady-state variety
has remarkable geometric properties, which lead to new biological predictions as
well as a method for drastically reducing the complexity of calculating steady
states. In this project, these geometric ideas will be used to analyze a much
broader class of cellular networks, especially the key modules that are
repeatedly used in biological processes, including cascades, scaffolds and
feedbacks. While the analysis will initially be at steady state, the team will
also examine whether the unexpected benefits of polynomial dynamics can be
extended to more complex dynamical behaviors, such as limit cycles. If
successful, these studies will provide new methods for overcoming molecular
complexity as well as a new geometrical language in which to formulate the
principles of cellular regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular networks
found within biological cells exhibit extraordinary complexity. Not only are
there many components--there are around 23,000 genes in the human genome--but
the proteins encoded by the genes may themselves become modified in multiple
different ways by other proteins in a dynamic fashion. Although the researchers
have developed excellent mathematical tools for dealing with genes, which are
static entities, there are few such tools for dealing with the dynamics of
proteins and their modifications. It is these dynamical processes that do the
work of cellular physiology and which become destabilized in disease. For
instance, a characteristic feature of Alzheimer's disease is uncontrolled
modification of a protein called tau, while similar imbalances in protein
modification have been found in many cancers. Unfortunately, the number of
different protein states that can arise in such processes is enormous, making it
hard to even understand what the processes are capable of doing, let alone to
devise the right experiments to unravel them. At present, much of this
complexity has to be glossed over. In this project, the investigators develop
new mathematical tools for representing and analyzing such cellular processes
that enable them to overcome some of the complexity rather than ignore it. In
this way, the team hopes to characterize how cellular networks exploit molecular
complexity to implement the physiological processes of life. Studies of this
kind will help lay the foundation for a better molecular understanding of health
and disease.