* 0856229
* Whisker Formation in Sn Coatings on Cu: Fundamental Mechanisms and Approaches to Mitigation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2013
* USD 270,422.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sn-based alloy coatings have been used for many
years in the manufacture of electronic components to enhance solderability and
prevent corrosion. Recent environmental legislation has forced the elimination
of Pb in these parts, which has enabled the re-emergence of tin whiskers, i.e.
thin filaments that grow from the surface and can ultimately cause short
circuits. Whisker-induced failures have been documented in numerous systems
(satellites, aviation systems, medical devices, etc.) and represent a
significant risk for manufacturers of high reliability systems. Despite
significant research, many fundamental aspects of whisker formation are still
not understood. Part of the difficulty is that multiple materials processes
interact to create the whiskers (e.g. interdiffusion, phase transformations,
stress generation and relaxation, etc.) so that it is difficult to identify the
underlying mechanisms. Moreover, many processing variables (film thickness,
grain size, plating conditions, etc.) have been shown to play a role in whisker
formation. This makes it difficult to compare the results of different studies
done under different conditions. The proposed research program is designed to
identify the fundamental mechanisms that govern whisker formation by focusing on
the several questions: 1. Which processes control stress in the Sn layer? 2. How
is the stress evolution related to whisker formation? 3. What causes whiskers to
nucleate at particular sites? 4. How does the addition of Pb prevent whisker
formation? 5) How can we use our understanding of whisker formation to prevent
their occurrence? Real-time thin film diagnostics will be used to quantify the
simultaneous temporal evolution of several critical parameters such as film
stress, intermetallic phase formation and whisker density, using carefully
controlled samples. These kinetic studies will be complemented by electron
microscopy studies to determine the underlying atomic-scale mechanisms behind
these processes as well as whisker nucleation. Microstructure, film thickness,
and Sn content in Pb-Sn alloys will be varied systematically to isolate and
identify different kinetic processes that contribute to whisker formation.
Analytical models will be used to interpret the measurements and to develop
predictive capability for assessing reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of Sn whiskers, i.e. thin
filaments of pure tin that grow from the surface of Sn-rich lead-free alloys, is
a serious concern in Pb-free electronics manufacturing because they can
ultimately cause short circuits in electronic components. The proposed research
program is designed to identify the fundamental mechanisms that govern whisker
formation by identifying the processes that control stress in Sn-rich layers in
Sn-containing alloys, learning how the stress evolves and relates to whisker
formation, finding out what promotes the nucleation of whiskers and why the
addition of Pb prevents whisker formation. An ultimate objective is to discover
how the acquired understanding of whisker formation can be used to prevent their
occurrence so that new coatings and Sn-rich alloys can be prepared with
predictable reliability. An informal collaboration with the EMC Corporation will
broaden the knowledge of students as well as the industrial participants. These
participants will expose the students to problem solving in a real-world
environment, where issues such as economics can be as important as technical
issues. This work will involve the education of graduate and undergraduate
students in experiments and modeling of a fundamental materials problem.
Involvement of under-represented minorities and women will be enhanced by
recruiting and a collaboration-student exchange with the Florida State
University-Florida A&amp;M University (an HBCU) association. K-12 educational
outreach will be achieved by working with teachers to develop modules on thin
film stress to be used in school visit program at Brown University. These
outreach activities will be leveraged through coordination with the Brown MRSEC
educational programs.