* 0856815
* The Idaho Science Talent Expansion Program
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Janet Callahan, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project is increasing STEM retention and graduation rates by targeting
first-year STEM students and the STEM faculty who teach those students.
Mathematics assessment and learning are integrated with new-student orientation,
and STEM faculty educational training is being linked with STEM freshman
learning communities and with new student orientation. The project is expanding
and incorporating a dimensional analysis curriculum, which has been successful
in an engineering learning community, to a precalculus STEM learning community.
This curriculum enhancement is helping to effectively prepare students for
chemistry and physics courses. Based on exceptional retention results, the use
of engineering research internships for first-year students is being expanded to
other STEM disciplines. The Summer Adventure STEM Orientation program is
improving retention with students at-risk for not completing a STEM degree,
including those who are underprepared in math, those with financial need,
Hispanic students, women, and students with low self-efficacy. The activities
and assessments are providing scholarly findings about the impact of first-year
programs for at-risk populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
impacting at least 1300 incoming STEM majors over the five-year grant period.
The expectation is that the retention rate of first-year STEM students will
increase from 57% to 70%, and STEM undergraduate degrees will increase by 40
additional STEM graduates annually. Internal and External Advisory Boards are
helping to guide the project and to disseminate results. Curriculum enhancement
resources developed by this project are being distributing via their website.
Project results and lessons learned are being shared through presentations and
publications. This project is also developing close connections with and
providing outreach activities for a newly formed regional community college,
College of Western Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PUBLICATIONS PRODUCED AS A RESULT
OF THIS RESEARCH&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;L.S. Nadelson, S.E. Shadle, J. Hettinger.
"A Journey toward Mastery Teaching: STEM Faculty Engagement in a Year Long
Faculty Learning Community," Learning Communities Journal,
2013.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BOOKS/ONE TIME PROCEEDING&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Callahan, J.M.; Garzolini, J.A.; Hunt, G.L.; Guarino, J.; Bullock,
D.; Shadle, S.; and Schrader, C.B.. "AC 2011-2500: The Idaho Science Talent
Expansion Program: &lt;br/&gt;Freshman Orientation for STEM majors",
01/01/2011-12/31/2011, "Refereed Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Conference of
the American Society of the Engineering Education", 2011, "Not
applicable".&lt;br/&gt;L.S. Nadelson and S. Shadle. ?Promoting STEM Faculty
Members? Reflection on their Learning Perceptions and Teaching Practices.?
Proceedings of the 2012 Annual Conference of the American Society of Engineering
Education.&lt;br/&gt;J.M. Callahan, D. Bullock, S.Y. Chyung. ?Both Sides of the
Equation: Learner and Teacher.? Proceedings of the 2012 Annual Conference of the
American Society of Engineering Education.&lt;br/&gt;A. Feldman, D. Bullock, and
J.M. Callahan. ?Using Online Assessment and Practice to Achieve Better Retention
and Placement in Precalculus and Calculus.? Proceedings of the 2012 Annual
Conference of the American Society of Engineering Education.