* 0856177
* UpTempO: Measuring the Upper Layer Temperature of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Ignatius Rigor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 09/30/2013
* USD 875,222.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice-based buoys exist that can measure
temperature profiles, but these are not optimized for observing the open sea.
Thus the objective of this proposal is to fill this gap in the Arctic Observing
Network measurement strategy, i.e., to measure the time history of summer
warming and subsequent fall cooling of the seasonally open water areas of the
Arctic Ocean. The PIs will focus on those areas with the greatest ice retreat,
i.e., the northern Beaufort, Chukchi, East Siberian, and Laptev Seas. Their
method will be to build up to 10 relatively inexpensive ocean thermistor string
buoys per year, to be deployed in the seasonally ice-free regions of the Arctic
Ocean. The Arctic-ADOS (Autonomous Drifting Ocean Station) buoy will float at
the ocean surface, equipped with (i) a sea level pressure sensor, (ii) a 50 m
long string of 11 thermistors, and (iii) a high precision
conductivity/temperature pair at 5 m depth on some buoys for thermistor
calibration. Data will be recorded every 2 hours and downloaded in near real
time via ARGOS satellite to the web site of the International Arctic Buoy
Program (IABP). Daily average and vertically interpolated data (to 1 m bins)
will also be provided on the IABP website, and will be sent to data archives
(CADIS and NODC). The PIs will also work with scientists at mission-oriented
agencies to better incorporate ocean surface data into their global products
such as Sea Surface Temperature analyses. Real-time data will also be made
available to the operational community via the Global Telecommunications System
(GTS). Buoy deployment will use existing assets such as C130 aircraft
coordinated by the National Ice Center (NIC), ship cruises planned as part of
other projects, and springtime ice surveys conducted by other projects and/or by
the U.S. Navy north of Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;