* 0856158
* Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Patrick Dowling, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2013
* USD 136,350.00

The Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (SUMSRI) is a
program conducted under the guidance of Miami University's Department of
Mathematics and Statistics. Each year, SUMSRI prepares 15 nationally selected
students to enter graduate education in mathematics by involving them in an
intensive research experience in mathematics and statistics and participating in
four short courses in Real Analysis, Advanced Algebra, GRE preparation and
Mathematical Writing. In the year following their participation in SUMSRI, each
participant is asked to present their research at regional and national
meetings, with financial support from SUMSRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African
American and Hispanic citizens, now over 25% of the US population, received less
than 5% of the 500 mathematics PhDs awarded to US citizens in the 2006 academic
year. Approximately a third of mathematics PhDs earned by US citizens went to
females. Because of the shortage of minorities and women mathematical
scientists, the program is especially interested in, but not limited to,
underrepresented minorities and women. In the past 10 years, SUMSRI has proven
its effectiveness in preparing students for the challenges of graduate
education. Seventy percent of SUMSRI's former participants have gone on to
graduate education. Seventeen percent are still finishing their undergraduate
degrees. Of the minority participants who have completed their bachelors degree,
88% have continued into graduate school. Former participants now in the work
force are teachers, professors and researchers in the nation's schools,
universities, government agencies and business.