* 0856420
* Collaborative Research:  Extracting 3-D Fracture Orientations for Rock Failure Analysis by Combining  Optical Imaging and LIDAR Scanning Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Norbert Maerz, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 143,940.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Automated measurements provide a promising alternative solution to the task of
measuring the orientation of systematic fractures in rock cuts, to provide input
to stability modeling programs. Two methods are available; optical image
processing and LIDAR (LIght Detection and Ranging) 3-D scans. Both these
technologies have been developed to some extent, however individually they are
both inadequate for the task at hand.

The cracks or discontinuities in the rock manifest themselves in two ways, as
linear traces (lines) on a planar rock cut, and as fracture surfaces (facets) on
an irregular rock cut. Some rock cuts manifest discontinuities in one way, some
in the other way. In many cases both manifestations can be seen in the same rock
cut.

LIDAR measurements have been demonstrated to measure 3D orientations in the
second case and optical imaging measurements can at least measure 2D apparent
orientations of the trace on the sampling plane. Neither technique tolerates
well the situations where the opposite manifestation of discontinues is present.
Since many rock outcrops contain both manifestations, current techniques do not
work well in most cases.

We will improve on both these methods and to combine them into a single analysis
using a LIDAR laser scanning unit that has a built in optical imaging system.
Using geometric probabilities we can match the probabilities of a particular set
of traces falling on the same orientation plane as a given set of 3D LIDAR
generated orientations, discarding traces that do not fit as extraneous noise.

Validation studies will focus on generating steroenet plots of discontinuity
orientations provided by the new method and manual fracture orientation
measurements. The benchmark will be whether or not a trained engineer will come
to the same design conclusions from both the automated and the manual
measurements.

The intellectual merit of this work is that this work will add significantly to
the advancement of scientific knowledge of rock slope characterization and
modeling in discontinuous rock masses. This cross-disciplinary investigation
brings together a uniquely qualified team consisting of a geological engineer
and a computer scientist to apply advanced mathematical theory and computational
science techniques from areas such as computer vision, computer graphics, image
processing as well as geometric modeling to a practical geological engineering
domain.

The broader impact to society as a whole is that it will result in safer
highways because it gives practitioners more and better tools to predict and
prevent or mitigate hazards of falling rock on highways. The practitioner will
have measurement tools that are more objective, quicker, and safer than manual
measurements.