* 0856853
* Fire In the Arctic Landscape: Impacts, Interactions And Links To Global and Regional Environmental  Change
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Gaius Shaver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 05/31/2013
* USD 911,715.00

The 2007 Anaktuvuk River (AR) fire created a unique opportunity to observe the
response of a pristine tundra landscape to a major disturbance. The area burned
is large enough (&gt;1000 km2) that its impacts can be measured directly at
multiple scales, from small plots, to small (first-order) catchments and
hillslopes, to large (third-order) catchments, to the atmospheric boundary layer
above the entire burn. As the burned area recovers over time, observations of
changes in key ecosystem processes and in terrestrial and aquatic communities
will afford insights into controls and interactions among system components that
would not be possible from long-term observation of an undisturbed or
unmanipulated tundra landscape. The AR fire also serves as a harbinger of future
change in the arctic landscape and its interactions with the atmosphere, aquatic
systems, and oceans as global climate continues to warm. It provides a standard
of comparison with predictions of long-term response to disturbance and climate
change, based on finer-scale, shorter-term experimental studies. Finally,
because the area burned is so large, it provides an opportunity for measuring
change at a scale that is directly relevant to large-area, PanArctic modeling
and prediction. For all of these reasons, this project will strive to establish
a long-term, multiscale, multidimensional program of observation, comparison,
and analysis on the Anaktuvuk River fire. This will be done in a way that
facilitates future, detailed process studies and long-term modeling and
synthesis. The program will be sufficiently broadly-based to involve
participation by a wide range of arctic researchers. Key components of the work
include measurement of (1) surface C, water, and energy exchanges, (2)
terrestrial organic matter, C, and element stocks, (3) terrestrial vegetation
composition and structure, (4) lake and stream chemistry and water flow, (5)
lake and stream community composition, and (6) evaluation of spectral
reflectance measures of production, biomass, community composition, and burn
impacts for use in scaling up to larger areas and for comparison with satellite-
and airplane-based measures of reflectance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;