* 0856273
* RUI: Detection of Dark Matter with Moderately Superheated Liquids
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ilan Levine, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most enduring mysteries in
astrophysics is the explanation for the compelling evidence that, on virtually
all scales above the size of a star, far more gravitating material exists in an
invisible form than that which can be detected by all known types of radiation.
This "dark matter" is detected dynamically, through its effects on the
structuring of galaxies, clusters of galaxies and larger scale structures in the
universe. Generic extensions of the standard model of subatomic particles
predict the existence of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles which are
excellent candidates for the dark matter. These are expected to interact with
ordinary matter as rarely as neutrinos and thus be extremely difficult to
detect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COUPP and PICASSO groups have undertaken the
development of new large dark matter detectors derived from the well known
bubble chamber technique. Charged particles traversing the superheated fluid in
bubble chambers deposit heat which creates small bubbles of gas. These bubbles
expand explosively unless the chamber is quickly pressurized. The bubbles can be
photographed before pressurization revealing the paths of these particles, so
the chamber is an excellent amplifier of tiny particle signals. Both approaches
have made the superheated state long lived enough to search for dark matter.
This award will enable this group to continue its participation in these
efforts. The sound sensors already produced by IUSB have recently proven to be
useful for discarding cosmic ray induced events and distinguishing the only
radioactive signal of concern for moderately superheated fluids (alpha
particles). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the program include
enhancing the education of undergraduates. They participate in the design,
construction and characterization of acoustic transducers, measurement of
radioactivity and other projects for the experiments. The PI has started to work
with one local high school to provide high school students with science
experiment experiences.