* 0856622
* Ultrafine-Grained TiAl-Based Alloys for High Temperature Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Fereshteh Ebrahimi, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2014
* USD 534,423.00

TECHICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extensive research in nanocrystalline
and ultrafine-grained materials has revealed that they have impressive
combination of strength and ductility in the absence of processing defects.
However, the thermal stability and high temperature creep resistance of these
materials in single phase form are unfavorable. In this work, a new and
innovative approach in which these properties can be enhanced by creating a high
melting point microstructure consisting of ultrafine grains decorated with
nanosize ultra-hard and stable particles is proposed. The objective of this
research is to intelligently design ultrahigh temperature light alloys based on
the Ti-Al-Nb-Cr-X (X = Mo, B) system for applications in engines used in
aviation. The combined room temperature toughness and high temperature strength
will be achieved by creating a microstructure consisting of ultrafine-grained
&amp;#61543;-TiAl phase with nano-size &amp;#61555;-Nb2Al particles distributed
effectively and at grain boundaries. The &amp;#61543;-TiAl phase is not ductile
at room temperature for several reasons, including localized deformation owing
to the lack of activation of enough slip systems. Refining the grain size and
alloying are anticipated to homogenize plastic deformation and reduce the
probability of fracture of the &amp;#61543;&amp;#61472;phase through modifying
the local stress state and affecting intrinsic parameters such as bonding. The
presence of the nanocrystals of the ultra-hard sigma phase combined with the
additions of refractory metals will allow achieving high temperature phase
stability and creep resistance. State-of-the-art computational techniques and
intelligent, sophisticated and advanced experimental methods will be employed to
reach the goals of the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scarcity of fossil fuels and the increase in
air travel frequency owing to the demands of industrial globalization require
economically feasible high-performance aircraft. The performance of gas turbine
engines can be improved by increasing the gas temperature and decreasing the
weight of the engine. Material limitations are among the road blocks to building
engines with higher performance levels. The results of this research will impact
the society with the prospect of creating a new family of high temperature
metallic materials. The education activities will include both graduate and
undergraduate students. A diverse group of students will be involved in this
project, including one minority and one female graduate student. Emphasis will
be placed on the involvement of undergraduate students in research. The
undergraduate students will be involved through two different programs, namely
Research Experience in Materials, a new program at the Materials Science and
Engineering (MSE) Department at the University of Florida, and the required
Undergraduate Senior Thesis course in the MSE department.