* 0856172
* Mitigating Fouling of Membranes in the Microfiltration of Metal-Working Fluid for Sustainable Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Richard DeVor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Microfiltration is a membrane-based technology that enables contaminated
metalworking fluids to be recycled while in use and significantly extends their
lifespan. This research is directed at strengthening our understanding of the
physics of fouling of microfiltration membranes and applying that understanding
to mitigate fouling, thereby enabling its use for sustainable manufacturing. The
work will proceed along three primary research foci: (1) create and validate a
three-dimensional computational fluid dynamic model of a tortuous pore network
that incorporates hydrodynamic, van der Waals, electrostatic forces, and
Brownian motion; (2) use the model to understand the physics of membrane fouling
through examination of the motion of single and multiple microemulsions and
aggregates; and (3) use the assembled knowledge of fouling mechanisms to create
a reformulated semisynthetic metalworking fluid designed with fouling-mitigating
fluid properties. The completion of this research will provide a solid knowledge
base that can be used to reduce fouling in three ways, namely, changing
operational conditions to minimize fouling within a given setup, redesigning
membranes to incorporate anti-fouling coatings and pore morphology, and
designing fluids to be more compatible with the microfiltration membranes. The
enhanced understanding of fouling mechanism through this research will help to
eliminate the barriers to widespread adoption of microfiltration technology and
encourage sustainability within the machining industry through the reduction of
millions of gallons of hazardous metalworking fluid waste and the toxins
associated with it. In addition, the knowledge gained on fouling mechanisms will
not only likely lead to sustainability improvements within the machining
industry, but also improvements in the food processing, water purification, and
waste-water processing communities. The impact of the modeling approaches
developed in this research is not limited to membrane microfiltration
applications, as all filtration techniques have to deal with the issue of
fouling. One of the important impacts that this work will have is to serve as an
?open door? into the concept of sustainable manufacturing.