* 0856240
* Nucleation and Growth of Epitaxial Graphene on Silicon Carbide
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Randall Feenstra, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2012
* USD 376,413.00

Technical. This project addresses synthesis/processing of graphene; a range of
studies involving variation in growth parameters and detailed characterization
of film properties will be conducted to identify and understand growth
mechanisms. Initially, reactive gases will be introduced as a background
environment during annealing. Hydrogen is expected to perform some etching
(perhaps of defects) during the annealing, whereas oxygen may act to getter
impurities and/or assist in the removal of silicon from the surface.
Additionally, carbon-containing gases such as propylene will be used to assess
their potential for deposition of graphene on SiC. The resulting films will be
characterized by atomic force microscopy, low-energy electron diffraction, and
Auger electron spectroscopy, with optical and electrical characterization to be
performed by collaborating researchers at Sarnoff Corp., Argonne National Lab,
MIT Lincoln Labs, and Notre Dame University. Complementary studies on the
detailed structure of the graphene/SiC interface will be performed by scanning
tunneling microscopy and scanning tunneling spectroscopy. Modeling of those
results using first-principles theory will be performed by collaborators at Ohio
University. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research
issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials science having
technological relevance. Societal benefits of the proposed research are
potentially very large since graphene is a strong candidate material for
extending electronics capabilities beyond the limits of silicon technology. The
project will also provide interdisciplinary training to graduate students in the
nanotechnology field. Additionally, the PI presents annual lectures to middle
and high school students on Nanotechnology, as well as teaching a course on
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. The graphene-related research of this proposal
will be used to enhance the content of these lectures, providing students with
an example of a current research topic in Nanotechnology. The course includes a
laboratory component, and development of a laboratory exercise dealing with
graphene exfoliation and observation is planned. &lt;br/&gt;