* 0856003
* PILOT:  Construction Made Simple(r):  Interfaces, Devices, and Infrastructure for Beginning Fabrication
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Michael Eisenberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 368,786.00

This project addresses the current gap in research on creative design through
personal fabrication and construction. At present, there is very little
understanding of what enables (or prevents) users from making greater use of
existing fabrication tools; there is even less exploration of how to expand the
space of fabrication devices to accommodate both traditional and non-traditional
crafting projects; and there is little discussion of how to build on the
successes of web-based communities for "intangible" creations (videos,
photographs, documents) to nurture communities for physical, tangible creations.
This project expands the possibilities of accessible fabrication to develop
prototypes of interfaces, personal devices, and infrastructure that will
illustrate the power and potential of construction when placed in the hands of
"beginners". The goal of this pilot project is to create a wide variety of
small-scale innovations that can seed larger and longer-term projects in the
near future. Work in interfaces will focus on the design of input devices and
software tools; the goal here is to enable people (including children) to create
objects using existing fabrication devices. Work in personal devices will focus
on prototyping novel fabrication devices geared toward small-scale, individual
craft projects. Work in infrastructure will focus on the creation of web-based
software systems aimed at building self-supporting fabrication communities among
children, students, and hobbyists. Through these multiple aims, this project
seeks both to identify a (potentially wide) variety of topics for more ambitious
research projects and to spark more widespread interest in these issues in the
computer science and educational technology communities.