* 0856064
* Collaborative Research: Planning Grant: I/UCRC for PHEV: Transportation and Electricity Convergence in the Built Environment (PHEV TEC BE)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 05/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Transportation and Electricity Convergence in
the Built Environment &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0856042 University of Texas at
Austin; S. Travis Waller &lt;br/&gt;0856064 Texas A &amp;M University; Mladen
Kezunovic&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center for Transportation and
Electricity Convergence in the Built Environment will focus on developing
comprehensive analytical solutions for managed deployment and use of Plug-in
Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) in the Built Environment. The research efforts
will be anchored by the University of Texas at Austin (lead institution)
partnered with Texas A&amp;M University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction
of PHEVs appears ievitable as early as 2010 with large scale penetration 5-10
years away. However, the temporal aspect of travel behavior, combined with
spatial options for interfacing with the electricity grid, introduces a plethora
of options for integrating the electric grid, roadway network, and the built
environment through PHEVs. The proposed Center plans to identify the couplings
and the dynamics of this meta-system enterprise, involving energy,
transportation, consumer choice, and infrastructure development using advanced
system-level modeling, optimization, and analysis techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will lay the intellectual groundwork
for characterizing and managing the inevitable changes in energy,
transportation, and the built environment that will occur with increased
adoption of PHEVs and other cross-cutting innovative sustainable solutions.
Widespread deployment of PHEVs will have effects on numerous industries
including electric utilities, automotive, manufacturing, transportation
planning, air quality management, and construction of the built environment. The
industry participation will enhance the students' educational experience by
providing a pipeline for talented engineers and scientist to industry. The
Center plans to attract a diverse group of researchers and students with highly
interdisciplinary interests and training.