* 0856650
* Degenerate Bandgaps in Magneto-Photonic Crystals and Magneto-Photonic Crystal Biochemical Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Miguel Levy, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2012
* USD 289,070.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Objectives This study will seek to demonstrate experimentally the existence of
new types of magnetically tunable optical band gaps recently predicted by the
PIs. The project will design, fabricate and characterize functional photonic
crystal structures based on this effect in magnetic garnet films. It will
conduct a theoretical and experimental study of controllable photonic band gaps
in one- and two-dimensional magneto-optic photonic crystals, and will fabricate
and characterize a new type of highly sensitive on-chip biochemical sensor based
on this new effect.

Intellectual Merit The project's intellectual merit resides in the investigation
of novel magnetically tunable optical band gaps resulting from the coupling
between local optical normal modes in birefringent magneto-optic photonic
crystals. A recently proposed photonic-state coupling mechanism by the PIs for
highly sensitive polarization response to refractive index changes in these
magneto-photonic crystals will be studied theoretically and experimentally and
applied to biosensor development. The proposed optical biosensor is unique in
that it relies on changes in polarization state as its transduction signal,
where extremely sensitive and mature detection techniques such as ellipsometry
exist.

Broader Impact Biosensors have vast applications to environmental monitoring,
healthcare and homeland security. An advance in optical bio-sensing broadly
applicable to toxic and non-toxic substance detection is proposed with
compatible and potentially better sensitivity to the most advanced tag-free
sensing techniques available. This project will involve participation of high
school women and Native American students by partnering with Michigan Tech's
Summer Youth Program and its Women in Engineering Program. The proposed activity
will also seek to develop partnerships with industry to explore technological
applications of magneto-photonic crystals. Contacts have already been initiated
with Integrated Photonics, Inc. for the development of optical biosensors.