* 0856250
* Hierarchical Computational Nanomechanics of Heterogeneous Interfaces: From Ab Initio to Continuum Calculations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sukky Jun, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2012
* USD 231,621.00

Hierarchical Computational Nanomechanics of Heterogeneous Interfaces: From Ab
Initio to Continuum Calculations

PI: Sukky Jun, University of Wyoming

The research objective of this project is establishing hierarchical
computational nanomechanics of heterogeneous materials where interfaces assume a
prominent role in their mechanical behaviors. Atoms in the vicinity of an
interface experience a different environment from their bulk counterpart, which
is quantified by macroscopic thermodynamic excess variables such as interface
energy and interface stress. In particular, interface elastic constants are of
special importance to extending continuum micromechanics theory to the nano-
regime because, for any particular interface, the associated non-classical
constitutive equations come into practical use only when those interface-
specific parameters are available. In this project, values of interface elastic
modulus tensors will precisely be determined, and the results will be applied to
problems of scientific significance. This goal will be achieved through a novel
approach that spans from density-functional ab intio calculations, to large-
scale atomistic calculations, and to continuum finite element modeling, in
conjunction with effective scale-transcending theories.

The proposed research is expected to inspire experimental measurements of
fundamental interface materials properties and further promote multidisciplinary
research for mechanically controlling electronic, magnetic, structural, and
optical properties of heterogeneous materials and devices over the wide spectrum
of technology. Research outcomes will be blended into undergraduate and graduate
curricula at the University of Wyoming which is the only four-year college in
the State of Wyoming. In addition, outreach efforts will contribute to exposing
geographically underrepresented K-12 students of Wyoming to motivating
experiences of science and technology as well as college awareness.

