* 0856171
* Collaborative Research: Mechanical and Electrical Reliability Maximization of Rechargeable Lithium-Ion Batteries through Microstructure Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yet-Ming Chiang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2012
* USD 72,888.00

The research of this award will: 1) develop and experimentally validate
numerical models to simulate real rechargeable lithium-ion battery electrodes of
arbitrary geometries; 2) Isothermal chemical stresses modeling and design for
improved electrode battery materials and devices; 3) Development of models that
resolve the local Joule-heating generation to create improved electrode
geometries. In each thrust, microstructures will be characterized using imaging
methods appropriate to their length scale (confocal microscopy, SEM, and AFM) to
obtain images where each of the phases (active material, binders, conductive
additive, porosity) is resolved to enable detailed model validation and improved
battery design by guiding the experiment through numerical
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will build
fundamental understanding for emerging electrochemical technologies, such as
rechargeable batteries and nastic structures (electrochemical actuators). By
understanding the mechanisms leading to the local mechanical, electrical, and
thermal fatigue of the system, devices with dramatically improved reliabilities
can be manufactured. By understanding the correlations between microstructure,
local Joule heating, crystallographic anisotropy, and Vegard stresses, reliable
higher power densities will be developed. The individual components of the
proposed research will be integrated into an educational plan that will
integrate the fundamental electrochemistry concepts developed through this
research into undergraduate and graduate classes whose focus will be to lead
future generations of materials engineers to develop a detailed understanding of
electrochemical materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;