* 0856482
* Cyber Security Education Consortium (CSEC): Reversing the Outsourcing Tide in Mission-Critical Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2017
* Sujeet Shenoi, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,700,000.00

In 2004, the Oklahoma Center for Information Assurance and Forensics Education,
which was subsequently renamed the Cyber Security Education Consortium (CSEC),
was established as an ATE regional center for cybersecurity education (NSF Award
No. 0355246) serving the state of Oklahoma and sections of surrounding states.
Following four successful years of operation, the current grant renews the
center for a second phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With broad support from business
and industry, government agencies, law enforcement, the military, and the
intelligence community, CSEC is creating a high-tech workforce in Oklahoma,
Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas, Louisiana, Missouri, Tennessee, and Texas. The goal
is to bring jobs to this eight-state region, where the quality of life is good
and costs are low, and to reverse the tide of outsourcing and offshoring that
has sent so many specialized high-tech jobs and facilities overseas. The center
is implementing high-quality cybersecurity education programs in 19 metropolitan
areas (31 educational institutions), which comprise eight of the 50 largest
cities in the country (Dallas, St. Louis, Denver, San Antonio, Kansas City,
Nashville, Memphis, and Oklahoma City) and 11 other mid-sized cities (Tulsa,
Knoxville, Little Rock, Colorado Springs, Wichita, Shreveport, Chattanooga,
Fayetteville [AR], Springfield [MO], Fort Smith [AR], and
Topeka).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSEC is a cohesive partnership of technology
centers, community colleges, and the University of Tulsa, one of the premier NSA
Centers of Excellence for Information Assurance Education, which serves as a
mentor to the other institutions. The center offers courses, certificate
programs, and degree programs for college students and professional development
for faculty members. In addition, the center provides education and training
opportunities to transitional adults and high school students. Articulation
agreements provide students with seamless educational pathways, allowing them to
move from associate degree programs to bachelor's degree programs to master's
and doctoral programs. The center's faculty development initiative incorporates
an effective "train the trainer" model, which trained 105 instructors during the
center's first four years. Faculty have access to a year-long residency program
at the University of Tulsa, in which they receive intensive training and may
pursue MS or PhD studies; a 25-day certificate program, which prepares
instructors to teach courses in each of five core cybersecurity areas; multi-day
workshops offered at locations around the country; and quarterly curriculum
working group meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSEC institutions implement a
comprehensive, nationally recognized cybersecurity curriculum covering five core
areas: information assurance, secure electronic commerce, network security,
enterprise security management, and digital forensics. The curriculum blends
theory and practice, legal and ethical issues, and an intense laboratory
component. It is incorporated in degree and certificate programs and maps to
industry (Cisco, Microsoft), vendor-neutral (Security+, SCNP/SCNA), and federal
(CNSS 4011-16) certifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus in the
center's second phase is the creation of curricula in the strategic areas of
secure coding, automation and control systems, and mobile communications devices
--areas in which a significant demand for experts has emerged. Each of these
three specialized curricula involves a foundational course, one or more advanced
courses, and a capstone course, which culminates in students (including
incumbent workers) receiving a certification in the technical
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An organizational focus of the center's second phase
is the creation of "centers of excellence" in every major city in the eight-
state region. These centers focus on a curricular area (such as secure coding,
automation and control systems, or mobile communications devices) driven by
local industry needs, and serve as hubs for education, training, and outreach
activities in their focus area, catalyzing job creation and economic
development.