* 0856663
* Discrete Moment Problems and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Andras Prekopa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,980.00

The research objective of this project is to develop new models and methods to
find sharp bounds in a numerically stable and computationally efficient manner,
under the knowledge of the support of the discrete random variables involved and
partial knowledge of their distribution. In many cases this means the knowledge
of a finite number of moments, including in the multivariate case problems where
the univariate marginals and some of the moments are known. These type of
problems, including the Boolean Probabillity Bounding Problem, Discrete Moment
Problems and Multivariate Discrete Moment Problems, are notoriously difficult
computationally, and can equivalently be viewed as very large scale (typically
exponentially large in the number of random variables) linear programming
problems. Linear programming will be the basic methodology of the proposed
research focusing on the special combinatorial structure of the arising linear
programs. In addition, multivariate Lagrange interpolation and graph theoretical
tools will be used and further developed. The linear programs arising in this
research area are either of exponential size or numerically unstable. New
constraint generation techniques, aggregation and disaggregation procedures, as
well as special arithmetic procedures will be used to come up with sharp and
efficiently computable bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results
of this research will lead to new and computationally efficient methods to
derive sharp probability bounds. The quality and computational complexity of
such bounds is the bottleneck in numerous applications, including
communication/transportation/electric network reliability analysis, financial
engineering, risk analysis, as well as stochastic optimization problems. In
particular, the improved methodology will allow better planning for extreme
events in large stochastic networks, such as evaluating emergency evacuation
plans in transportation networks, preparing for heat events in electric
networks, etc. The proposed work will also contribute to the theory and
computational methodology of linear programming.