* 0856098
* Pilot: Meta4acle - A Software Tool for Generating Metaphors, Stimulating Creativity and Framing Solutions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Alice Agogino, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 07/31/2013
* USD 237,159.00

By allowing us to understand one concept in terms of another, metaphors enrich
our mental imagery and imbue concepts with meaningful attributes. The cognitive
juxtaposition provided by metaphors stimulates creativity by allowing us to see
a concept from a new point of view, highlighting previously hidden aspects. This
project develops meta4acle, a Creative IT software tool to help build
creativity, inspiration and communication in design teams through the generation
and application of metaphors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops
algorithms for assisted metaphor generation to tap into a pool of knowledge
significantly larger than that of a single design team to find appropriate
metaphors for better framing a design problem and expanding the space of
concepts. In this project, variations in the creative benefit of meta4acle will
be observed in different user demographics and at different stages of the design
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the development of
curricular modules on the creative use of metaphors for use in design classes at
both the undergraduate and graduate levels at the University of California at
Berkeley. Given the social imperative and need for creative solutions for
sustainable products, services and building designs, sustainability and
biomimicry will be a focus for expanding the metaphor database and will provide
the major test bed and case study for implementation and evaluation. The
meta4acle tool will be tested with top design firms in the San Francisco Bay
Area in order to explore its potential use and impact in the commercial sector.