* 0856234
* Novel Phenomena in Single-Crystal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Gang Cao, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2013
* USD 495,000.00

Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely recognized that whoever
discovers and controls the optimized synthesis of novel materials generally
controls the investigation of their often unique properties and, ultimately,
their successful integration into advanced technologies. The proposed research
is to build upon our recent success on studies on single crystals of 4d or
5d-electron-based materials and emphasize (1) the synthesis and characterization
of novel transition metal oxides in bulk-single-crystal form and (2) a rigorous
search for new materials. The novelty of these materials is highlighted by our
recent discoveries, such as orbitally-driven colossal magnetoresistance (CMR)
attained by avoiding a ferromagnetic state, and a novel spin valve effect in
bulk single crystals, a delicate quantum phenomenon that depends upon precision
deposition and nanoscale patterning of artificial thin-film heterostructures
whose quality and performance are difficult to control. While these discoveries
open new avenues for understanding the underlying physics of spintronics, and
fully realizing the potential in practical devices, new physics unique to these
materials, which are largely driven by spin-orbit coupling, continues to emerge,
and better understanding this physics will surely lead to new discoveries. It is
this new physics and possible new discoveries we seek to pursue. The transfer of
technical expertise will be achieved via direct integration of the graduate
students and post-docs into ongoing research efforts with a goal of professional
journal publication of results. The proposed program will also constitute a key
thrust within the newly established multidisciplinary Center for Advanced
Materials. This association will help nurture interdisciplinary expertise that
will stimulate collaborative research, and generate synergies that will attract
new students who are the future human capital in technologies driving the
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Condensed matter physics addresses identification of
novel, fundamental properties of solids and liquids that have generated a
remarkable number of cutting-edge technologies in recent decades. It is widely
recognized that whoever discovers and controls the optimized synthesis of novel
materials generally controls the investigation of their often unique properties
and, ultimately, their successful integration into advanced technologies.
Unfortunately, U.S. leadership in materials research has seriously eroded in
recent years due to a growing shortage of scientists who possess skills in both
the synthesis and characterization of new materials. The current situation
presents an urgent national challenge that could ultimately undermine our
economic competitiveness if left unaddressed. The proposed research is to build
upon our recent success on new materials studies and emphasize the synthesis and
characterization of novel materials in bulk-single-crystal form and a rigorous
search for new materials. The novelty of these materials is highlighted by our
recent discoveries, such as a novel spin valve effect in bulk single crystals, a
delicate quantum phenomenon that depends upon precision deposition and nanoscale
patterning of artificial thin-film heterostructures whose quality and
performance are difficult to control. Spin valves or more generally spintronic
(magnetoelectronic) materials not only have technological potential as magnetic
field sensors and read-heads for computer hard drives, but also present
fundamental challenges to the theory of magnetotransport in solids. These are
among the most intensively studied phenomena in materials physics and
engineering due to their enormous potential impact on a $100-billion-per-year
electronics industry. It is the technological potential and the intellectual
challenges these materials present that we seek to pursue. The transfer of
technical expertise will be achieved via direct integration of the graduate
students and post-docs into ongoing research efforts with a goal of professional
journal publication of results. The proposed program will also constitute a key
thrust within the newly established multidisciplinary Center for Advanced
Materials funded by the NSF EPSCoR RII. This association will help nurture
interdisciplinary expertise that will stimulate collaborative research, and
generate synergies that will attract new students who are the future human
capital in technologies driving the economy.&lt;br/&gt;