* 0856379
* Bayesian Inventory and Replacement Models Using Real-Time Condition Monitoring Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Jennifer Ryan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 02/29/2012
* USD 188,171.00

Bayesian Inventory and Replacement Models Using Real-Time Condition Monitoring
Information

Abstract

This grant provides funding to develop methods for incorporating real-time
sensor information obtained through condition monitoring (CM) into inventory
management and replacement decisions for service parts, with the goal of
improving the management of service parts inventories. This research considers
the problem faced by a manufacturer who manages inventory for a machine part
that is used on a large number of geographically-dispersed machines and which is
subject to deterioration. The degradation signal generated by the deterioration
of an individual part, and captured via CM, is modeled using a Wiener process.
This degradation model, which can be used to predict part failure, as well as
demand for service parts, is periodically updated as new sensor information is
obtained. A stochastic inventory model that incorporates the updated demand
distribution will be developed and the form of the optimal inventory control
policy will be studied. While adaptive inventory policies such as those
developed in this research can help manufacturers to increase machine
availability and reduce inventory costs, their implementation can be
computationally intensive and may require the retention of a significant
quantity of sensor data. Thus, this research will focus on the development of
computationally tractable methods that take advantage of the available sensor
information.

If successful, this research will develop implementable and broadly applicable
tools that will be of practical value to manufacturing firms, assisting them in
taking advantage of CM technology to improve their after-sales service and to
compete more effectively. This research also seeks to contribute to the
development of essential linkages between condition monitoring technology, part
maintenance and replacement, and inventory management. This research identifies
a critical area for interdisciplinary collaboration, seeking to build
connections between research on CM technology and research on the development of
decision models that make use of information obtained through CM.



