* 0856600
* Resource Flexibility for Uncertainty Mitigation in Production and Service Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Douglas Down, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 360,000.00

This grant provides funding for research aimed at determining how an
organization can best use flexible resources to prepare for uncertainty in
demand, supply, and capacity. The project is focused on, but not limited to,
organizations that can be modeled as queueing networks and where throughput is
the primary performance measure of interest. The goal is to achieve the best
possible performance in the present market environment, while simultaneously
having the ability to shift capacity between any two tasks, products, or
services in response to uncontrollable changes in the environment. This goal is
realized through the use of an appropriate flexibility structure that specifies
what tasks individual workers and other resources are trained or configured for.
The three major components of the project are to (i) provide criteria for
determining whether a given flexibility structure satisfies the previously-
stated goal, and if not, identify how the flexibility structure may be enhanced;
(ii) develop metrics that can predict which flexibility structures are most
effective; and (iii) ensure that our criteria and metrics are computationally
efficient and broadly applicable. In the process, we will determine how flexible
resources should be assigned to tasks in real time to achieve the best possible
performance.

If successful, this research will lead to techniques that can be used to
increase the competitiveness of the U.S. production and service sectors at low
cost through better use of available resources. Specifically, the project
involves developing effective criteria and metrics that practitioners can use to
assess the merits of individual flexibility structures and study how they may be
enhanced. These techniques will be computationally efficient and broadly
applicable to different organizations, including call centers, healthcare
delivery, computer services, and supply chains.