* 0856303
* Collaborative Proposal:  Optimizing the Supply Chain for Cost and Carbon Footprint
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Saif Benjaafar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 187,418.00

This grant funds the development of supply chain models that account for the
need to minimize or restrict carbon emissions while also minimizing cost or
maximizing profit. The models will account for carbon emissions at several
levels: (1) single operation models (e.g., inventory models) at a single firm,
(2) inter-functional models that integrate a range of operational models (e.g.,
location, transportation, sourcing and inventory decisions) across the supply
chain at a single firm and (3) inter-company inter-functional models that
account for the interaction between firms within the supply chain. The models
developed will be multi-objective, allowing planners to explore the tradeoffs
between cost and carbon footprint. They will allow the examination of carbon
emissions across the entire spectrum of supply chain activities in which a firm
engages, contrasting with current practice which tends to focus on carbon
emissions in single operations (e.g., transportation but not inventory or
production). The models will also account for collaboration across the supply
chain to reduce emissions and will capture the interactions between firms within
the same supply chain, as decisions made by one firm can significantly impact
both the cost and carbon footprint at other firms. The models will be used to
investigate schemes that allocate carbon footprint, and associated cost, among
member firms of the supply chain, recognizing the differential capabilities of
firms to meet emission standards. They will also be used to investigate the
impact of different regulatory policies, including cap-and trade, carbon taxing,
and carbon offsetting, on supply chain performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research (1) will enhance our understanding of key tradeoffs
between costs and emissions, (2) will contribute to our ability to reduce carbon
emissions across a range of supply chains, (3) will identify coordination
mechanisms and incentives systems under which firms voluntarily choose to
collaborate with other firms on carbon emission reductions, and (4) will explore
the efficacy of various regulatory policies and support the implementation of
policies that reduce emissions while mitigating the impact on supply chain
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;