* 0856058
* Major: Computational Creativity: Building a Model of Machine Generated Humor
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kristian Hammond, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2013
* USD 712,883.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational creativity has been a
goal of artificial intelligence since nearly its inception. But while many
interesting models have been developed, and some of these have even produced
interesting creative works, most have been built on foundations that either
don't scale, or don't easily scope across different domains, or both. In this
project the PI will explore an alternative in which creativity, and in
particular humor, is modeled as a layered system of intelligent control, using
case-based reasoning, of simple retrieval and filtering mechanisms.
Specifically, this is an effort, in the realm of believable comedy agents, in
which the issues of control and breadth are decoupled and handled by two very
different sorts of systems. For control, the PI will use a variant of case-based
planning to provide task-level guidance to content acquisition, evaluation,
transformation, combination, and presentation; for breadth, he will employ
lexical technologies from information retrieval that will be used to mine online
resources spanning a wide variety of domains. The PI's goal is to provide a
model of creativity and humor that works in much the same way that a
professional comedy writer or improvisational performer does. These
professionals "mine" their memories for experiences, but they do not merely
"free associate." Instead, they employ a set of conventions or techniques that
can be applied and scoped across any domain to produce a specific comedic
effect. Modeling human skill in this way will result in a robust and scalable
system that is able to provide breadth of coverage (through well understood and
scalable information retrieval techniques), without sacrificing the power of
control provided by the reasoning system. In effect, it will be funny no matter
what it is talking about. This research will improve our understanding of
creative processes through an examination of machine-generated content, and the
creation of new content and content forms derived from existing resources. It
will also support the development of new technologies to support human
creativity, in that the resulting models and systems will enable high-level
authoring of new kinds of interactive "information"
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PI expects that at least
two broad societal impacts will derive from this work. First, he will actually
create intelligent comedic performance agents and deploy them both on- and off-
line for the enjoyment and illumination of everyday citizens. Second, this
research will attract, develop, and produce an equally new type of AI researcher
whose vision of the mind scopes beyond the confines of a single machine. In
particular, the goal is to attract a broader set of students (including the
underrepresented group of women in engineering) from communications studies and
theater, who want to do research on the machine as a device for communication
and creative expression made possible and supported by the mediation of
intelligent systems. The PI believes this is a crucial step in the development
of AI as a field, drawing in a next generation of creative and innovative
thinkers who will be able to bring new light into the world of semantics and
inference while building artifacts with artistic power.