* 0856124
* Extending Plus Closure
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Raymond Heitmann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 146,869.00

In the study of local rings of equicharacteristic p, the tight
closure&lt;br/&gt;has proved very useful. This closure also extends nicely to
local rings&lt;br/&gt;of equicharacteristic zero. Unfortunately this closure
does not&lt;br/&gt;naturally extend to mixed characteristic rings. This project
is designed&lt;br/&gt;to fill this void. In earlier work, the principal
investigator defined&lt;br/&gt;several variants of an extended plus closure. As
the name suggests,&lt;br/&gt;these closures, which coincide with tight closure
in equicharacteristic&lt;br/&gt;p, are based upon the plus closure of an ideal,
the set of elements&lt;br/&gt;which are in the extension of the ideal in some
integral extension of&lt;br/&gt;the original ring. In the earlier work, a number
of properties of these&lt;br/&gt;closures were demonstrated. Most notably, the
principal investigator has&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated that the colon-capturing
property implies that ideals in&lt;br/&gt;regular rings are closed and also that
the colon-capturing property does&lt;br/&gt;in fact hold in dimension three.
Hence the Direct Summand Conjecture is&lt;br/&gt;a theorem in dimension three. A
key objective of the current project is&lt;br/&gt;to extend these results to
dimension four and above. A completely&lt;br/&gt;successful program would
establish that one of these extended plus&lt;br/&gt;closures - or a close
relative - satisfies all of the requirements&lt;br/&gt;suggested by Huneke for a
mixed characteristic analog of tight closure.&lt;br/&gt;It would also determine
whether or not three particular rings of&lt;br/&gt;interest are Cohen-Macaulay.
The most compelling of the three is the&lt;br/&gt;absolute integral closure of a
complete mixed characteristic local&lt;br/&gt;domain of dimension three. For
equicharacteristic complete local domains&lt;br/&gt;and all complete local
domains of dimension not equal to three, the&lt;br/&gt;answer is already
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most fundamental subjects in algebra is
the understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the concepts of ideals and modules in local
rings. For those local&lt;br/&gt;rings which contain a field, the notion of
tight closure has evolved as&lt;br/&gt;a way to give a unified presentation -
and a simplified one - for many&lt;br/&gt;of the known properties of these
objects. As a natural byproduct, it has&lt;br/&gt;led to the discovery of new
properties. Understanding of local rings&lt;br/&gt;which do not contain a field
has always lagged behind. The principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator has proposed
several closely related and promising&lt;br/&gt;candidates to play the role of
tight closure in the alternate setting.&lt;br/&gt;These candidates have already
led to one significant new result. In this&lt;br/&gt;project, the investigator
will continue his efforts to determine which&lt;br/&gt;is the best candidate and
to what extent the new closures fill the void.