* 0856417
* SGER: A novel apparatus to investigate subsurface flow and microbial biomineralization in hydrothermal systems
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Lensyl Urbano, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 10/31/2010
* USD 58,790.00

This research develops a Hele-Shaw type apparatus made of infrared transparent
germanium glass, to allow, for the first time, a window into subsurface Earth
environments that permits direct observation of complex hydrothermal and
hyperbaric processes in the laboratory. The reactor will enable controlled, non-
invasive, real-time visualization of hydrologic and potentially biogeochemical
processes applied to a subsurface system at temporal and spatial scales
inaccessible in nature. An innovative combination of scientific approaches using
forward and inverse hydrodynamic modeling facilitate the design and
interpretation of geochemical experimental results using the apparatus.
Justification for this effort is based on rapidly growing evidence of prolific
microbial populations thriving in "extreme conditions" in Earth surface and
subsurface environments and the importance of microbial mediation of geochemical
processes. In hydrothermal systems, microscale catalysis of mineral
precipitation and dissolution and the creation of biofilms play a crucial role
in the development of fluid flow patterns, thereby affecting the spatial and
temporal evolution and occurrence of thermophilic microbial populations.
Fundamental questions addressed with the apparatus include: (1) how the
subsurface biosphere affects the geochemistry and fluid dynamics of porous flow
systems and (2) how geochemical heterogeneity in subsurface environments affects
microbial populations. Broader impacts of the work include support of two early
career PIs both of whom are from groups under-represented in the sciences and
one of whom is a faculty member at a primarily undergraduate institution. The
device also has strong possibilities for educational purposes and public
outreach through its ability to do video imaging of real time changes in the
distribution of microbes, biofilms, and temperature in the reactor.