* 0856321
* Pressure- and Field-Tuned Spectroscopy of Strongly Spin-Lattice-Coupled Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* S. Lance Cooper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Strong coupling between atomic spins and the lattice in "strongly correlated"
materials is associated with many scientifically important and technologically
useful phenomena, including orbital ordering, multiferroic behavior, and
magnetic-field- and pressure-tunable phase transitions. This individual
investigator award supports a project that will involve the growth,
characterization, and optical spectroscopic measurement of various single-
crystal ruthenium-oxide, magnesium-oxide, and vanadium-oxide materials whose
properties have highly enhanced ("colossal") responses to applied pressure
and/or magnetic field, making these materials promising candidates for the next
generation of "functional" materials and devices. The goal of this project is to
understand the microscopic origin of these exotic and useful properties, by
employing magnetic-field- and pressure-tuned optical spectroscopy to investigate
the manner in which spin-lattice coupling and spin/lattice dynamics evolve
through various low temperature, high-magnetic-field, and high pressure phases
of these materials. Among the anticipated outcomes of this project are (i)
elucidation of the microscopic origin of the colossal sensitivities these
materials exhibit in response to high pressures and applied magnetic fields;
(ii) insights into how to grow new materials with enhanced functional
properties; and (iii) high quality single-crystal samples of correlated
materials that will be made available to others in the scientific community.
This project will also provide broad training to 2 graduate students in single-
crystal growth and pressure- and magnetic-field-tuned optical spectroscopy, and
will be used as part of an outreach program to interest K-12 students in the
sciences via tours of the high field/high pressure optical laboratory. NON-
TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

In many oxide-based materials, there is a particularly strong interaction
between the atomic magnetic moments (which can be thought of as small bar
magnets attached to the atoms) and the ordered "lattice" structure of the atoms;
one important consequence of this strong interaction is that applied pressures
or magnetic fields can be used to sensitively control the mobility of the
electrons in, the magnetic properties of, and even the structural shape of,
these materials. As a consequence, these "highly tunable" materials are
promising candidates for the next generation of multi-functional switches,
sensors, shape-memory structures, and other useful electronic/magnetic devices.
This individual investigator award supports a project that will involve the
growth of these novel oxide-based materials, and the study of the basic
mechanisms responsible for their exotic properties by scattering light (i.e.,
"photons") from the materials while tuning the materials' properties through
their novel phases found at high pressures and high magnetic fields. The goals
of this project are to better understand the conditions responsible for the
"highly tunable" properties of these materials (i) to elucidate how matter
behaves under novel environmental conditions, and (ii) to develop new materials
with enhanced functional properties. This project will also provide broad
training to 2 graduate students in materials growth and state-of-the-art light
scattering methods, and will be used as part of an outreach program to interest
K-12 students in the sciences via tours of the high field/high pressure optical
laboratory.