* 0856270
* Novel Modeling and Analytical Approaches for Primary Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Scheduling and Related Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Subhash Sarin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 04/30/2013
* USD 350,003.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel Modeling and Analytical Approaches for
Primary Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Scheduling and Related
Problems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Subhash C. Sarin and Hanif D.
Sherali&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding for developing
optimization models and algorithms for analyzing the primary manufacturing
operational stage of the pharmaceutical supply chain, which is responsible for
the production of active pharmaceutical ingredients. The designed approach will
determine optimal assignment and sequencing of pharmaceutical products to
various processing bays of a primary manufacturing facility in order to meet
customer requirements at minimal production costs (which include contributions
from both the setups required and inventory incurred to achieve a quick turn-
around), given a set of equipments with specified capacities as well as a
product-mix and demand rate for each product. A decomposition-based methodology
will be developed for determining (near-) optimal batching, assignment, and
sequencing decisions. Certain important special cases that arise in practice
will also be studied. The models and solution methodologies developed will be
tested on real-life problem instances encountered by the Boehringer Ingelheim
Chemical plant, located in Petersburg, Virginia, which is devoted to the
production of active pharmaceutical ingredients and intermediaries for the
pharmaceutical industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will lead to increasing the responsiveness to market demand by reducing
cycle time delays in practice, while curtailing manufacturing costs. The models
to be investigated include as substructures the high multiplicity asymmetric
travelling salesman problem and the classic job shop scheduling problem. The
polyhedral analysis based on the proposed research effort will also serve to
enhance the independent solution of these problems, which are important in their
own right. In addition, the proposed research will contribute toward providing
insights and computational tools for analyzing other batch production
facilities, such as in semiconductor manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;