* 0856522
* RUI:  Particle theory in the LHC era
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* David Tucker-Smith, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 05/31/2012
* USD 115,400.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its remarkable successes,
there are strong indications that the standard model of particle physics is
incomplete. In the past decade, compelling evidence that neutrinos have mass,
and that most of the energy density of the universe is divided between dark
energy and dark matter, has altered our understanding of nature at the
fundamental level. The coming years promise equally exciting developments, with
the LHC scheduled to begin taking data soon. This and other experiments will
shed light on some of the profound mysteries left unresolved by the standard
model. This proposal details the PI's plan to investigate theoretical ideas for
addressing some of these mysteries. In particular he is interested in verifying
whether evidence of Supersymmetry which unifies integer spin particles with ½
integer spin particles into super-multiplets will be found at the LHC. In
particular the PI proposes to study (1) the possibility of using chargino
cascades at the LHC to constrain superpartner masses, (2) LHC searches for the
charged electroweak Kaluza-Klein states predicted in Randall-Sundrum theories
with standard model fields propagating in the extra dimension, and (3) the
phenomenology of supersymmetric theories with extended R symmetry. Models with
extended R symmetry provide an interesting solution to the supersymmetric flavor
problem. The PI proposes to study the phenomenology of these theories. This will
include exploring a possible connection between neutrino mass and mixed-
sneutrino dark matter, the collider signatures of the heavy gauginos and large
flavor violation in soft masses expected in these theories, and the possibility
of inelastic neutralino dark matter. The broader impact of this proposal is that
undergraduate involvement is a central part of the PI's research program.
Students will have the opportunity to engage in particle physics research, and
through their work will learn important ideas, results, and methods relating to
both particle phenomenology and theoretical physics in general.