* 0856113
* Topics in the arithmetic of automorphic forms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Anantharam Raghuram, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2012
* USD 144,129.00

The principal objective of the proposal is to study arithmetic aspects of
automorphic forms with the aim of understanding the special values of
automorphic L-functions. The proposal has several projects which fall under the
general theme of applying recent progress in the Langlands program to study
Deligne's conjecture on the special values of L-functions. Some of these
projects are about understanding the special values of various Rankin-Selberg
L-functions, and then via Langlands functoriality, to understand special values
of symmetric power L-functions attached to a modular form. An important aspect
of the proposal is that the investigator will be developing a cohomological
point of view of certain analytic theories of L-functions, like the Langlands-
Shahidi method, with the hope of proving arithmetic theorems on their special
values. Another major aim of the proposal is to study the arithmetic of
automorphic forms on the some other groups: like inner forms of the general
linear group, and the group of symplectic similitudes. This will be carried out
with a view toward understanding cuspidal cohomology and rational structures on
certain models of automorphic representations, which will allow us to study the
special values of L-functions attached to these groups, thus substantially
widening the class of L-functions for which special value results can be proved.
The proposal also aims to develop a framework which will explain known
cuspidality criteria, and predict new criteria, for various instances of
Langlands functoriality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numbers are a
fundamental aspect of reality and have been investigated for thousands of years.
One of the central themes in modern number theory involves the concept of an
L-function. These L-functions encode within them all knowledge about numbers and
their underlying patterns. The investigator's work, on the special values of
L-functions, will allow us to decode such information and hence deepen our
understanding of numbers. &lt;br/&gt;The subject of L-functions involves, and in
turn has applications to, several other branches of mathematics like
representation theory, harmonic analysis, algebraic and differential geometry,
not to mention important and practical applications to cryptography, coding
theory, physics, and electrical engineering. The investigator is actively
involved in providing research experience for undergraduates. He is also
committed to the mentoring and training of graduate students and postdocs by
involving them in several projects of the proposal. The investigator intends to
write a monograph on special values of L-functions with the aim of bringing
advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate students to the frontiers of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;