* 0856227
* Dynamics of Hurricane Risk Perception
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wayne Schubert, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 485,229.00

This study will add to our understanding of how individuals view hurricane risk
and how this shapes their decisions in the face of a potential evacuation order.
The study is designed to accomplish three goals. First, we will develop a
detailed attitude questionnaire for hurricane risk perception. Second, we will
examine how hurricane risk perception acts on hurricane evacuation. Third, we
will take a close look at the information sources that people use during an
approaching hurricane and evaluate how these information sources influence
evacuation behavior. To accomplish these goals, we will establish a panel of
about 600 individuals to be recruited from the U.S. Gulf and East Coast areas
often affected by hurricanes. Over three years we will conduct several mail
surveys of these panelists to understand their perception of hurricane risk. And
during each hurricane season we will conduct phone interviews of the panelists
who are being presented with a potential hurricane evacuation order.

The results of this study will provide a wide range of benefits. We will provide
important new information on how people react to hurricanes. This knowledge can
then be used by many other researchers to conduct other investigations on
hurricanes. The scientific results of this study will also be useful to
researchers working on problems involving how people react to other natural
hazards as well, such as wildfires or earthquakes. The results will also have
more immediate practical benefits. An important problem involving hurricane
warnings is the manner in which maps and other communications are used to inform
the public. Since this project will collect information from people while they
are actively using such maps and communications we will be able to provide
recommendations for ways to improve these risk communication tools. We hope this
study will serve to improve the way that hurricane warnings are communicated. In
a broader perspective this study will also provide insight into the basic ways
that coastal residents view living in hurricane prone areas. This knowledge can
be of use to urban planners and disaster managers to help guide the way that our
growing coastal populations are situated.