* 0856401
* A Mechanics Framework for the Analysis and Design of Protein Based Nano Machines
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Amy Anderson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 325,108.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This research project focuses on a new mechanical design,
analysis and simulation framework for protein molecules. The fact that proteins
are nano devices developed through evolution by nature suggests that the
development of biomimetic artificial nano machines based on polypeptide chain
building blocks is not only promising, but may also be the most practical
approach to meet these challenges. This project continues the recent
developments under an NSF Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) and builds
on a numerical modeling platform called 'PROTOFOLD' developed by the research
team. The project will make use of mechanical analysis and design tools to
accurately model protein molecules as mechanical devices, hence facilitating
understanding of their function or ability to design and manipulate protein
based molecular devices for specific functional purposes. The multi-disciplinary
research team includes expertise in engineering, biology and pharmacology and
will validate the proposed analytical tools and benchmark them in practical
applications including nano-material, vaccine and drug design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed research will provide the
ability to develop devices of increasing sophistication at the nano level,
capable of acting as sensors, or carrying out more complex tasks. The broader
impacts of this project range from proteomics, medicine, and rational drug
design to biocomputers, bio robots, and biosensors. The interdisciplinary nature
of this project will also have substantial educational impact on the students
that will be supported through this program as well as on other graduate and
undergraduate students through the proposed modules in mechanics of peptide
based nano systems to be included in four separate courses. The outreach
activities of this program include outreach to K-12 classrooms through the
infrastructure already in place, and to the general public through the science
museum in Hartford. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;