* 0856008
* SGER:  Explaining the African Vote: an Exit Poll in Ghana
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Clark Gibson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2010
* USD 102,218.00

In Ghana, where once observers expected an orderly affair, the electoral process
is now significantly challenged by voter registration problems, the promise of
billions of dollars worth of oil revenue, the example of Kenya's stolen
election, the use of ethnic appeals in campaigns, and the probability of a
single percentage point victory for one of the main parties. The irregularities
and violence surrounding Kenya's recent election demonstrates the danger of
presuming quiescence when a nascent democracy holds an election. These issues
have heightened tension between the parties and within the electorate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undertaking an exit poll for the Ghanaian election will
increase knowledge of the determinants of the African vote. Conventional wisdom
is that Africans vote largely upon ethnic lines. We argue that this picture is
very far from complete. Recent exit poll results in Kenya demonstrates that
African voters are quite similar to those in the industrial democracies -- they
use many sources of information to inform their vote, ethnicity being only one.
Many voters did rely on ethnicity to inform their vote, but many did not. In
fact, a surprising number of Kenyans chose their candidate on the basis of
government performance. Most seem to use the information of ethnicity and
performance to make their choices. Surprisingly, studies of Africa's democracies
and electorate use very little systematic data in their exploration of the
continent's voters. And yet, the US government -- as well as other countries --
spends millions of dollars promoting democracy in Africa, and yet knowledge of
the motivations of African voters remains murky, and is generally drawn from
anecdote, a small number of cases, or surveys that are not part of the actual
electoral process. Few scholars to this point have employed the most powerful
tool to measure voter intention and checks against fraud: the exit poll.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ghana is considered on its way to being a stable
democracy, so understanding the motivations of its voters opens the way to a
deeper understanding of African politics. The events and issues that surround
the election can inform us as to how citizens vote. By conducting an exit poll
in Ghana, the micro-foundation of African Voting can be explored in a manner
that existing work does not address. This approach has the potential to
transform the study of ethnicity and politics in Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will put four graduate
students and one undergraduate student in the field. The knowledge they will
receive through helping to construct, manage, and analyze this exit poll is
precisely what they need to advance training beyond the classroom. For two of
the students, it will be their first experience in Africa. For all, it will be
the first time they are involved in generating primary data. We will also help
in the training of hundreds of enumerators in Ghana. Finally, the poll can also
provide another check on the official results which may prove unreliable.