* 0856396
* STEM Double Bridge: Connecting High Schools, Community Colleges, and Universities for Tomorrow's Leaders in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* John Barthell, University of Central Oklahoma
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,998,750.00

&lt;br/&gt;The University of Central Oklahoma, in collaboration with eight other
universities and community and technical colleges, is continuing to enhance a
statewide network of institutions to increase recruitment, retention and
graduation of students in STEM disciplines. The Oklahoma project, STEM Double
Bridge: Connecting High Schools, Community Colleges, and Universities for
Tomorrow's Leaders in Science, Technology Engineering and Mathematics, has used
their experience with a previously funded STEP award to develop activities and
initiatives that target incoming high school students and community college
transfers. The project's Summer Bridge program will provide a four-week,
residential lecture and research experience to incoming freshmen who have
expressed an interest in a STEM discipline. New to the Oklahoma program, this
program element will incorporate five area high school teachers who will serve
as advisors to the program and who will work with the students on their research
projects. A second bridge, called the Fall Bridge, will target community and
technical college students who are entering four-year programs. This one-week
residential program will provide the students with a campus orientation and
academic advisement, provide assistance in developing writing and mathematics
skills, introduce the students to the library system, and provide sessions on
research methods and guidance in reading scientific articles.