* 0856674
* Collaborative Research: High-Throughput Nanomanufacturing of 10 NM Feature Patterns Using Ultra-Sharp Probe Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Sungho Jin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is to provide viable solutions to major
bottleneck issues in nano manufacturing, including, i) precise placement of
nanomaterials/devices in high enough densities, and ii) convenient high-
throughput fabrications. The approach is to introduce new concepts and
techniques involving massively parallel, electron-beam-emitting nano probes for
large area, simultaneous nano patterning. An array of extremely fine, scanning
probe tips with sub-10 nm dimension and identical heights will be fabricated
using silicon fabrication, carbon nanotubes, and related materials and
processes. The principles and materials behavior involved in the nanofabrication
processing steps as well as underlying phenomena during localized electron field
emission from extremely small probe tips will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research on the 10 nm
regime nano manufacturing science and technology include scientific
understanding and novel conceptual advances. The successful outcome of this
research will allow fabrication of a variety of ultra-high-density nanofeatured
structures for nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, nanomagnetics, and nano-bio
devices. More importantly, high throughput processing of precisely placed,
ultra-high-density materials and devices will enable wider use of nanotechnology
for electronics and other applications. The ultimate aim is to enable broader
industrial utilization in areas such as advanced displays, sensor array
technologies, telecommunications systems, information storage memory systems,
and medical therapeutics. The research outcome will be leveraged to enhance
education in nano-science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;