* 0856024
* Collaborative Research: Planning Grant: I/UCRC-Center for Advanced Radioactive Materials Processing
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Darryl Butt, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Advanced Radioactive Materials Processing

0856024 Boise State University; Darryl P. Butt 0856480 Utah State University;
Brent Stucker The Center for Advanced Radioactive Materials Processing (CARMaP)
will focus on the development of unique fabrication solutions for radioactive
elements and their isotopes and for hard-to-process materials in functionally-
optimized structures that include ceramics, metals, and their composites. Boise
State University (BSU) and Utah State University (USU) are collaborating to
establish the proposed center, with BSU as the lead institution. CARMaP research
will support commercial-scale material and fabrication advances that promote the
expanded use of nuclear technology while reducing risks from nuclear
proliferation and long lived nuclear waste. The Center would draw upon the
research and fabrication capabilities at both universities, as well as at Idaho
National Lab. The research proposed as potential topics will advance the
capabilities of industries engaged in all phases of the nuclear fuel cycle,
nuclear medicine, and aerospace, as well as renewable energy generation and
storage. BSU and USU plan to hold a meeting with prospective industrial
partners, and to develop an initial research agenda for CARMaP of sufficient
commercial interest that attendees will be willing to invest in and sustain the
Center.

The outcomes proposed include new classes of validated materials and material
joining and fabrication techniques for extreme environments characterized by
high temperatures, corrosiveness and radiation. This research will become
increasingly more important when the nation begins to shift more of its
requirements for more energy from fossil fuel generation to nuclear generation.
CARMaP will leverage existing collaborative relationships through the Center for
Advanced Energy Studies (CAES) to engage graduate students in industrial
research, to develop innovative curricula, to host industry/university short
courses and seminars, to manage intellectual capital and to develop the regional
technical workforce through outreach to the under-represented and underemployed.
CARMaP research findings will be broadly disseminated through university
networks that include the U. S. Department of Energy National University
Consortium.

