* 0856185
* Research in higher dimensional algebraic geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sandor Kovacs, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 346,126.00

The investigator will work on several problems in higher dimensional algebraic
geometry. In a project, joint with Alexeev, Hassett, and Kollár, the PI plans to
complete the proof of existence of a coarse moduli space of stable log surfaces
and higher dimensional varieties, an analog of the moduli space of stable
curves. This an open problem whose solution is crucial to many applications in
the field. Another project, pursued jointly by Kollár and the PI, will provide
crucial results for the above projects. The main theme of the project is to
understand deformations of singularities that appear on stable log varieties. In
a related project the PI is planning to prove various generalizations of the
classical Kodaira vanishing theorem. In another project the PI is going to work
on the refined Viehweg conjecture regarding subvarieties of moduli stacks of
canonically polarized smooth projective varieties. This conjecture evolved from
a landmark conjecture of Shafarevich, and its solution by Arakelov and Parshin,
which played an important role in Faltings' proof of the Mordell Conjecture.
Part of this project is joint work with Kebekus. In another project the PI and
Hacon are going to study the impact of the existence of nowhere vanishing
differential forms on the geometry of the underlying variety. Their goal is to
prove several outstanding conjectures in the area. In another project the PI is
planning to prove a a characterization of the projective space and quadric
hypersurfaces that will give a far reaching common generalization of Mori's
theorem (earlier known as Hartshorne's conjecture) and Beauville's conjecture.
The latter was settled by Araujo, Druel and the PI recently. In yet another
project the PI hopes to prove a strong rational resolution theorem. One
application of this result would be that varieties with rational singularities
admit a compactification with only rational singularities
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is in the field of algebraic
geometry, one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one that blossomed
to the point where it has solved problems that have stood for centuries.
Originally, and still in its simplest form it treats figures defined in the
plane by polynomials. Today, the field uses methods not only from algebra, but
also from analysis and topology, and conversely it is extensively used in those
fields. Moreover it has proved itself useful in fields as diverse as physics,
theoretical computer science, cryptography, coding theory and robotics. A
central problem in algebraic geometry is the classification of all geometric
objects. In turn, an important part of classification theory is the theory of
moduli. The latter's core idea is that one does not only want to understand
these objects, but also understand the way they can be deformed. Moduli spaces
play a very important role in theoretical physics. Studying curves on moduli
spaces provides information on how an object is changing in space-time. One of
the focuses of this project is on compact moduli spaces. Those are extensions of
moduli spaces in general and they give additional information about singular
deformations, ones that are essentially different from others. Other goals of
the project involve a better understanding of certain higher dimensional
varieties.