* 0856531
* AON:  Continuing the Beaufort Gyre Observing System to Document and Enhance Understanding Environmental Change in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Mary-Louise Timmermans, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 06/30/2014
* USD 5,274,224.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Arctic Observing Network (AON)
project will conduct Beaufort Gyre Observational System (BGOS) operations begun
in 2003 during 2009-2014 to document the unprecedented changes in sea ice and
ocean parameters that are presently occurring in the Beaufort Gyre (BG) region.
The project will measure time series of temperature, salinity, currents,
geochemical tracers, sea ice draft, and sea level using bottom-tethered moorings
and shipboard measurements. Three moorings will acquire precise data on the
variations of the vertical distribution of seawater properties, bottom pressures
and sea ice draft at sites: 75N and 150W; 78N and 150W; and 77N and 140W. Ship-
based sampling covering the entire BG, will be performed in collaboration with
scientists in Canada and Japan with shared logistics expenses, to augment the
year-round mooring measurements. Temperature, salinity, oxygen, nutrients,
barium and delta-18O will be measured and analyzed at 30 standard locations
along 140W, 150W, ~ 75N and ~78N sections using shipboard CTD/rosette to provide
long-term time series started in 2003. Samples that provide information on
longer time-scales, such as CFCs and carbon tetrachloride, alkalinity, total
CO2, dissolved inorganic carbon and tritium/3He, will be collected less
frequently. Between CTD/rosette casts, expendable CTDs that profile to 1100 m
depth will be used to increase spatial resolution of the temperature and
salinity fields. The proposed work will be coordinated with the basic elements
of AON to enhance effectiveness and interconnections of observational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;