* 0856162
* Advanced Carbon Nanotube-Liquid Crystalline Elastomer Nanocomposites and Their Actuation Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jian Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 310,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to more fully
understand carbon nanotube (CNT)-liquid crystalline elastomer (LCE)
nanocomposites and their actuation behaviors. Adding a small amount of properly
functionalized CNTs into the LCE will create a new class of CNT-LCE actuators
that can be stimulated via an electrical field, electrical Joule heating, and
remote IR irradiation with excellent actuation performance and improved
mechanical properties. Pure LCE actuators can only be actuated by changing the
temperatures of their surroundings. In order to uniformly disperse the CNTs in
the LCE matrix and to achieve strong coupling between the CNTs and the LCE, the
surfaces of the CNTs will be engineered rationally with various types of
functional materials. The effects of CNT chemistry and loading on the structure
and the material properties of the CNT-LCE nanocomposites will be established.
The actuation behaviors of the CNT-LCE actuators under different stimuli
including electrical field and remote IR irradiation will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;A greater understanding of this new class of CNT-LCE composites will
have a significant impact on the field of smart materials. The strong synergies
between CNTs with various characteristics and LCEs can generate many novel
properties and functions, and lead to practical applications in actuators,
artificial muscles, micropumps, and micromotors. The technological results will
be shared with industry partners, and the knowledge gained will be integrated
into newly established courses to educate students about the growing importance
of nanomaterials. Particular emphasis will be placed on developing research
experiences for students of underrepresented groups and for middle/high school
students enrolled in various science programs at UWM to introduce the concept of
nanotechnology and to expand their interest in science.&lt;br/&gt;