* 0856278
* US-Brazil Workshop on Functional and Nanomaterials; Sao Paulo, Brazil, August 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 03/31/2011
* USD 36,740.00

Abstract 0856278&lt;br/&gt;Duran, Randolph S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas
Program award, with co-funding from the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Division of Chemistry, will provide support for a two-day workshop on functional
and nanomaterials at the Brazilian State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), in
August 2009. The organizers of the workshop are: Miguel Garcia-Garibay (UCLA)
Randy Duran (Univ. Florida, UF) James Brown (Morehouse College), Ronaldo Pilli
(UNICAMP) and Jose Riveros (Univ. Sao Paulo, USP). Scientists from the US and
Brazil will discuss emerging aspects of their research. Participants will
include students and faculty from UF, UCLA, the Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority (LSAMP) Program, UNICAMP, and USP. Topics will include biomolecule
patterning techniques at the nanoscale, dynamics of materials, electronic
transport in materials, and light harvesting materials. A 1-day short course on
nanomaterials is also planned. The main purpose for this activity is to foster
joint research collaborations at the frontier of materials science and condensed
phase dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed 2008 workshop and the
corresponding short course will attempt to develop an integrated viewpoint of
structures and functions necessary to understand and design a new generation of
complex materials. A perspective on materials dynamics also allows for a
seamless collaboration between experimentalists and theorists with a broad range
of expertise and interests. A key goal is to identify collaborative projects
involving undergraduate and graduate students and researchers from both
countries. &lt;br/&gt;