* 0856065
* Pilot: Tangible Interaction Kiosks: Integrating Physical/Digital Interaction and Visual Design to Support Creativity in K-12 Informal Science Education
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Rod Parker, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2012
* USD 199,711.00

This project develops and applies ?tangible interaction kiosks? to support
creativity in K-12 informal science education. It is a collaboration among
design and computational faculty and students, and builds on synergistic ongoing
NSF and state-funded efforts. Tangible interaction kiosks are a platform for
human-computer interaction that combine interaction devices (developed with
support from NSF MRI 0521559) and static and dynamic visuals. This builds upon
previous efforts to support informal middle school science education, in
cooperation with the Louisiana-based NSF LIGO Science Education Center (SEC) and
extends to several middle schools across Louisiana. The first kiosk content is a
multi-player ?Powers of Ten? game where competing children attempt to guess the
physical scale of successive images. Movie or game content is chosen through a
tangible interface, while child interaction is conducted through several knob-
augmented handheld computers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF pilot carries out new
three-pronged research with focus upon the development of creative tools for
graphic designers, domain scientists, K-12 teachers, and K-12 student end-users
who take on central roles in new content production. The researchers are
developing, applying, and evaluating:&lt;br/&gt;? tools that support authoring
new content for variations of the existing educational game;&lt;br/&gt;? tools
for allowing graphic designers, domain scientists, K-12 teachers, and K-12
student end users to engage in content creation, leveraging the existing Anoto
and LiveScribe smart pen technologies; and&lt;br/&gt;? discussions and planning
toward generalizing this approach to other scientific domains and audiences, in
support of a full CreativeIT proposal to be proposed for launch after the two-
year pilot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses upon the support of
creativity with information technology, and innovative educational approaches.
The tools? creativity support is being evaluated on:&lt;br/&gt;? how the
platform enhances the creative processes of iterative interaction
design;&lt;br/&gt;? how the platform enhances the creative process of content
production; and&lt;br/&gt;? how content delivered on the platform supports
creativity in the learning processes of student users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;