* 0856737
* Semi-Autonomous Networks: A System-Theoretic Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Mehran Mesbahi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 09/30/2013
* USD 281,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a methodology for examining
system-theoretic aspects of semi-autonomous networked system. These systems
consist of a collection of dynamic units that evolve according to a
predetermined interaction protocol over an information-exchange network, and a
set of units that act as interfaces between the networked systems and its
exogenous operational environment. The system-theoretic attributes of particular
interest in this project include controllability, observability, and feedback
performance of semi-autonomous networks, as well characterization of most
influential interfaces- which in this project- will be examined with respect to
graph-theoretic and algebraic structures of the underlying network. In this
venue, the network features that are interest include its symmetry, degree
sequence, diameter, centrality of its nodes, connectivity, and incidence
relationship between its spanning trees and cycles. This framework will be
developed in the context of a canonical dynamic model, namely, diffusion-like
models of interactions and their extensions. Deliverables include a
documentation of research results in terms of journal and conference
publications, modeling and analysis tools for semi-autonomous networks,
engineering student education, and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will provide a framework for augmenting a variety of networked systems for
improved performance, including engineering realizations of formations,
distributed sensor networks, as well as synthetic lattice-like structures in
nano-systems. This award will lead to developing a new course with the aim of
bridging a gap between networked systems analysis and control and their
scientific and engineering realizations in science and engineering. This goal
will further be facilitated by organizing a workshop on networked systems during
the final year of the project and the development of a new curriculum for
graduate program in systems and control.&lt;br/&gt;