* 0856044
* Studies in Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Anurag Singh, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 07/31/2014
* USD 207,900.00

The PI will work on several problems in commutative algebra that are centered
around the homological conjectures, tight closure, and local cohomology. Some of
these, such as the homological conjectures, are old problems for which recent
advances have provided the hope of a solution; the problems on tight closure and
finiteness properties of local cohomology modules are a continuation of the PI's
long-term projects. Hochster's monomial conjecture is unresolved for rings that
do not contain a field, such as those arising in number theory. Two approaches
to this will be pursued: the first is a natural extension of Heitmann's work;
another is via local cohomology theory. Brenner and Monsky recently proved that
tight closure need not commute with localization. However, it appears likely
that weak F-regularity---the property that all ideals of a ring are tightly
closed---does localize. This will be approached via the notion of splinter
rings. It is also proposed to attack Lyubeznik's conjecture that local
cohomology modules of regular rings have finitely many associated prime ideals.
This is now known in various cases, but remains unresolved for polynomial rings
over the integers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with questions
in commutative algebra. This is a field closely related to algebraic geometry:
while algebraic geometry focuses on the geometry of solution sets of polynomial
equations, the point of view in commutative algebra is to study the ring of
polynomial functions on a solution set. Most of the questions that will be
investigated may be viewed as questions about the existence of solutions for
families of equations, and about the nature of the solution sets. Commutative
algebra continues to develop a fascinating interaction with several branches of
mathematics, and is becoming an increasingly valuable tool in engineering,
coding theory, cryptography, and other applications of strategic
interest.&lt;br/&gt;