* 0856702
* Collaborative Research:  Adaptive Maintenance Planning Based on Evolving Residual Life Distributions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lisa Maillart, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 324,732.00

This grant provides funding for the development of broadly applicable analytical
and statistical tools that determine adaptive maintenance policies for complex
systems that deteriorate over time. In contrast to existing techniques, these
new mathematical models will link low-level, sensor-based condition data with
high-level maintenance decision making. In particular, the techniques will
determine how often condition-based data should be collected, when repairs or
replacements of critical components should take place, and when spare parts
should be acquired in anticipation of impending failures. The resulting policies
will be adaptive in nature, meaning that they will revise the timing of
maintenance actions based on observed data. For individual components, Bayesian
statistical techniques will be developed to model degradation patterns and the
evolving residual life distribution of the component. At the system level,
environmental data will be used to develop versatile stochastic failure models
to estimate the system's residual life distribution. For both cases, Markov
decision process models that effectively convert these residual life
distributions into cost-optimal, adaptive maintenance policies will be analyzed.
Laboratory experiments will be performed to assess the applicability of the
techniques to real problems and to validate the models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will improve the way that firms translate vast
quantities of condition monitoring data into maintenance decisions. Determining
the optimal timing of data collection, repairs and replacements, and spare parts
ordering is vital to the maintenance of engineering systems including
manufacturing systems, aging infrastructure, aviation systems, and many others.
Performing the right type of maintenance activity at the right time will reduce
maintenance costs while improving safety.