* 0856060
* Opportunities and Challenges in the Field of Semiconducting (conjugated) Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2016
* Alan Heeger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2016
* USD 986,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The research will focus on two aspects of current
opportunities and challenges in the field of conducting polymers: A.
Interdisciplinary research, involving polymer science, physics and device
science, will improve the efficiency and brightness of the emission from Light-
Emitting Field Effect transistors (LEFET) with a goal of successfully
demonstrating polymer injection lasers. Distributed Feedback (DFB) resonators
will be imprinted directly into the light emitting polymer within the LEFET.
Blends of luminescent polymers will be used to shift the emission (via Förster
transfer, FRET) away from the polymer absorption to reduce losses and thereby
achieve higher gain. A split-gate architecture will be introduced for separate
control of electron and hole injection. Brightness will be extended to the
highest level possible using pulsed LEFET operation. B. Basic physics and
materials science of ?next generation? semiconducting polymers. Examples include
poly(2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (PBTTT) and the
poly(carbazole-acceptor) alternating copolymers and related structures with D-A
repeat units. Studies of the spectroscopy, photoconductivity, photo-luminescence
and ultrafast photoinduced absorption will be carried out on spin-cast, blade
coated, and chain-oriented films to provide fundamental information on the
electronic structure of these new polymer semiconductors. Gate-induced
conductivity measurements in FETs fabricated with the semiconducting polymer in
the channel enable gate induced control of the carrier density and thereby
enable studies of both the insulator-metal transition and the mechanism of
transport in the ?metallic? state.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Research in the field of semiconducting and metallic
polymers has created new concepts of broad importance to interdisciplinary
science; examples include detailed studies of the insulator-to-metal transition
in polymers, solitons and polarons as the primary excitations in semiconducting
polymers, demonstration of electroluminescent light emission from polymer light-
emitting diodes, and the discovery of the novel electrochemistry of conducting
polymers. Research on semiconducting polymers has resulted in the demonstration
of opportunities for potentially important commercial products based upon
?printed plastic electronics?, including, for example, low cost plastic solar
cells created using controlled nano-scale phase separation. The specific
subjects that are the focus of this proposal, the basic science of ?next
generation? semiconducting polymers and the fabrication and study of novel
devices (such as the Light Emitting Field Effect Transistor) involve a
combination of polymer science, condensed matter physics, device science,
materials chemistry, interface chemistry and materials science. Because of its
interdisciplinary nature, the research has the potential for impact across a
broad range of science and technology, and it is ideally suited for the
education and training of graduate students and post-doctoral researchers.

