* 0856391
* Surface Engineering of Gallium Nitride with Biomolecules
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Albena Ivanisevic, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 268,413.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a versatile method to
engineer the surface properties of gallium nitride (GaN), a semiconductor
material used for the fabrication of different microelectronic devices. The work
will start by utilizing a Grubb?s catalyst previously used in polymer synthesis.
The Grubb?s catalyst will enable to modify the surface with a variety of
different functional groups using an olefin cross metathesis reaction. The
availability of a general route to place different chemical functionalities on
the surface is essential for the development of (bio)sensors. The work
progresses from the development of the catalysis reaction on the GaN surface to
the optimization of all the reaction conditions so that several classes of
biomolecules can be anchored on the GaN surface while still retaining their
recognition properties and specificity. Deliverables of this award will include
an empirical model for selectivity of olefin cross metathesis on GaN. The model
will be derived by performing a set of surface characterization tests in order
to quantify chemical, morphological and mechanical properties of the modified
GaN. If successful, the results of this research will increase the understanding
of the possible ways to enhance the properties of GaN. The knowledge can be used
to design new types of devices and interfaces that utilize a more robust and
functional GaN. For example, GaN based transistor devices can benefit from high
chemical stability and be used in more reliable and label free biosensor schemes
if desired chemical groups are present on surfaces. Undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as underrepresented minorities such as women majoring in
engineering will be engaged with the research efforts as well as an outreach
program with local middle school students. Through the outreach activities
associated with this work, the students will be to educate the audience on their
research efforts, to convey the excitement of their scientific investigation, to
portray a positive image of their research and to provide role models for the
younger attendants (middle and high school students).