* 0856415
* RUI: Thermal Properties of Strongly-Coupled Extreme Type-II Superconductors in the Mixed State
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Sasha Dukan, Goucher College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports research and
education as part of the NSF Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
program, and involves the theoretical study of the properties of strongly-
coupled superconductors. The recent discovery of iron-based superconductors in
January 2008, and the discovery of the magnesium diboride superconductors in
2001, has stimulated great scientific interest. These superconductors are all of
the extreme type-II variety which permits coexistence of superconductivity with
high magnetic field as well as having high transition temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to calculate the thermodynamic properties of
strongly coupled extreme type-II superconductors starting from the high-field
limit of the Landau level pairing scheme. First, a theoretical model will be
derived and used to perform numerical calculations based on experimentally-
determined parameters that help provide insight into the thermodynamic and
transport properties of these superconductors. The ultimate goal is to elucidate
the nature of the mixed state of type-II
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational aspects of the project
will provide a variety of learning opportunities for physics, mathematics, and
computer science undergraduate students. The research will also be integrated
into the academic program at Goucher College, where it will contribute to an
interdisciplinary materials science emphasis already in place in the physics
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
supports a research and education effort in the Department of Physics at Goucher
College, an independent, co-educational liberal arts college located in
Baltimore County, Maryland. The research component of this program will focus on
enhancing our understanding of two new classes of superconducting materials that
have been discovered in the past decade, magnesium diboride in 2001 and iron-
based superconductors in 2008. Development of improved superconducting materials
of the type studied as part of this research offer potential promise for
upgrading the reliability, capacity, and efficiency of the national power grid.
The research will focus on developing theoretical models that describe the
properties of these novel superconductors, and then carry out numerical
simulations to help understand how these materials behave under different
conditions, such as changes in temperature.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
computational aspects of the project will provide a variety of learning
opportunities for physics, mathematics, and computer science undergraduate
students. The research will also be integrated into the academic program at
Goucher College, where it will contribute to an interdisciplinary materials
science emphasis already in place in the physics curriculum.