* 0856596
* SGER: Canada Shifts Green? The Economy, the Environment and Electoral Choice in a Contemporary Mature Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Allan Kornberg, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2009
* USD 50,230.00

The dominance of valence issues in electoral politics in Canada and other mature
democracies such as Britain and the United States is typical but not inevitable.
The upcoming Green Shift debate promises to be different because it will involve
discussions about the efficacy of innovative government fiscal policies to
protect the environment. Of course, the environment, by itself, is a
quintessential valence issue -- everyone favors a healthy, pollution-free
environment and its many attendant virtues. However, by proposing a radically
revamped tax structure to achieve this highly valued consensual goal, the Green
Shift becomes a contentious position issue. Thus, Canada's forthcoming Green
Shift debate will provide an excellent opportunity to determine how voters make
their electoral choices when confronted with a major, novel, position issue with
strong normative overtones. The explicit link between environmental and economic
consequences made by the Green Shift policy can be expected to appear in similar
debates in other major democracies in the years ahead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study examines two topics: 1) the explanatory power of rival valence and
position models of party choice in the new issue era; and 2) the dynamics of
partisanship and consequences for Canada's new party system. The study re-
interviews 6,018 Canadian citizens who participated in a survey conducted for
the 2006 elections. The respondents are interviewed before and after the 2008
election to examine the impact of the Green Shift issue on traditional vote
choice models and to consider the factors causing changing partisan attachments
in the Canadian electorate across two election cycles.&lt;br/&gt;