* 0856333
* Modeling of Endothelial Cell Adhesion Dynamics Modulated by Experimental Molecular Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 08/31/2012
* USD 370,989.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In experimental biomechanical
studies, a common problem is the difficulty of conducting a large number of
tests for the efficacy time course of engineering manipulation. An integrated
experimental and computational molecular biomechanics model for the enhancement
of endothelial cell adhesion in arterial reconstruction is proposed. Endothelial
cells play a critical role for protecting blood vessels against thrombosis and
atherosclerosis, which is associated with platelet activation and blood
coagulation. Endothelial cell lining of arterial constructs is an effective
approach for preventing intimal hyperplasia in reconstructed arteries. However,
endothelial cells often detach from reconstructed arteries due to weak adhesion
strength, hampering the effectiveness of endothelial cell lining. Hence, the
research thrusts are: (1) the adhesion of endothelial cells will be enhanced by
experimental molecular modulation of selected adhesion regulatory factors; (2)
the focal contact association/dissociation rates of the intergrin receptor and
ligand pair binding at the molecular level will be computed; and (3) the
adhesion strength of modulated endothelial cells will be predicted by
computational simulation under various hemodynamic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;Societal Impact and Intellectual Merit: Vascular thrombosis, intimal
hyperplasia, and atherosclerosis are common disorders affecting about 50% of the
human population. Thus, a novel investigation leading to a potential reduction
in these disorders will elicit significant impact in the scientific as well as
non-scientific communities. The proposed research, while using the arterial
reconstruction model as an example, addresses a fundamental topic: enhancing a
desired cell function by modulating molecular activities, a potentially
effective engineering approach not only for basic scientific research but also
for the treatment of pathological disorders. Although this investigation focuses
on endothelial cell adhesion in arterial reconstruction, the concept of
integrating computational approach with experimental molecular modulation of
cell function can be generalized and used for other pathological disorders.