* 0856089
* Pilot: Art(ificial): Generation of Creative Visual Metaphor for Communicating Intension
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Dan Ventura, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 217,183.00

Art can be a profound communication medium and is an explicit example of
creative process. This project explores creativity in the context of an
artificial artist -- a system that produces visual representation for the
purpose of communicating an internal concept to the viewer. Viewers that
experience a connection to the artist via this communication are implicitly and
powerfully influenced to attribute creativity to the artist. Since creators are
seen to be (or not to be) creative through the perceptions of others, a
significant aspect of creativity is the ability of the creator to convince
others, explicitly or implicitly, that he or she possesses the attribute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initially, the project will focus on constructing a system
that autonomously creates visual art based on a subject image and markets itself
by explaining its selection of subject, choice of style, etc. and possibly the
concept the artefact is intended to convey. Eventually, the project will work
from an internal concept model to produce an artefact intended to implicitly
communicate that concept. The successful completion of the project will result
in a computational system to which creativity can be attributed and will explore
the role of creativity in understanding and communicating concepts through
visual metaphor. The project will involve work in a broad variety of fields
including computer vision, natural language processing, cognitive science,
design and art, suggesting the potential for interesting advances at the
intersection of several of these areas. The project also initiates a dialogue
with the artistic community regarding whether artificial systems can
successfully establish this kind of abstract communication with human
recipients; for example, we have established a collaboration with one of the
largest and best attended art museums in the Mountain West, and they have
indicated a willingness to pursue a significant exhibition event.&lt;br/&gt;