* 0856320
* A Novel Containerless Melting and Casting Process for Structural Cast Magnesium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Nagy El-Kaddah, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 359,010.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a novel technology for
producing high quality magnesium castings. The work involves advanced
computational and experimental methods that will result in the development of a
new electromagnetic casting process and of a process model that is general
enough to apply to several conventional electromagnetic casting and
solidification processes. The research approach will progress from the
development of a comprehensive mathematical model of the melting operation to
understanding of the influences of casting variables on the microstructures and
mechanical properties of cast magnesium alloys. Deliverables include a modeling
and analysis tools, development of a processing-microstructure-properties
database, documentation and dissemination of research results, engineering
student education, and engineering research experiences for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will provide a series of computational tools that can be used to optimize
electromagnetic melting and casting of metals. This research will also yield a
means to produce castings with high purities, low defect contents, and unique
microstructures. Examples include light weight magnesium alloys which are highly
reactive and difficult to produce. The computational tools developed in this
research will be broadly applicable to other electromagnetic melting and casting
techniques such as skull induction melting and electromagnetic casting. The
results will be disseminated to allow the creation of commercial devices that
have increased precision, reduced cost, reduced weight, and improved
recyclability. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit
through classroom instruction and involvement in the research. Undergraduate
students from the University of Alabama and historically black colleges and
universities will be engaged to provide them firsthand research experience.