* 0856675
* Symmetry of Discrete Geometric Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Egon Schulte, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 136,374.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Schulte, Egon Proposal Number: DMS - 0856675
Institution: Northeastern University Title: Symmetry of Discrete Geometric
Structures

This grant supports the PI's research on discrete structures in geometry and
combinatorics, such as polytopes, maps, graphs, complexes and tessellations,
with symmetry as the unifying theme. One major goal is the analysis and
classification of various kinds of highly-symmetric polyhedra, graphs or
complexes in Euclidean spaces, with a focus on ordinary three-space. Specific
research projects aim at the full enumeration of the discrete regular polygonal
complexes, the fully transitive polyhedra, the two-orbit polyhedra, and the non-
discrete chiral or regular polyhedra of finite local complexity. Another main
focus is to explore unexploited connections between maps, graphs and abstract
polytopes. This includes constructions of graphs from polytopes, and polytopes
from graphs, as well as topological classification results for polytopes based
on those for maps. Another important direction of research are modular reduction
techniques in abstract polytopes. This involves a detailed study of polytopes
and reflection groups in finite orthogonal geometries associated with Coxeter
(or other) groups, and of polytopes derived from groups of linear fractional
transformations over complex or quaternionic integers. Further projects concern
abstract two-orbit polytopes and links between polytopes and incidence
geometries. The proposed activities will involve several PhD and Masters
students.

The PI's approach takes a broad and long-range view, bringing together methods
and tools from a wide range of different fields (geometry, combinatorics,
algebra, topology and number theory), to advance our knowledge and understanding
of various kinds of highly-symmetric discrete polyhedral structures. The most
natural examples are generalized polyhedra in ordinary space, studied through
their graphs by a skeletal approach. These are fundamental geometric objects
that will stay in mathematics, independent of trends or fashion. Via their
skeletal nature as periodic geometric graphs in space, they also have
considerable potential for applications in the design and synthesis of molecular
structures appearing in crystallography, physics or biology. Tessellations, or
maps, on surfaces or manifolds are another rich source of polyhedral structures
with a high degree of symmetry. There has been a huge amount of work on maps and
graphs, parallel to, but largely independent, of developments in polytope
theory. One general goal of the proposed research is to cross-fertilize these
areas. Polyhedral structures may also be purely abstract, exhibiting
combinatorial or algebraic symmetry, and may in some cases be associated with
finite geometric spaces.