* 0856201
* Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* William Woodin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inner Model Program is one of
the&lt;br/&gt;central areas of Set Theory. The traditional view of this program
has been that of an increment program with progress measured by a progression up
the hierarchy of large cardinals. &lt;br/&gt;It is now known that this view is
not correct. A critical transition occurs at the level of exactly one
supercompact cardinal, and in solving the Inner Model Program for this specific
large cardinal axiom, one solves the Inner Model Program for essentially all
known large cardinal axioms. The solution must necessarily yield an ultimate
enlargement of Goedel's inner model L. This ultimate-L must closely approximate
the parent universe within which it is constructed. The ramifications for Set
Theory will be profound, ranging from new inconsistency results in ZF to
combinatorial theorems of ZFC proved by exploiting the closeness of ultimate-L
to V. Ultimate-L will also provide a key setting for resolving the hierarchy of
large cardinals beyond the level of omega-huge cardinals which constitute
essentially the strongest large cardinals axioms which are not known to be
inconsistent. The point is that ultimate-L inherits large cardinals from V
exactly as L inherits large cardinals from V if 0-sharp does not exist.
Therefore the analysis of what is possible in ultimate-L is in effect the
analysis of what is possible in V.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical study
of Infinity in its modern incarnation dates from the&lt;br/&gt;work of Cantor in
the late 19th century, this area of mathematics&lt;br/&gt;is Set Theory. With
the results of Goedel and then&lt;br/&gt;Cohen from the middle of the 20th
century it was established that many of the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problems could
not be solved on the basis of the current ZFC axioms for Set Theory. The most
famous example is the problem of Cantor's Continuum&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis which
was placed first by Hilbert on his list of 20 questions&lt;br/&gt;in 1900. The
solution to this question and the numerous other questions now known to be
unsolvable requires the discovery of new axioms beyond the current axioms. Over
the last few years a new approach to this problem has emerged based on
generalizations of Goedel's axiom of constructibility. There is now convincing
evidence that this approach will lead to new axioms which settle all the
problems of Set Theory currently known to be unsolvable, are compatible with all
known strong axioms of infinity, and which themselves are immune to kind of
unsolvable problems that are ubiquitous in Set Theory. These examples will be
the first examples of such axioms ever discovered and therefore show great
promise for at long last finding the correct axioms for Set Theory and thereby
solving in particular the problem of the Continuum Hypothesis.