* 0856594
* Collaborative Research: Variational Kinematic Geometry and Task Driven Mechanism Design in VR Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Qiaode Jeffrey Ge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 05/31/2013
* USD 187,489.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to develop a new,
constraint based paradigm for task-driven mechanism design in a virtual
environment. Concepts in variational geometry for constraint based geometric
modeling will be extended from geometric domain to kinematic domain for
representing and resolving kinematic constraints that define a given motion.
This facilitates a constraint based analysis, classification, and synthesis of
rigid body motions by applying and adapting existing methods in the field of
computational shape analysis. Deliverables include: (1) a B-spline motion
generation tool for specifying a motion task; (2) a novel motion trajectory
analysis tool for converting a prescribed planar or spherical motion into a set
of geometric primitives; (3) a database of basic planar or spherical mechanism
constructs sorted by the geometric constraints that they can generate; and (4)
an interactive, virtual-reality (VR) enabled design environment that solves the
problem of mechanism design as a shape identification and retrieval problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to a new, multidisciplinary framework called "Variational Kinematic
Geometry." It will make the often elusive task of concept generation in
mechanism design more tractable. The proposed design environment will be capable
of solving highly complex motion generation problems without requiring advanced
knowledge of kinematics from the user. The results will be disseminated through
the software distribution to other fields such as biomechanics, structure
chemistry and protein kinematics, as well as micro- and nano-systems, in which
kinematics plays an important role. The virtual design tool will be used as an
education tool for teaching and learning spatial visualization and reasoning and
for exploring the interplay between geometry and motion. The education and
outreach activities of the proposed effort will help promote interest for
science and engineering from underrepresented groups and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;