* 0856274
* Using Oxygen Isotopes to Constrain Ozone Sources and Sinks
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Greg Michalski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 299,748.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Ozone plays a critical role in global and regional atmospheric chemistry and has
a significant impact on global climate, making it vital to understand ozone
source and sink processes. Although substantial progress has been made, there
are many open questions regarding ozone dynamics, long-rage transport, and the
importance of stratospheric exchange. Variation in the oxygen isotope
composition of ozone provides a window into these processes, however, data are
very limited because existing methods for sampling ozone for isotopic analysis
are complex, cumbersome, and impractical for routine application. Uncertainties
in laboratory-determined pressure and temperature dependencies of ozone isotopic
composition of ozone also hinder progress. The thrusts of this project are the
development and application of a new methodology for determining the oxygen
isotopic composition of ozone molecules, and laboratory experiments to determine
the pressure and temperatures dependencies of ozone isotope effects under
simulated tropospheric conditions. Analysis of daily/nightly ozone isotope
composition measurements on the Purdue University campus and in a network of
stations across the U.S. for a one-year period will provide new data on the
observed pressure and temperature dependence of ozone isotope composition in the
troposphere. These data will also give insight into the kinetic isotope effects
of ozone oxidation reactions in the atmosphere. The laboratory studies will
reduce uncertainties in the theoretical pressure and temperature dependence of
ozone isotopic composition, which will then be compared with the field data. In
addition to developing an in situ ozone proxy, the data from the laboratory
experiments provide insights into the internal distribution of oxygen isotopes
in ozone, which will further our understanding of mass independent isotope
effects. In addition to improving the understanding of atmospheric ozone
cycling, the project will support an early-career investigator, an under-
represented group doctoral student, and will continue development of
relationships between university researchers and state government agencies.
Undergraduate students will also be part of the research team. A volunteer ozone
sampling component will incorporate community participation into the project.