* 0856488
* The Effect of Surfaces on the Strength of   Nanoscale Silicon Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Alan Zehnder, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 295,508.00

The Effect of Surfaces on the Strength of Nanoscale Structures

This collaboration between an engineering and a chemistry laboratory will
develop an understanding of fracture at the atomic scale using a newly developed
technique capable of accurately measuring the strength of tiny (nanoscale)
samples of material. Previous research by the collaborators has shown that a
single layer of molecules can significantly improve the strength of nanoscale
silicon beams, whereas atomic-scale roughness can lead to strength degradation.
A combination of experiments and computer simulations will be used to understand
the origins of these effects. This understanding will enable the development of
chemical coatings and processes for the production of very strong and very
stable nanometer-scale mechanical devices. By integrating research and
education, this interdisciplinary project will educate undergraduate and
graduate students in an area of increasing technological and economic importance
the production of high strength, long-life micro- and nano-electromechanical
devices (MEMS and NEMS) and will prepare these students for subsequent careers
in education, industry and public service. The project will contribute to the
advancement of technology by developing new commercially-viable processes. To
attract more students to careers in science and technology, particularly
students from traditionally underrepresented groups, members of the research
team will participate in a variety of educational outreach activities to K-12
students and teachers. In addition to new activities, the researchers will
continue their involvement with the Cornell Institute for Chemistry Teachers and
Project High Jump two programs designed to improve high school education.