* 0856555
* Innovative Self-Centering Braces for Advanced Seismic Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Larry Fahnestock, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 05/31/2012
* USD 148,785.00

Buckling-restrained braces are currently being used as primary lateral-force
resisting elements for buildings in high seismic regions. After strong ground
shaking buildings containing buckling-restrained braces are likely to be
permanently deformed and thus their repairs may not be feasible. Since it is
desirable to develop structural systems that self-center and have no permanent
deformation, this project will investigate the use of innovative self-centering
buckling-restrained braces as seismic protective devices in buildings. The
proposed self-centering buckling-restrained brace consists of a novel
configuration of steel tubes and anchorage plates installed with super-elastic
shape-memory alloy rods to provide a self-centering mechanism with predictable
and stable energy dissipation. The primary objective of the proposed research is
to conduct experimental and numerical studies that establish a sound basis for
application of the proposed protective system in practice. Large-scale prototype
self-centering buckling-restrained braces will be tested to verify the
anticipated brace behavior and to examine the effect of critical brace
parameters. Numerical models will be developed and validated for use in
parametric component studies and braced frame earthquake simulations. The
results from the experimental and numerical studies will be used to develop
design and fabrication guidelines for practical implementation of self-centering
buckling-restrained braces in earthquake-resistant structural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The use of the proposed self-centering buckling-restrained
brace system has the potential to significantly limit earthquake damage and
economic loss in building structures. The proposed protective system can be
easily substituted for conventional steel braces or buckling-restrained braces,
and this ease of use will make it especially attractive to practicing engineers
and contractors. The use of self-centering buckling-restrained braced frame
systems, which can be designed to withstand large earthquakes with little to no
damage, has the potential for significant broader impact on earthquake affected
communities by providing buildings with immediate occupancy performance. This
project will also provide unique learning opportunities and training to
undergraduate and graduate students as they actively participate in the
development of this advanced protective system.