* 0856438
* Detection and Mitigation of Hazardous Releases in Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Anna Stefanopoulou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 585,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop and apply a novel technology for the automatic detection and real-time
mitigation of accidental or deliberate hazardous releases in infrastructure
systems. The proposed technology can be used to protect a passenger terminal,
transportation tunnel, tall building or channel carrying water to a municipality
in a reliable, cost-effective and socially acceptable way. A prototype will be
built at laboratory scale to demonstrate the ability of the method to detect and
control hazardous chemicals in real time. Microsensors capable of detecting a
broad menu of chemical agents will be installed at strategic locations in the
prototype. The sensors will detect the chemical agent and transmit a signal to a
computer control model. The model will provide optimal operation scenarios for
bleed valves mounted on the channel walls. Elimination of the chemical cloud
will be achieved by optimal blowing and suction of ambient fluid or injection of
counteracting chemicals. The sensing and control model will be tested in two
large-scale applications including the McNamara terminal of the Detroit
Metropolitan airport and the Detroit-Windsor tunnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will bring together state of the art equipment and technologies from
electrical, mechanical and environmental engineering. It will train three
doctoral students in an interdisciplinary research effort including
microelectronics, fluid mechanics, computational science, management, cost
optimization, control theory and instrumentation of sensors and actuators. The
prototype system will become part of the Michigan Tech Day exhibits and a user
friendly version of the software will be made available both on line and at the
Ann Arbor Hands on Museum. Underrepresented minority students will participate
in the project through the Dual Degree in Engineering Program of the University
of Michigan. The final product will provide a powerful tool to security,
transportation and regulatory agencies for making critical decisions during
times of emergency. It will produce a new methodology for addressing potential
disasters in real time without human intervention. It will offer graduate and
undergraduate students, professional engineers, high school students and the
general public a unique opportunity to appreciate how advances in
multidisciplinary research can transform our methods for infrastructure security
and improve the quality of life.