* 0200614
* Valuations in Dynamics and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Mattias Jonsson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 90,003.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0200614&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mattias
Jonsson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator will use valuations, &lt;br/&gt;a tool from algebra, to study local
problems &lt;br/&gt;in dynamics and analysis in two complex dimensions.
&lt;br/&gt;Valuations can be visualized concretely as the&lt;br/&gt;different
ways that a sequence of points can converge&lt;br/&gt;to the origin. In fact,
they parameterize all the&lt;br/&gt;local data at a point. Local phenomena in
complex variables, &lt;br/&gt;such as the singularity of a plurisubharmonic
functions &lt;br/&gt;or the rate of convergence of an orbit to a fixed
point,&lt;br/&gt;can be effectively studied by observing the behavior
along&lt;br/&gt;different approaches to the point. Valuations constitute
a&lt;br/&gt;very powerful tool for this study. The success of
the&lt;br/&gt;approach depends on the fact that the set of all
valuations&lt;br/&gt;at a point in two dimensions is a set that can be
understood:&lt;br/&gt;it is a tree in the sense of an infinite collection of
real &lt;br/&gt;intervals welded together at branch points so that no
cycles&lt;br/&gt;appear. This tree is a complicated but manageable
object&lt;br/&gt;and its one-dimensionality has striking
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems are mathematical models
that are widely &lt;br/&gt;used in virtually every science for any situation
that&lt;br/&gt;undergoes a time-evolution. Sir Isaac Newton
invented&lt;br/&gt;calculus, or mathematical analysis, for the study of
the&lt;br/&gt;planetary system, a prime example of a dynamical
system.&lt;br/&gt;Much of mathematics has developed as a respond to the
need&lt;br/&gt;to model and understand the world around us.&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal the principal investigator will use a tool&lt;br/&gt;from a different
field of mathematics in order to understand&lt;br/&gt;certain dynamical systems.
One example of a system&lt;br/&gt;that can be studied arises from numerical
(iterative) &lt;br/&gt;algorithms, and the study of the dynamical systems in
&lt;br/&gt;this proposal will give information on the performance of
&lt;br/&gt;the algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;