* 0200500
* A Broad Research Program in the Sciences of Complexity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* George Gumerman, Santa Fe Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,191,000.00

The Santa Fe Institute (SFI) will build significantly upon its successes to date
in conducting transdisciplinary research toward understanding the complex
behaviors arising in systems composed of relatively simple, highly interacting
components. Specifically, SFI will study the emergent behaviors of real complex
systems whose components are themselves complex-genetic regulatory networks,
financial markets and social institutions for example-through mathematical
investigation and simulation in concert with empirical studies and data
analysis. Researchers involved in these activities will come from many
disciplines, including biology, physics, mathematics, computation, and the
social behavioral, and economic sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration and
synthesis underlie this research, which is thus complementary to the more well-
established methods of reduction and analysis that characterize disciplinary
science. It is, of course, essential that complex systems such as the immune
system or the global economy be decomposed into their constituent parts and that
the behavior of these parts be elucidated as completely as possible for the
subsequent understanding of the system as a whole. But in addition to
understanding these constituents, understanding of their collective organization
is required. It is necessary to refer separately to the parts and their
organization to call attention to the fact that the properties of the parts
alone do not uniquely determine their collective organization; there are many
organizational structures possible with the same parts. Furthermore, the
observed organization, or the emergent collective entity, is itself perpetuated
independently of its parts. Thus, a market persists even as the individual
traders turn over, an ecosystem persists even as the organisms die and are
replaced, a cell persists, though its molecules degrade.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SFI will further develop the fertile concept of emergence
by strengthening the theoretical understanding of emergence through rigorous
mathematical study direct and by intensive study of empirical data from specific
real-world complex phenomena, including: Structure and Dynamics of Networks,
Novelty in Evolution, Computation in Nature, Market Evolution, and Human
Behavior and the Emergent Properties of Social Structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;