* 0200429
* Research and Education in Financial Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* John Birge, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 06/30/2006
* USD 400,391.00

This project focuses both on methodological and applied aspects of financial
engineering. The goal is to develop new and original methods to value complex
financial products, manage financial risks, and evaluate investment
opportunities. The project will focus on the following problems: developing
stochastic models to describe dynamics of asset prices and financial variables;
developing new, powerful, analytical and computational tools to value complex
derivative instruments (path-dependent and multi-variable contracts in
particular) and manage risks of derivatives transactions; the eigenfunction
expansion approach to derivatives pricing; investigating the issue of model risk
in financial engineering; financial engineering for the energy industry;
stochastic optimization methodologies in financial engineering, including
investment portfolio management under transaction costs and taxes, and dynamic
asset/liability management; and real options applications in manufacturing and
service industries. To address the national need for advanced training of
specialists in financial engineering, the educational component of the project
proposes to develop a comprehensive financial engineering curriculum at
Northwestern, from the beginning undergraduate to the doctoral level, and create
a new Ph.D. major in financial engineering as a part of the IEMS Ph.D. program
at Northwestern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discipline of financial engineering
includes applications of mathematical and statistical modeling and computational
technology to problems in the financial services industry and financial
management of non-financial corporations and public institutions. This project
outlines a broad research program for the next three years. Additionally, it
outlines a curriculum development effort, including a new Ph.D. major in
financial engineering. This project will support the new Ph.D. program. This
project is a part of a long-term development effort at Northwestern in the area
of financial engineering. Modeling methodologies, analytical results, and
computational algorithms developed in this project will help financial
institutions, corporate treasuries, and energy companies accurately value
derivative securities, assess model risk, manage investment portfolios, manage
assets and liabilities, and apply real options technology to the valuation of
businesses and strategic managerial decisions. The education and curriculum
development efforts will result in training of highly qualified personnel to
enhance competitiveness of the U.S. financial services
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;