* 0200153
* Spray Deposited High Damping Shape Memory Alloy Composite Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Pravansu Mohanty, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 06/30/2006
* USD 264,013.00

The research objective of this grant is to develop a new class of high damping
structures having a shape memory metal alloy composite casing over a carbon
fiber reinforced polymeric (FRP) composite tube. It is expected that the
traditional FRP core will provide the high stiffness while the damping capacity
accomplished by the shape memory alloy casing. The research will be conducted in
three key segments: (1) developing the fabrication technology (spray forming)
for building shape memory alloy casings on the FRP cores, (2) characterizing the
stiffness, strength and damping capabilities of the new structures, and (3)
integrating the design, manufacture, and field testing of prototype automotive
half -shafts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fabrication technology to be developed
as part of this project will introduce a new way of making multi-material,
multi-functional structures that cannot be conveniently fabricated by other
manufacturing methods. These novel high damping structures would find use in
challenging, vibration prone applications in the automotive, aerospace, and
cutting tool industries. The project includes collaboration among university
researchers, REU students, and industrial engineers. The automotive and
composite manufacturing industries have pledged support for the project and will
be collaborative partners providing composite manufacturing and prototype field-
testing. Learning modules will be developed from the research and included in
the undergraduate and graduate curriculums. A goal is to stimulate undergraduate
and graduate students to pursue advanced educational degrees. The integrated
research and educational objectives will benefit the participating industries
and will provide their engineers with unique training for further advancing the
state-of-art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;