* 0200091
* GOALI:  Optimum Design of Extrusion Dies using the Estimated Elongational Viscosity of Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Joseph Dooley, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 218,738.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project deals
with two important issues in polymer processing. Research will be focused on
enhancing the control of the processing through the development a new methods
for indirect measurement of the elongational viscosity of the polymeric
material. In addition, efforts to optimize die channel geometry for polymer
extrusion will be investigated in terms of the effects of elongational viscosity
on the polymer flow in the die. In this project, strain-rate dependence of
elongational viscosity will be determined by finding the optimal values of the
four parameters in the Sarkar-Gupta elongational viscosity model such that the
difference between the pressure loss predicted by a finite element simulation
and the corresponding experimental data from a capillary or slit rheometer is
minimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimization model, which will be developed
in this project, is expected to provide much better die design than the design
obtained by using currently available software packages, which do not account
for the elongational viscosity of a polymer. Even though this proposal involves
optimization of extrusion dies, a successful completion of the proposed research
will open the avenues for including the effect of elongational viscosity on
design of the equipment for other polymer processing techniques involving
elongation-dominated flows such as blow molding and fiber spinning. The software
developed in this project will be used in a senior-level course to educate the
students on importance of elongational viscosity in polymer processing. For the
next three years, a graduate student will spend one month per year at The Dow
Chemical Co. to conduct various experiments resulting in additional educational
benefit from the project.