* 0200029
* GOALI:  Robust Product Design Selection under Uncertainty and for Competitive Advantage
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Shapour Azarm, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 05/31/2005
* USD 327,059.00

The objective of this research is to (1) develop an integrated framework and
methodology to aid robust selection of product designs, either a single product
or a product line, taking into account the uncertainties &lt;br/&gt;in measuring
customer preferences, uncertainties due to changing preferences over time,
uncertainties in competitive reactions, and uncertainty in uncontrollable
engineering design parameters, and based on this framework (2) construct and
validate a prototype decision support system. In the proposed approach, the
product/product-line design selection is viewed as a selection with two main
stages: design alternative generation and design alternative evaluation. In the
first stage (design module), commonality information, along with uncertainty in
the engineering design formulation, is fed into a multi-objective robust
optimization to generate a Pareto robust optimal set of design alternatives. In
the second stage (market module), demand and market share estimates are
generated for each alternative in the set by accounting for customer preferences
and choices. Based on the demand function and commonality, cost functions are
calculated &lt;br/&gt;for each generated design alternative and are used to
compute the net present value of profit for each alternative. A recursive
process between the two modules will be undertaken to account for the
uncertainty in uncontrollable parameters in both modules using simulation
methods and to obtain a robust set of recommendations. &lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the outcome of this research will advance the state of the art across different
domains in engineering design, marketing science and management. The results of
this investigation will be broadly disseminated in the engineering design
automation and marketing science communities, the knowledge integrated into
courses at the University of Maryland, and the technology and techniques
transferred to industry. The proposed research will also provide opportunities
for students to learn business and engineering &lt;br/&gt;practices involved in
product design selection and ways to enhance the effectiveness of such practices
through basic research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;