* 0200490
* SGER: In Vivo Measurements of Channeling
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Daniel Kohl, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2004
* USD 98,876.00

The hypothesis that intermediates in many metabolic pathways are "channeled"
from one pathway enzyme to the next is widely, but not universally, accepted.
The mechanism of channeling is presumed to be the transient associations of
pathway enzymes. It is postulated that the proximity of sequential enzymes would
cause the product of the first enzyme to have an advantage in competition for
the active site of the second enzyme when compared to molecules of the same
species within the bulk medium. An alternative formulation is that pathway
intermediates are not part of the same pool as are identical molecules within
the cell. Intermediates produced within the pathway are "channeled" to the next
enzyme. Investigations of this hypothesis often center on the presumed
mechanism; i.e., the association of sequential pathway enzymes. Methods employed
include several chromatographic techniques, co- precipitation and co-
purification. While positive results are suggestive, they are not conclusive
since channeling need not occur even if the enzymes are associated. Other
approaches, including isotope dilution experiments, have often supported the
existence of channeling, but in vitro systems are a poor proxy for the crowded,
structured environment of the living cell. Approaches employed in in vivo
experiments include genetic approaches, NMR and isotope dilution. While some of
the reports from these experiments strongly support the existence of channeling,
use of these techniques allow only a qualitative assessment of channeling. The
work proposed here should lead to a quantitative evaluation of channeling in an
in vivo, functioning system. For simplicity, consider a 2-enzyme pathway.
Substrate A binds to Enzyme 1 to make intermediate B. B is the substrate for
Enzyme 2. The product is C. If the cells can be induced to take up B* (the
asterisk indicating B has a different stable isotope, say 13 C, than does B),
and B* serves as the substrate for Enzyme 2, then the product will be C*. If
there is no channeling, then B*/B = C*/C. If there is 100% channeling, then C* =
0. Given knowledge of the ratios B*/B & C*/C, quantitative values for channeling
can be calculated. No other method presently in use can provide this
information. The appropriate ratios will be measured using a mass spectrometer
(MS) interfaced with an appropriate column. The metabolism of
glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) is one of the foci of this proposal. Whether G6P
produced by hexokinase is channeled to the next enzyme in the oxidative limb of
the pentose phosphate pathway, G6P dehydrogenase will be investigated. The
appropriate mutant of yeast will take up galactose (gal) in the presence of
glucose (glc). In four steps, gal is converted to G6P, which is oxidized to
6-phosphoguconate (6PG) Yeast will be incubated in 13 C-glc and 12 C-gal. The
ratios 13 C-G6P / 12 C-G6P and 13 C-gal / 12 C-gal will be measured and the
results interpreted as described above. G6P and 6PG have isomers which, if
entered into the MS at the same time as the compounds of interest, would give
artifactual results. To avoid this, the isomers will be separated on a Dionex
column off-line. If necessary corrections for any isomeric impurity using MS/MS
techniques will be made. An analogous experiment will be done with a prokaryote,
E. coli, to investigate channeling between aldolase and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. With this method in place not only can
the degree of channeling be quantified, but also changes in channeling in
response to changing environmental conditions or nutritional states may be
evaluated for its possible contribution to directing the flow of metabolites.