* 0200162
* Strategic Reverse Production System Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jane Ammons, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2006
* USD 344,966.00

This grant provides funding to develop methodology and tools for the design and
extension of reverse production systems. The methodological basis is
mathematical programming, specifically mixed-integer linear programming. The
model uses a robust objective function that minimizes the maximum deviation of
the robust solution from the best solutions for a set of scenarios. The approach
builds on previous research in reverse production systems in four ways. First,
it extends the scope of the system to overlay decisions in the forward
production system. Second, it considers multiple commodities. Third, it develops
richer representations of uncertainties that have a major impact on the
decision-making. Fourth, it addresses reverse production systems with several
independent players that may have conflicting goals. The strong links between
the principal investigators and organizations involved in recycling for carpet
and electronics will allow these tools to be tested and refined in a variety of
contexts.&lt;br/&gt; Production systems that support the recovery, processing
and resale of materials and sub-components at the end of their useful life are
an important part of the U.S. and world economy. There are estimated to be
73,000 firms employing 350,000 people, generating revenues of US$53 billion/year
in remanufacturing alone. Working with companies, non-profits, and government
agencies, successful results from the research enable better decision making for
strategic reverse production system design, with practical application to
recycling and reuse in the carpet and electronics industry. They will contribute
to the knowledge base for complex supply chain decision-making, both by making
the problem representation richer, and by developing new approaches for solving
large-scale mathematical programming problems in the context of supply chain
design. The students and our industrial partners will gain exposure to a rich
class of problems of significant importance to modern industrialized societies
and a set of techniques that can be brought to bear on a wide range of decision-
making problems.