* 0200868
* A Mobile Canopy Access Platform for Environmental and Physiological Research at Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 63,284.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Foster at Harvard University to purchase a
mobile canopy access platform to support research at the Harvard Forest. Forest
canopies are key sites for the exchange of mass, energy and momentum within
forest ecosystems. However, examination of the physiological and physical
processes occurring within the canopy is hampered by logistic difficulties of
conducting research that involves sophisticated equipment at heights far above
the ground. The funds provided in this grant will allow the purchase of a mobile
canopy access platform of the type referred to as an articulated boom lift in
the construction industry. This "macromanipulator" will enhance ongoing projects
of six investigators whose work at the Harvard Forest focuses on tree
physiology, ecosystem processes, and atmosphere-biosphere exchange.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forests are inherently three-dimensional systems. A mobile
canopy access system will provide investigators with the ability to expand their
research into new areas and new dimensions. A mobile platform is well suited to
research at the Harvard Forest due to the relatively low stature of the forest
(~ 20 m) and the extensive network of fire roads. At present, canopy access at
the Harvard Forest is limited to a small number of fixed towers. A mobile canopy
system will allow us to extend our studies to a broader range of community types
and to sample from a larger number of trees. In addition, a mobile canopy access
platform is compatible with physiological studies that frequently require the
collection of destructive samples. Specific projects that will benefit from the
purchase of this instrument include: Dr. Foster's studies of the impact of the
hemlock wooly adelgid, a recently introduced pest of hemlock trees, Dr. Bazzaz's
research on photosynthesis-nitrogen dynamics in forest trees, Dr. Holbrook's
studies of water transport in tall trees, Dr. Wofsy's studies of CO2 exchange
between forest ecosystems and the atmosphere, Dr. Aber's studies of the effects
of chronic nitrogen deposition on forest ecosystems, and Dr. Steudler's research
on global warming and carbon storage in mid-latitude forest
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Harvard Forest is an important site for
both research and teaching. Much of the research at the Harvard Forest is
directed at understanding the function and stability of forest ecosystems in
relation to human disturbance and global climate change. Thus, the acquisition
of this instrument will contribute to our understanding of the health and
resilience of this important ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;