* 0200644
* Free Boundary Problems and Mass Transfer
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Mikhail Feldman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2005
* USD 101,801.00

PI: Mikhail Feldman, University of Wisconsin DMS-0200644

ABSTRACT -------------------------------------------------- The project consists
of two main topics: (1) Free boundary problems for nonlinear elliptic equations.
One of objectives is to develop techniques for studying free boundary problems
arising in the models of compressible fluid dynamics, in particular to study
existence, uniqueness and stability of multidimensional transonic shocks for
Euler equations for steady and self-similar potential flows. Euler equations can
be written as a single second order, nonlinear elliptic-hyperbolic equation of
mixed type for the velocity potential, if the flow is steady or self-similar.
Transonic shocks are discontinuities in the gradient of the solution such that
the type of equation changes from hyperbolic to elliptic across the shock
surface. Transonic shocks arise in many situations of physical importance
(steady supersonic flows around an obstacle, shock reflection for self-similar
flows). (2) Monge-Kantorovich mass transfer problem. The questions to study
include geometric and measure-theoretic properties of solutions, and
applications to partial differential equations.

Free boundary problems arise naturally in many models in physics, fluid
dynamics, economics. Free boundaries correspond to sharp changes in the
variables describing the problem. Significant progress has been made during last
several decades in the study of free boundary problems. However in the case of
nonlinear partial differential equations many important questions are yet to be
studied. This is the first theme of the project. Better understanding of
properties of free boundaries, such as stability, makes possible to understand
complex phenomena in models and applications. We plan to study transonic shocks
in a flow of compressible fluid or gas. Another area of the project is optimal
transportation problem. Recently many fundamental properties and important
applications of this problem within and beyond mathematics were discovered, in
particular its connections to nonlinear partial differential equations, and
applications in models for front formation in the atmosphere, kinetic theory,
fluid flow, elastic crystals, granular materials, and microeconomic decision
problems. We plan to work on theory and applications of optimal transportation
problem.

