* 0200762
* SGER: The Slip Boundary Condition
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Seth Lichter, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2003
* USD 76,299.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0200762&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: The Slip
Boundary Condition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0200762
Lichter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the no-slip boundary condition, which
requires fluid adjacent to a solid substrate to move with the same velocity as
the substrate, serves reliably to model fluid behavior in most circumstances,
recent experiments and numerical simulations have shown that, in fact, there is
a relative velocity between the fluid and the substrate. While the effects of
this slip may remain negligible in some flows, accounting for slip is a
prerequisite for predicting the correct behavior in many other types of flows,
such as those in small geometries, flows in which an interface (between two
fluids) moves along a solid, and flows in which particles must pass through an
interface. This project seeks to develop models of the slip boundary condition.
The formulation will incorporate results of recent experiments and numerical
simulations to construct the equations of flow in the neighborhood of a solid
substrate. Preliminary work indicates that such a model, as well as related
useful simpler approximations, can be developed. The simplicity of the equations
and consequent efficient numerical procedures for evaluating the dynamics near
the wall should provide insight into how slip occurs and how the characteristics
of the fluid and the substrate determine the amount and nature of slip. The
recent availability of high quality experimental data and simulation results, as
well as the advent of technologies demanding flow in small geometries, make this
a timely undertaking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns mathematical
modeling of the behavior of fluids where they adjoin solids. The results will
allow highly accurate computation of fluid flow, which is essential for the
design of small hydrodynamical instruments, including "lab-on-a-chip"
devices.&lt;br/&gt;