* 0200838
* Computational Study of Chemical Reactions and Material Modification during Polyatomic-Ion and Cluster-Surface Deposition
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Susan Sinnott, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* raima larter
* 06/30/2007
* USD 510,875.00

Susan Sinnott of the University of Florida is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to examine particle-surface interactions that
can lead to chemical reactions and material modification using molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations. Three closely related problems will be studied.
First, the deposition of covalently bound polyatomic ions on polymeric
substrates will be examined. The unique capabilities of polyatomic ions for
material modification and thin-film growth motivate this research, which aims to
shed light on the analogous and more complex processes that take place in low-
energy plasmas. Second, the use of polyatomic and single-atom ions to chemically
functionalize and modify carbon nanotubes and nanotube-polymer interfaces will
be explored, motivated by the fact that carbon nanotubes are being considered
for use as fibers in the next generation of composite materials. Finally, the
novel size-specific reactions that occur in gas solvent assisted chemistry when
molecular clusters are deposited on solid surfaces will be studied, along with
the growth of covalently balanced nanostructured thin films that can be
generated experimentally through cluster-beam deposition. This project requires
expansion and refinement of existing MD programs to include kinetic Monte Carlo
simulations of thermal surface diffusion and relaxation between MD simulations
of each cluster deposition event. Collaborative efforts are planned with
experimentalists and theorists on all three projects.

This computational project has the potential to provide new understanding that
will be important for industrial materials processing. For example, ion
deposition can serve as a model for several aspects of thin-film growth through
low energy plasmas, which is the leading industrial method for depositing
polymer thin films under dry conditions. Organic thin films are important for
optoelectronic applications, coatings, electronic devices, and mechanical
applications. The present studies aim to model film deposition and surface
modification issues relevant to ongoing experimental studies.