* 0200223
* Collaborative Proposal: Ultrabroadband Supercontinuum Studies
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Rick Trebino, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2006
* USD 279,999.00

0200223 Trebino

Probably the most exciting event in optics in the past two years has been the
development of microstructure optical fiber. The dispersion properties of this
fiber can be tailored to a far greater extent than conventional optical fibers.
As a result, it can be used to transform commercially available, low-energy
ultrashort pulses into ultrabroadband continuum light with a bandwidth of >500
THz. This light has numerous far-reaching applications in telecommunications,
solid-state spectroscopy, coherent control of chemical reactions, and ultrahigh-
spatial-resolution optical coherence tomography. It has already completely
revolutionized the field of optical metrology.

Unfortunately, techniques for working with ultrabroadband light remain in their
infancy. At this stage, it is not possible to measure its properties other than
the power spectrum. Pulse shaping and compression techniques, which are
successful in narrowband applications, are not applicable to this type of
ultrabroadband radiation. Even simple tasks such as collimating and propagating
ultrabroadband light are not yet possible. For example, ultrabroadband lenses do
not exist, and mirrors also fail because the diffraction angle of this light is
over 60s. Furthermore, the process by which this light is created is at best
poorly understood.

As a result, we propose to 1) perform extensive modeling to understand the
underlying mechanisms and the properties of the continuum light, 2) develop
experimental techniques for its characterization, and 3) devise new techniques
for manipulating and compressing this light. We will take two distinct
approaches to ultrabroadband-light generation. One will utilize a standard fs
Ti:Sapphire laser and microstructure optical fiber to produce continuum light
with spectrum from 400 nm to 1.6 um. The second approach, which is equally
promising-but as yet unexplored-will use amplified fiber lasers developed by
IMRA America to generate ultra-broadband continuum in conventional
telecommunications fiber in the IR: from 800 nm to 2.5 um.

This ultrabroadband light is extremely complex, having a time-bandwidth product
(TBP) in excess of 1000, whereas the most complex ultrashort pulse that has been
completely characterized had a TBP of ~10. This latter measurement used
frequency-resolved optical gating (FROG), and it pushed the FROG technique to
its limits. As a result, we propose to develop a much broader-band version of
FROG for measuring ultrabroadband continuum with more than two orders of
magnitude of additional complexity. It will necessarily involve several
innovations, including, for example, angle-dithering the nonlinear crystal for
much greater bandwidth.



