* 0200150
* ABELIAN VARIETIES, MODULI OF VECTOR BUNDLES AND MODULI OF COURVES
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Mihnea Popa, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2005
* USD 110,558.00

In work with G. Pareschi, Popa has introduced a notion of Mukai
regularity&lt;br/&gt; for coherent sheaves on abelian varieties, defined using
the Fourier-Mukai&lt;br/&gt; transform, and developed its theory. Popa and
Pareschi are now interested&lt;br/&gt; in using the concept of Mukai regularity
in the study of irregular&lt;br/&gt; varieties, especially to give effective
results on adjoint linear series and&lt;br/&gt; pluiricanonical maps. Also, Popa
and Pareschi intend to use invariants&lt;br/&gt; arising naturally from this
theory in order to differentiate between&lt;br/&gt; Jacobians and other abelian
varieties, and thus approach the Schottky&lt;br/&gt; problem in a new way. Using
some of their results that carry through in the&lt;br/&gt; more general context
of an arbitrary Fourier transform, Popa and Pareschi&lt;br/&gt; intend to obtain
constraints on the existence of equivalences of derived&lt;br/&gt; categories,
which is a main concern in this line of approach to mirror&lt;br/&gt; symmetry.
In other work, Popa has established effective results for linear&lt;br/&gt;
series on moduli spaces of vector bundles on curves. Popa is interested
in&lt;br/&gt; approaching the Strange Duality by refining his methods based on
the&lt;br/&gt; Fourier-Mukai transform of Verlinde bundles on Jacobians and
combining it&lt;br/&gt; with representation theory techniques. Popa also intends
to approach some&lt;br/&gt; optimal conjectures on effective base point freeness
on these moduli spaces&lt;br/&gt; for general curves, using degeneration to
stable curves. In work with G.&lt;br/&gt; Farkas, Popa has obtained Brill-
Noether type non-existence results for rank&lt;br/&gt; 2 vector bundles on
general curves, via generalized limit linear series and&lt;br/&gt; stability of
pairs on reducible curves. Popa and Farkas intend to further&lt;br/&gt; refine
these techniques in order to prove a conjecture of&lt;br/&gt; Bertram-
Feinberger-Mukai on Brill-Noether theory for rank 2 vector bundles&lt;br/&gt;
with canonical determinant, and to find non-existence results in
higher&lt;br/&gt; ranks. This will allow them to define new divisors in moduli
spaces of&lt;br/&gt; stable curves for appropriate genera. The ultimate goal of
this project is&lt;br/&gt; to compute the class of these divisors and determine
whether they provide&lt;br/&gt; counterexamples to the Harris-Morrison Slope
Conjecture as expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Algebraic curves and abelian
varieties are ubiquitous objects in&lt;br/&gt; mathematics. Apart from their
realizations in algebraic geometry, they&lt;br/&gt; appear in complex analysis
(as Riemann surfaces or complex tori) or algebra&lt;br/&gt; (as field extensions
or group schemes), and play a fundamental role in&lt;br/&gt; recent progress in
mathematical physics. One of the most important problems&lt;br/&gt; in algebraic
geometry is to classify algebraic varieties. For&lt;br/&gt; one-dimensional
varieties (that is, for algebraic curves) this problem is&lt;br/&gt; approached
by understanding the geometry of a space M(g) parametrizing all&lt;br/&gt;
curves of given genus. In the case of abelian varieties, one way to
approach&lt;br/&gt; this is to understand the totality of a specific kind of
algebraic objects&lt;br/&gt; (called coherent sheaves) which can be associated
to them. The investigator&lt;br/&gt; is pursuing these directions in research
related to this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;