* 0200699
* Boundary Behavior of Analytic Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Alexei Poltoratski, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 90,000.00

The research will focus on several problems concerning&lt;br/&gt;the boundary
behavior of analytic functions and their&lt;br/&gt;applications in functional
analysis and mathematical&lt;br/&gt;physics. In analytic function theory the PI
plans to&lt;br/&gt;study the interaction between singular and non-
singular&lt;br/&gt;components of Cauchy integrals near the boundary of
a&lt;br/&gt;complex domain. The results will then be applied to&lt;br/&gt;study
the resolvent functions of linear operators in&lt;br/&gt;perturbation problems.
This area has connections with&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models of solid state
physics, which&lt;br/&gt;provides most of the motivation. Another part of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is the study of the connections between
the&lt;br/&gt;Beurling-Malliavin theory, inverse spectral problems&lt;br/&gt;for
partial differential equations and properties of&lt;br/&gt;kernels of Toepliz
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytic Function Theory is one of the classical
yet&lt;br/&gt;rapidly developing parts of modern mathematics.
The&lt;br/&gt;present stage of its development features many&lt;br/&gt;promising
new applications in various parts of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and physics. One of
the cornerstones of&lt;br/&gt;Analytic Function Theory is the integral
formula&lt;br/&gt;named after the famous French mathematician
Cauchy.&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this formula is due to the
fact&lt;br/&gt;that most analytic functions in complex domains can&lt;br/&gt;be
defined through Cauchy integrals. The PI plans&lt;br/&gt;to study various
properties of Cauchy integrals near&lt;br/&gt;the boundaries of their domains.
The results will&lt;br/&gt;then be applied in several areas of mathematics
as&lt;br/&gt;well as in mathematical physics. The applications&lt;br/&gt;in
mathematical physics will concern, among other&lt;br/&gt;things, mathematical
models of wave propagation.&lt;br/&gt;The general question that will be
considered is how&lt;br/&gt;to recover full information about a
disordered&lt;br/&gt;environment from the spectrum of the wave operator
and&lt;br/&gt;partial information on the potential field.