* 0200324
* Polymer Nanocomposite Foams Prepared by Environmentally Benign Supercritical Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Kurt Koelling, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 264,000.00

This project seeks to develop novel nanocomposite foams, based on a combination
of nanoparticle technology and supercritical fluids (SCF) technology. With
proper design of the nanoparticle type, content, dispersion, an orientation, the
solubility of SCF in the polymer matrix, the rheological properties of
nanoparticle containing polymer, and nucleation and foam growth mechanism can be
tailored to generate a wide spectrum of foams with well-defined pore structure.
They include closed or open cellular structures; macro, mire, and nano-cellular
foams. The presence of nanoparticles can provide improved mechanical strength
and physical properties, such as diffusion barrier and fire retardance, that are
essential for many engineering applications. The large surface area of
nanoparticles may also serve as templates for added functions to the polymer
foams. Examples are bioactive molecules such as growth factors to facilitate
cell growth in tissue engineering, an electric or magnetic conductive molecules
for EMI shielding.

This project decribes a scientific effort at developing environmentally benign
technology in direct response to regulatory action. In order to remain viable
and compete in the construction industry of the twenty-first century, industries
producing polymeric foam products have no choice but to operate in an
ecologically conscious manner. Education impact and recruitment of
underrepresented minorities is addressed through collaboration between the
Center for Advanced Polymer and Composite Engineering at The Ohio State
University and Florida A& M University - FSU. By combining expertise in foam
production from industry with thermodynamics, rheology, and polymer processing
in academia, this project demonstrates the potential for rapid development of
this alternative blowing agent.