* 0200834
* Representation Theory and Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Feodor Malikov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2006
* USD 167,989.00

This proposal is centered around several examples of sheaves of vertex algebras
that Malikov, Schechtman, Vaintrob, and Gorbounov discovered and investigated in
the previous work. More specifically, the first part of the proposal has to do
with computation of the algebras of global sections of these sheaves on Calabi-
Yau manifolds. The known examples arising in the case of tori and projective
spaces are promising. The second part is built on the recent discovery that a
family of such vertex algebras arising in the case of the projective line is
closely related to the super-algebra Lie sl(2|1) and to sl(2|1) - Toda field
theory. The third is an attempt to generalize the relation of such sheaves to
ellptic genera, quantum cohomology, and modular forms discovered in a joint work
with Schechtman. This relation is visible through the fact that the character of
the space of global sections of one such sheaf, a chiral de Rham complex, over
over an even-dimensional projective space equals the equivariant signature of
the corresponding loop space. The fourth is a project aiming at an explanation
of a certain remarkable duality arising in the case of a simple Lie group, in
physics terms if possible. That the whole proposal may be related to string
theory is revealed, for example, in the fact that the above-mentioned chiral de
Rham complex allows to reproduce the quantum cohomology of smooth projective
toric varieties. The fifth is a separate project based on the previous work of
I.Frenkel and Malikov; it has to do with a possible application of affine
translation functors to BGG-type resolutions of admissible
representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project simultaneously in the
area of mathematics known as "Representation Theory," and in the area of
mathematical physics called "Quantum Field Theory." Representation theory is
generally considered to be the most useful area of mathematics for describing
symmetries of all kinds, especially those that arise in nature. Quantum field
theory may be thought of as the logical foundation for the quantum mechanics
that govern the behavior of subatomic particles. An important source of
inspiration for this project is string theory, which is widely accepted as the
only candidate for a unified physical theory explaining all fundamental laws of
Nature. The striking idea of string theory is that an elementary particle in
physics can be described mathematically as a loop. The implications of this idea
have made entire areas of mathematics previously thought of as totally abstract
into everyday tools of research in theoretical physics. The specific goal of
this project is to obtain a better understanding of the so-called "loop spaces"
that arise in this point of view. Mathematical ideas from string theory have
already found important applications in tomography, and surely there are more
applications waiting to be found.&lt;br/&gt;