* 0200051
* Involvement of Glutamate Metabotropic Receptors in Synaptic Plasticity in the Spinal Cord
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Mirjana Randic, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

INVOLVEMENT OF GLUTAMATE METABOTROPIC RECEPTORS IN SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY IN THE
SPINAL CORD&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now well established that the primary
afferent fibers use glutamate as a principal fast excitatory transmitter in the
superficial dorsal horn (SDH) of the spinal cord, the first modulatory site in
the relay of sensory information from the peripheral receptors to the brain.
Glutamate acts through two broad classes of receptors, ion-channel-linked
(ionotropic) receptors (AMPA/kainate and NMDA receptors) and metabotropic
receptors (mGluRs), which couple via G-proteins to the intracellular second
messenger cascades. Group I mGluRs (mGluR1 and 5 subtypes) are expressed by
neurons in the SDH, but their roles in synaptic function, and contribution to
spinal somatosensory transmission and synaptic plasticity, have yet to be
elucidated. The recent development of ligands that bind specifically to these
receptors, and availability of mutant mice lacking mGluR1 or mGluR5 receptors,
has provided means of characterizing the important roles they may play in tuning
of fast and slow excitatory synaptic transmission, including the induction of
long-term changes in synaptic efficacy, as suggested by our recent preliminary
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;Two major objectives in the proposal are: 1) to study
involvement of Group I mGluRs via ICAN (non-selective Ca2+-dependent cation
channels) in the generation of primary afferent-evoked slow excitatory synaptic
potential (sEPSP) in the SDH region; and 2) to study regulation of AMPA and NMDA
receptor-mediated sensory transmission by activation of Group I mGluRs. A
combination of intracellular and whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, Ca2+
imaging, and pharmacological techniques will be employed to study the
involvement of Group I mGluR activation in synaptic transmission and plasticity
in SDH neurons within spinal cord slices prepared from young rats and mutant
mice lacking mGlu1 or 5 receptors.&lt;br/&gt;Delineating the physiological roles
of the Group I mGluRs in the SDH region, and cellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying their actions, is an important step toward understanding of
implications of glutamate-mediated transmission in the spinal cord DH synaptic
function, but in particular for synaptic plasticity and nociception.&lt;br/&gt;