* 0200202
* Weak Hopf Algebras and Dynamical Twisting of Quantum Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Dmitri Nikshych, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 89,980.00

The main objects of investigation of this project are weak Hopf
algebras&lt;br/&gt;(also called quantum groupoids in literature). These are
group-like &lt;br/&gt;objects that generalize both Hopf algebras and usual
groupoids and that &lt;br/&gt;appear naturally in the theory of semisimple
tensor rigid (fusion) categories, &lt;br/&gt;conformal field theory, symmetries
of algebra extensions, and the quantum &lt;br/&gt;dynamical Yang-Baxter
equation. The investigator develops the general &lt;br/&gt;theory of weak Hopf
algebras and their representations and applies it to &lt;br/&gt;the study and
classification of fusion categories (every such a category
is&lt;br/&gt;equaivalent to the representation category of a semisimple weak
Hopf algebra).&lt;br/&gt;One goal is to extend the results known for the
representation categories of&lt;br/&gt;ordinary semisimple Hopf algebras, such
as e.g., Larson-Radford theorems, &lt;br/&gt;Stefan's finiteness result
(Ocneanu's rigidity), and Class Equation to general&lt;br/&gt;semisimple tensor
categories. Another goal is to use weak Hopf algebra&lt;br/&gt;techniques to
reveal the structure of modular categories which are important&lt;br/&gt;because
of their applications to physics and geometry. The investigator&lt;br/&gt;also
studies weak Hopf algebras arising from dynamical twists (these twists
&lt;br/&gt;give rise to solutions of the quantum dynamical Yang-Baxter equation
of Felder). &lt;br/&gt;The goal here is to get a conceptual explanation of new
intriguing phenomena &lt;br/&gt;related to dynamical twists, such as, e.g., non-
minimizable dynamical twists &lt;br/&gt;in group algebras and self-duality of
dynamical quantum groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the investigator
studies problems of the theory of quantum groups. &lt;br/&gt;The origins of this
theory which was created in 1980s are the classical theory of&lt;br/&gt;groups
and quantum physics. The theory of groups is the classical
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;subject that describes in mathematical terms the
phenomenon of symmetry&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., groups describe the symmetry of
molecular structure). Groups are fundamental&lt;br/&gt;objects as they provide a
universal language used in all areas of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;The quantum
theory reveals the laws of physics that determine the behavior &lt;br/&gt;of
very small particles and interactions between them. This theory led to
many&lt;br/&gt;technological advances of the 20th century such as, e.g.,
development of the&lt;br/&gt;nuclear physics. In order to give an adequate
mathematical description of &lt;br/&gt;the structure of quantum physical systems
the theory of classical groups &lt;br/&gt;is not sufficient, this is why the new
theory of quantum groups was invented. &lt;br/&gt;Among these new objects the
notions of weak Hopf algebras and quantum &lt;br/&gt;groupoids are of special
interest, as they have recently seen many applications &lt;br/&gt;on both sides
of the mathematics-physics divide. The present proposal is devoted &lt;br/&gt;to
the study and classification of weak Hopf algebras and exploring their
applications &lt;br/&gt;to various areas of mathematics and physics.