* 0200861
* Effective Non-oscillation of Solutions of Fuchsian Systems of Differential Equations and Abelian Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Dmitry Novikov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 126,499.00

PI: Dmitry Novikov / A. Gabrielov, Purdue University DMS-0200861

Abstract

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% D. Novikov and A. Gabrielov
propose to investigate the global finiteness properties of solutions of Fuchsian
systems of ordinary differential equations. The goal of this research is to
establish effective upper bounds on the global oscillation of polynomial
combinations of these solutions in terms of quantitative characteristics of the
Fuchsian systems, and to apply these results to the infinitesimal Hilbert's
sixteenth problem. The main interest is the oscillation of solutions near
confluent singular points of the hypergeometric equation.

Stable oscillations of many natural systems in biology, electronics,
engineering, meteorology, etc., are described by limit cycles in the
corresponding dynamical systems. If the dynamical system is close to a
conservative one, its limit cycles correspond to zeros of an Abelian integral, a
solution of an ordinary differential equation with polynomial coefficients.
Unlike solutions of algebraic equations, such functions can have many zeros even
when the coefficients are low-degree polynomials. The goal of the proposed
research is to give an effective upper bound on the number of these zeros in
terms of the magnitude of the coefficients, and the corresponding upper bound on
the number of limit cycles of the dynamical system. This can be considered as an
effective version of the famous Hilbert's sixteenth problem.

