* 0200256
* Full Size Experiments & Centrifuge Physical Models of Pile Foundations Subjected to Lateral Spreading: Comparitive Study & Engineering Interpretation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Ricardo Dobry, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 12/31/2006
* USD 222,409.00

This research effort aims to study experimentally the effect of earthquake-
induced lateral spreading due to liquefaction on pile foundations, both in full
size and centrifuge model conditions. Comparable tests instrumented single piles
and pile groups embedded in 1-and 2-layer soil profiles will be conducted in
slightly inclined laminar boxes subjected to base shaking at three facilities:
1) The 100g-ton geotechnical centrifuge, laminar box and in-flight shaker at
RPI, 2) The 6m high laminar box and 1g shaking table at NIED, Japan (largest
laminar box in the world), and 3) The 1.9 m high laminar box and 1g shaking
table at UCSD (largest laminar box in the US). Taking advantage of the
successful experience at RPI in this kind of testing, this research constitutes
the first opportunity for direct comparison of results in controlled
experimental environments between centrifuge and full size tests to be conducted
at NIED. Additionally, centrifuge and full size NIED results will be used to
validate the medium-size experiments to be performed using the UCSD shaking
table and laminar box. Advanced data analysis techniques-including system
identification and visualization-will be used to process and compare the results
from the three facilities, with engineering interpretations and computer
simulations.