* 0200322
* A Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Biological Sciences at Lehigh University
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Lynne Cassimeris, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2004
* USD 240,450.00

Abstract

0200322 Lynne Cassimeris

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lynne Cassimeris at Lehigh University to
purchase a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope. This microscope will support a
research community that includes faculty in biological sciences, physics,
chemical engineering, earth and environmental sciences, materials science, and
biology faculty at nearby colleges and universities. The confocal microscope
will facilitate rapid three-dimensional imaging of microscopic structures,
allowing researchers to examine specimens in ways that are not possible with
conventional light microscopes. The confocal microscope images will be used to
answer questions about where and when specific molecules are active during
biological processes.

The confocal microscope will have a major impact on the research programs of
numerous faculty at Lehigh University, ranging from cell biology and
neuroscience to the structure and dynamics of colloidal crystals.

Studies in the research areas conducted at hehigh will not only contribute to
our understanding of basic cellular and organismal processes, but may also have
future practical applications to human health. The microscope system will also
provide valuable training to young researchers by exposing undergraduates,
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows to state-of-the-art light
microscopy.