* 0200712
* Methods of Hankel and Toeplitz Operators in Noncommutative Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Vladimir Peller, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 350,000.00

PI: Vladimir Peller&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number
0200712&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator will use vectorial Hankel and &lt;br/&gt;Toeplitz operators in
noncommutative analysis. In&lt;br/&gt;spite of the recent progress of
approximation theory for matrix&lt;br/&gt;and operator functions there are still
many open problems&lt;br/&gt;important in applications such as control theory,
multivariate&lt;br/&gt;stationary processes, etc. The principal investigator
will &lt;br/&gt;look for a sharp estimate of the degree of the
superoptimal&lt;br/&gt;approximant of a rational matrix function and sharp
estimates of&lt;br/&gt;the resolvents of Toeplitz and Wiener-Hopf operators
acting on&lt;br/&gt;spaces of vector functions, study properties of Wiener-
Hopf,&lt;br/&gt;thematic, and canonical factorizations of matrix functions,
study&lt;br/&gt;different regularity conditions for multivariate
stationary&lt;br/&gt;processes in spectral terms, study Hankel-Schur
multipliers, study&lt;br/&gt;Schatten--von Neumann properties of certain
integral operators&lt;br/&gt;arising from Schrodinger
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among operators acting on spaces of analytic
functions there are&lt;br/&gt;two classes that play an extremely important role.
These are&lt;br/&gt;Hankel operators and Toeplitz operators. The theory of
such&lt;br/&gt;operators has been rapidly developing for the last 20
years.&lt;br/&gt;Recently it has become clear that to satisfy the needs of
control&lt;br/&gt;theory, prediction theory and other applications, it is
necessary&lt;br/&gt;to study Toeplitz and Hankel operators on spaces of
vector&lt;br/&gt;functions. This leads to a considerably more complicated
theory,&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator has obtained recently
interesting&lt;br/&gt;results that required a new technique. He is going to
continue to&lt;br/&gt;work in this direction and apply Hankel and Toeplitz
operators on&lt;br/&gt;spaces of vector functions to different problems in
noncommutative&lt;br/&gt;analysis.&lt;br/&gt;