* 0200690
* Geometry of Banach Spaces and Operator Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* William Johnson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 427,215.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS-0200690&lt;br/&gt;William B. Johnson and
Gilles Pisier, PIs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators will
investigate problems in the &lt;br/&gt;theories of Banach spaces and operator
spaces. The problems &lt;br/&gt;to be considered fall into several
subcategories; namely,&lt;br/&gt;affine approximation of Lipschitz functions,
non linear&lt;br/&gt;infinite dimensional and finite dimensional geometry,
finite &lt;br/&gt;dimensional subspaces of Lebesgue spaces, measures on infinite
&lt;br/&gt;dimensional spaces, similarity theory, tensor products of
&lt;br/&gt;operator spaces, bounded and completely bounded approximation
&lt;br/&gt;properties, and amenability of spaces of operators. There will
&lt;br/&gt;be coordination of the proposed project with the existing
&lt;br/&gt;Workshop in Linear Analysis and Probability Theory at Texas A&amp;M
&lt;br/&gt;University. This Workshop encourages interactions among
&lt;br/&gt;researchers and apprentices in different mathematical
&lt;br/&gt;fields by bringing together graduate students, young
&lt;br/&gt;investigators, and junior and senior postdoctoral participants
&lt;br/&gt;in several areas of analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Banach space
theory, the study of notions of "distance" which &lt;br/&gt;are not necessarily
Euclidean on both finite and infinite &lt;br/&gt;dimensional vector spaces,
forms the basis for both Euclidean &lt;br/&gt;and non-Euclidean geometry and the
analytic geometry of infinite &lt;br/&gt;dimensional function spaces, including
the space of continuous &lt;br/&gt;numerical functions on an interval as well as
more complicated &lt;br/&gt;classes of functions. From the beginning, the ideas
at the &lt;br/&gt;root of Quantum Mechanics have had a major impact on
mathematics, &lt;br/&gt;stimulating the study of operators and their spectrum
instead of &lt;br/&gt;numerical functions. These ideas have led recently to the
new &lt;br/&gt;field of "Quantized Functional Analysis" or "Operator Space
&lt;br/&gt;Theory" and this development has led to the solution of several
&lt;br/&gt;major problems as well as opened new avenues of research.
&lt;br/&gt;Analogously, the non linear geometry of Banach spaces &lt;br/&gt;also
is a rather recent development which is beginning to have
&lt;br/&gt;considerable impact in geometrical analysis in both the finite
&lt;br/&gt;and infinite dimensional settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;