* 0200449
* Nonlinear System Identification with Application to Combustion Instability Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Robert Bitmead, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2005
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract-0200449&lt;br/&gt;Robert R. Bitmead, U. of Cal-San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear System Identification with
Application to Combustion Instabillty Control&lt;br/&gt;Robert R Bitmead,
Department of Mechanical &amp; Aerospace Engineering, U of California-San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;System Identification is the science of fitting
mathematical dynamical models using measured data from experiments together with
candidate model structures from physical reasoning. Identification is critical
in developing models of complex and imprecisely known systems prior to their
analysis. This project is concerned with developing techniques and underpinning
theories for nonlinear system identification. At present there is a dearth of
tools and guidance of how to proceed in this case. While the focus is scientific
and broad, the study will proceed by considering in tandem with theory a major
driving application of combustion instability control, of interest in jet
engines and gas power turbines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has phases in
which general concepts are developed and then are explored in the context of the
combustion instabilities. Developing suitable measures of fit and then tests of
confidence of models will be early goals. These should capture the important
features in the data records from the nonlinear oscillating system while
ignoring the unimportant detail. Here tests can be made with models already
fitted to the data. Specifically nonlinear tools such as bifurcation analysis
then can be applied for the assessment of model properties which are preserved
from experiment to experiment and which might form the basis of control
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chief among the theoretical tasks is to address the
concept of model validation for such systems as oscillators. That is, how might
one develop an experiment, which is capable of revealing the weaknesses of a
particular candidate model fitted using some criterion. This is intimately
connected with confidence in the identified model and with uncertainty in its
suitability for a use. Should generalized concepts and meaningful tests be
developed, there is a ready market for the application of these tools. Indeed,
nonlinear control design has moved forward greatly recently in theory and
practice, but it needs good models of known reliability to go much
further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;