* 0200797
* Mechanics of Nanoropes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 04/30/2005
* USD 332,398.00

Nanorope Mechanics, Rod Ruoff and Wing Kam Liu, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes, CNTs, are a multifunctional
material that may find applications as a reinforcing component in a variety of
composites, where the matrix could be polymer, ceramic, or a metal, including
ductile metals such as aluminum. Additionally, CNT's may be applied as a new
type of cable material that would exploit the high stiffness and potentially the
high strength. There are two types of carbon nanotubes, the "single walled
carbon nanotubes," SWCNTs, and the "multiwalled carbon nanotubes," MWCNTs. This
grant from the National Science Foundation addresses the mechanics of SWCNT
bundles with a combined experimental and modeling effort. In particular, the
goal of this project is to develop a detailed understanding of the mechanics of
both parallel and twisted SWCNT bundles. Inspiration for this effort comes from
the rather well established fields of twisted wire, and textile, mechanics.
These disciplines have treated the mechanics of twisted wire structures, or
textile fabrics, typically by continuum mechanics. One may expect that twisting
a bundle, or achieving a "woven" bundle, of SWCNTs will enhance the load bearing
capacity of the SWCNT "rope." The extent of load transfer between individual
tubes in the bundle is a crucial aspect of their potential application in
structural applications in either composites, as cabling, and even for example,
as windings in electromagnets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our experimental effort
involves the use of a nanomanipulator/testing stage in which we will pick up
SWCNT bundles, mount them for tensile loading, and apply twists with a component
of this testing stage, which can undergo 1800 individual steps per 360 degree
revolution, and can continue to "wind up" a SWCNT bundle through n turns. The
stiffness as a function of applied twist, and also the bundle strength as a
function of applied twist, will be studied with this tool, which has been
previously used to study the tensile loading of individual MWCNT's and of
untwisted SWCNT bundles. Our modeling effort involves using a variety of
approaches, including molecular dynamics (MD), molecular mechanics (MM), and
continuum mechanics, to study such issues as load transfer as a function of both
twist and contact length, for both idealized bundles (for example, where every
tube in the bundle is identical, such as all tubes being (10,10) tubes with
perfect closest-packing) and bundles that might more closely mimic those
actually tested in experiment, such as having different diameter tubes in the
bundle, without perfect closest packing. There is a close collaboration between
the groups doing theory and experiment, and each effort is meant in part to
guide the other, and to provide deeper overall understanding.&lt;br/&gt;