* 0200063
* Current Mode Band-Limited Signaling for Deep Submicron Global Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Wentai Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 06/30/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Recent trends in submicron CMOS scaling suggest that global interconnects will
increasingly become a major performance limitation due to increased signal delay
and cross-talk noise. The implementation of copper and low k wiring technology
mitigates the effect of scaling on signal delay and cross-talk in local and
intermediate interconnects. However, the benefits of new materials may not be
sufficient for scaling long global interconnects due to the increasing RC
delays. The near term solution adopted by the semiconductor industry to minimize
the relative delay, according to the 1TRS roadmap, has been to increase the
aspect ratio of interconnects. However, the increase in metal thickness,
reduction in metal pitch and continuing voltage scaling with each technology
generation will progressively exacerbate the noise problem due to interconnect
capacitive and inductive coupling effects and will eventually become the
dominant problem over local and global propagation delays.

The research described in this proposal will address the signal propagation
delay and cross-talk noise limitations in deep submicron interconnects by
introducing a fundamental change in the signaling approach: the use of current-
mode band-limited signaling to reduce the signal delay and cross-talk noise
bottlenecks in CMOS VLSI's. To reduce cross-talk noise due to capacitive and
inductive effects, the proposed signaling scheme based on band-limited basis
waveforms will partially replace the square pulses in critical communication
links within the system. A preliminary remit from the proposed band-limited
signaling scheme in 0.35-urn CMOS process shows capacitive cross-talk noise
reduction beyond 30 percent for aluminum and copper interconnects. An attractive
result from the proposed signaling approach is that given the signal bandwidth
and noise margin requirements, longer interconnects lines or higher interconnect
densities can be achieved.

To overcome the bandwidth limitations in the deep submicron regime, new
approaches to high-speed signaling are required. In the proposed research, we
intend to use current-mode circuit techniques to improve the bandwidth
performance and reduce signal delay. Current-mode sensing has received limited
attention for signaling in global interconnections partially due to the
popularity of voltage-mode full swing repeater insertion methodologies. . It can
be shown that as CMOS technology continues to scale, the number of repeaters
required to achieve the projected performance criteria will increase
dramatically and constitute a significant portion of the total system power
dissipation. Therefore, current-mode sensing circuits will increasingly become
popular in this deep submicron IC era.

Accurate estimation of propagation delay and cross-talk noise in long global
interconnects plays an important role in the early design stages of high
performance VLSI systems. Various techniques based on simulations and/or
analytical closed-form formulations have been proposed to model delay and cross-
talk in interconnects. The bulk of the work dedicated to this area targets
capacitively terminated lines for voltage mode signaling. However, with the
increasing speed requirements in VLSI circuits, current mode signal transporting
techniques may provide an attractive solution to some of the challenges caused
by aggressive interconnect scaling. To accommodate current-mode signaling
techniques, we propose to derive efficient closed-form analytical models for a
driven distributed RC line with arbitrary termination. The accuracy of this work
is predicted to be the same as Elmore Delay formulation, extended to accommodate
current-mode type circuits.

In this research, we intend to develop the theoretical basis for the proposed
current-mode band-limited signaling scheme and analytically formulate its impact
on cross-talk noise and signal delay reduction. We will target our study toward
understanding its effects on interconnect coupling noise. Study of circuit
design issues will be followed by prototype fabrication for conceptual and
experimental verification. Finally, we intend to apply this knowledge to build a
high performance wide bus system to prove the noise reduction advantages.