* 0200809
* Operator Algebras and Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Adrian Ocneanu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 274,616.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Ocneanu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
their introduction a century ago, subgroups of SU(2) and simple Lie groups have
evolved almost separately. In operator algebras no geometrical structure of
subfactors has been previously found. The proponent has found the natural link
between subfactors, the subgroups of quantum SU(2) and the classical and quantum
Lie groups, showing that the information for building a simple Lie group comes
naturally from the fusion structure on representations of a quantum subgroup of
SU(2). The bridge between these two areas of research is a new crystallographic
property of homology theory, wherein for instance six term exact sequences
correspond to regular hexagons. These methods yield a natural elementary
construction of a canonical basis of the quantum enveloping algebra of the
semisimple Lie groups. The link found between quantum subgroups and root
lattices extends beyond SU(2) and the classical Lie groups. The proponent found
new unimodular root systems in weight lattices associated to general quantum
subgroups, which are not connected to any known structures. The proponent
considers the development of the higher analogs of simple Lie groups
corresponding to the new root systems a priority. These are likely to be
essentially new mathematical objects with natural many-to-one laws, which have
potential applications in constructive QFT in a physical (3 or 4) number of
dimensions, while the usual binary laws produce naturally 2-dimensional field
theories.&lt;br/&gt;The project is centered around the construction,
classification and study of the properties and manifestations of the quantum
subgroups of Lie groups. The quantum deformations of the semisimple Lie groups
have, when the quantization parameter is a root of unity, subgroups which are
the analogs of the finite subgroups of the classical Lie groups. The proponent
has introduced this structure over the years, starting with the classification
of the algebraic structure of small index subfactors in the noncommutative
Galois theory for operator algebras. Other manifestations of these structures
appear in topological quantum field theory, where they provide boundary
extensions of numerical invariants for 3-manifolds , conformal field theory, and
modular invariants. The quantum subgroups of SU(2), SU(3) and SU(4) are now
classified by the proponent, and show that the quantum world is very different
and apparently nearly unrelated to the classical world, with a markedly simpler
situation for the exceptional quantum subgroups than for the corresponding
classical subgroups. The project introduces geometrical structures associated to
quantum subgroups, with the quantum subgroups of SU(2) producing the roots
weights and canonical bases for the simple Lie groups, while the other quantum
subgroups give raise to essentially new generalized root systems in weight
lattices. It is hoped that the new structures produced by the project could play
a role in constructing models of quantum field theory in a physical number of
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;