* 0200308
* Collaborative Research:    Advanced Techniques for Mixed-Integer Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Gabor Pataki, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2005
* USD 87,354.00

This research will develop new lift-and-project methods for 0-1 mixed-integer
programming. These methods will encompass two classes of techniques. The
research team will consider lifting an n-dimensional point to a zeta-vector of
the subset algebra of the n-dimensional hypercube, thereby extending the Lovasz-
Schrijver, Sherali-Adams, Lasserre methods, as well as the disjunctive
programming ('lift and project') method of Balas, Ceria and Cornuejols. Such a
lifting appears promising in that it produces higher-dimensional objects
"faster" than the previously mentioned methods. The second class of techniques
will consider successively refining a disjunction to generate deeper cutting
planes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integer programming embodies the systematic
solution of planning problems arising in numerous practical settings, e.g.
transportation, logistics, supply chain, finance, power generation and others.
Such problems are inherently non-continuous: they involve the allocation of
discrete units of resources. As such, they are extremely intractable. At the
same time, accurate solutions translate into substantial savings, and thus there
is a need for effective solution methodologies. The impact of this research will
be to broaden the class of problems that can be successfully tackled, using
innovative techniques.