* 0200492
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Program:   Displacement Amplification Factors for the Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of Existing RC Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jose Pincheira, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 07/31/2006
* USD 156,000.00

Many existing buildings designed according to older code provisions have
performed poorly in recent strong earthquakes (e.g., 1994 Northridge, U.S., 1995
Hyogo-Ken Nanbu, Japan). The damage caused by these events reached unprecedented
figures which resulted in some of the costliest natural hazard events in recent
history. Since damage and lateral deformations are interrelated, the control of
lateral displacement during an earthquake is key to providing for damage
control.

The main objectives of this investigation are: a) to quantify the influence of
the degrading characteristics of older buildings on the lateral displacements
and b) to develop approximate expressions to compute displacement amplification
factors. These objectives will be accomplished by computing the lateral
displacement of a variety of older systems subjected to a large database of
earthquake records. Statistical and regression analysis of the data will be
conducted to develop simplified expressions for the calculation of displacement
amplification factors.

The project will be conducted in close collaboration with investigation at
Nagoya Institute of Technology in Japan. The results of this investigation will
provide new and needed data that will allow researchers and practicing engineers
to make better decisions in their evaluation and rehabilitation procedures in
both the U.S. and in Japan