* 0200858
* Integrality, Blowup Algebras and Multiplicities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Bernd Ulrich, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2006
* USD 208,506.00

Passing from an affine algebra or an ideal to the integral closure is a
fundamental operation. The investigator intends to examine computational aspects
of this process. While there exist algorithms for computing the integral closure
of an affine domain, little is known about the complexity of such calculations.
To address this problem the investigator intends to find estimates for the
number of algebra generators of the integral closure and for the degrees of
these generators. In the case of ideals on the other hand, one still has no
efficient method for computing integral closures. In view of this lack of an
algorithm, the investigator intends to express, or at least approximate, the
integral closure of an ideal by a sum of colon ideals that are more readily
accessible. The core of an ideal is a counterpart of the integral closure: it
encodes information about all possible reductions of a given ideal, i.e., all
ideals over which the given ideal is integral. The investigator intends to work
on a conjectural formula that, if proved, would give an explicit expression for
the core of a large class of ideals. Continuing the somewhat computational theme
the investigator proposes to establish bounds for the Castelnuovo-Mumford
regularity of embedded projective varieties in terms of their defining
equations. The known results require strong assumptions on the singularities of
the variety which the investigator hopes to weaken. In this vein he intends to
show that rational singularities persist under generic linkage of ideals in the
linkage class of a complete intersection. In continuation of his earlier work on
blowup algebras the investigator plans to study the rings representing special
fibers of blowups. These `special fiber rings' describe, for instance, images of
rational maps, including secant varieties and Gauss images. The investigator
intends to study the Cohen-Macaulayness of special fiber rings, estimate their
depth and compute multiplicities. Suitable depth estimates would have a bearing
on a conjecture by Mazur that originates in Wiles' work on deformations of
Galois representations. Formulas for the multiplicity on the other hand would
lead to an extension of the Teissier-Pluecker formula for the degrees of certain
dual varieties.

The investigator works in the area of Mathematics called "Commutative Algebra,"
which deals with the qualitative study of systems of polynomial equations in
several variables. Such systems arise in numerous applications outside
mathematics. Over the past two decades commutative algebraists have become more
concerned with computational aspects, thereby emphasizing connections to applied
areas such as computer algebra, robotics, cryptography and coding theory. This
project addresses both theoretical and computational aspects of commutative
algebra.