* 0200703
* Higher-dimensional Shifts and Ergodic Convergence
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Anthony Quas, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 88,048.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0200703&lt;br/&gt;PI: Anthony Quas
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
focus on the areas of higher-dimensional shifts of&lt;br/&gt;finite type and
almost everywhere convergence in ergodic&lt;br/&gt;theory. Higher-dimensional
shifts of finite type are symbolic&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems whose points are
arrays of symbols from a finite&lt;br/&gt;alphabet satisfying certain adjacency
rules. While there is a&lt;br/&gt;well-developed theory for one-dimensional
shifts of finite type, the&lt;br/&gt;general situation for higher-dimensional
shifts has been very&lt;br/&gt;unclear. Recently a number of organizing concepts
have started to&lt;br/&gt;emerge and it is hoped that these will lead to a
satisfactory theory&lt;br/&gt;for at least some reasonable collection of higher-
dimensional systems. &lt;br/&gt;Birkhoff's theorem is concerned with the effects
of averaging a&lt;br/&gt;sequence of measurements of a system taken at equal
time&lt;br/&gt;intervals. The result then states that in the case of
a&lt;br/&gt;measure-preserving transformation, for almost every initial
condition,&lt;br/&gt;the time averages are convergent. Further, the limit is
identified if&lt;br/&gt;the transformation is ergodic. The work will focus on
variations to&lt;br/&gt;this scenario where the measurements are taken at
varying&lt;br/&gt;intervals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The higher-dimensional shifts
of finite type that will be studied are&lt;br/&gt;of relevance in designing
efficient data storage schemes. Due to&lt;br/&gt;physical restrictions on
storage media, in many cases certain patterns&lt;br/&gt;of binary digits cannot
be reliably written and read back from digital&lt;br/&gt;storage media. In these
cases, it is necessary to encode the data so&lt;br/&gt;as to ensure that the
encoded data does not contain any of the&lt;br/&gt;forbidden patterns of binary
digits. This applies to magnetic tapes, but also to conventional hard disks,
where data is stored in a number of tracks, all separated from&lt;br/&gt;one
another. It is likely that in order to continue the growth in
the&lt;br/&gt;amount of data that can be stored on a single device, it will
be&lt;br/&gt;desirable or maybe even physically necessary to
consider&lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional storage schemes. Efficient methods for doing
this&lt;br/&gt;will depend on a good understanding of the properties
of&lt;br/&gt;higher-dimensional shifts of finite type. The almost everywhere
&lt;br/&gt;convergence results lie at the intersection of a&lt;br/&gt;number of
diverse areas of mathematics: probability, dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems, ergodic
theory, number theory and harmonic analysis. It is&lt;br/&gt;hoped that progress
made in this area will have knock-on effects in &lt;br/&gt;the other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;