* 0200607
* Analysis of Toeplitz Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Dechao Zheng, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 104,147.00

PI: Dechao Zheng&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0200607
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted
on problems arising from &lt;br/&gt;the interaction between function theory and
functional &lt;br/&gt;analysis. Primary emphasis will rest on the study of
Toeplitz &lt;br/&gt;operators on some function spaces. The topics to be
considered &lt;br/&gt;include compact operators ``closely associated with
function &lt;br/&gt;theory'' on the Hardy space or the Bergman space, bounded
&lt;br/&gt;Toeplitz operators, algebraic and spectral properties of
&lt;br/&gt;dual Toeplitz operators, Hankel and Toeplitz operators on
&lt;br/&gt;the Segal-Bargmann spaces and quasi-invariant subspaces of
&lt;br/&gt;the Segal-Bargmann spaces. This project focuses on the
&lt;br/&gt;central problem of establishing the relationship between the
&lt;br/&gt;fundamental properties of those operators and analytic and
&lt;br/&gt;geometric properties of their symbols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed work involves ideas and problems from &lt;br/&gt;operator theory and
complex analysis. Operator Theory &lt;br/&gt;grew out of ideas used to study
certain partial differential &lt;br/&gt;equations arising in physics, and became
increasingly&lt;br/&gt;important with the advent of Quantum Mechanics. There are
&lt;br/&gt;at least two reasons for the continuous and increasing
&lt;br/&gt;interest in Toeplitz operators. In addition to differential
&lt;br/&gt;operators, Toeplitz operators constitute &lt;br/&gt;one of the most
important classes of non-selfadjoint operators &lt;br/&gt;and they are a
fascinating example of the fruitful interplay &lt;br/&gt;between such topics as
operator theory, function theory, &lt;br/&gt;harmonic analysis and operator
algebras. On the other hand, &lt;br/&gt;Toeplitz operators are of importance in
connection with a &lt;br/&gt;variety of problems in physics, probability theory,
&lt;br/&gt;information and control theory, and several other fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;