* 0200945
* Probabilistic Considerations in the Analysis of Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Alan Frieze, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 287,331.00

The investigator will continue his work on the interplay
between&lt;br/&gt;probability and algorithms. He has identified two distinct but
&lt;br/&gt;very important aspects of such study. In the first instance he will
&lt;br/&gt;study randomized algorithms i.e. those algorithms that introduce
randomness&lt;br/&gt;as a means of speeding up computation. In the second
instance, he will &lt;br/&gt;consider the average case performance of
algorithms. Here, he wants to try&lt;br/&gt;to explain the good performance of
simple algorithms on &lt;br/&gt;"typical" problems as opposed to the worst-case
performance &lt;br/&gt;exemplified by the pathological examples of complexity
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of randomized algorithms, the
investigator will consider&lt;br/&gt;problems arising in the study of Monte
Carlo Markov Chain algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;In particular he will study their use
in problems associated with &lt;br/&gt;combinatorial counting problems and with
problems in Statistical &lt;br/&gt;Physics. He will also continue his study of
the Edge Disjoint Path &lt;br/&gt;problem and the construction of a
generalisation of the well known&lt;br/&gt;matrix Singular Value Decomposition
to multi-dimensional matrices. &lt;br/&gt;In the area of average case analysis,
he will continue his work on the&lt;br/&gt;Traveling Salesman Problem and try to
extend his ideas to the &lt;br/&gt;independent symmetric model. He will continue
his work on analysing the &lt;br/&gt;efficacy of the Sequencing By Hybridization
technique in Computational&lt;br/&gt;Biology. Finally, he will continue to work
on probabilistic models of the&lt;br/&gt;World Wide Web in an attempt to find a
useful model for &lt;br/&gt;the testing of algorithmic ideas.