* 0200047
* Number Theory and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* George Andrews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 138,906.00

This proposal focuses on problems in q-series and partitions. &lt;br/&gt;There
are five separate parts of this work. The first part &lt;br/&gt;considers
research tied to applications of the construction &lt;br/&gt;of representations
of Lie algebras. Next the investigator &lt;br/&gt;looks at new q-series methods
related to special problems in &lt;br/&gt;number theory. The third part
discusses applications of the &lt;br/&gt;Omega software package (http://www.uni-
linz.ac.at/research/&lt;br/&gt;combinat/risc/software/Omega/) which is being
developed by &lt;br/&gt;the investigator in collaboration with colleagues at
Linz. &lt;br/&gt;The focus in this latter section is on mutli-dimensional
&lt;br/&gt;partitions. The fourth section is devoted to the study of
&lt;br/&gt;Bailey chains and a consideration ofhow recent discoveries of
&lt;br/&gt;the investigator may lead to new applications of this concept.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposal concludes with consideration of three major
unsolved&lt;br/&gt;problems in the theory of partitions: (1) the Friedman-
Joichi-&lt;br/&gt;Stanton conjecture, (2) the Borwein conjecture and (3) the
&lt;br/&gt;Okada conjecture. Each of these three conjectures has been
&lt;br/&gt;around for some time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this proposal
put succinctly might be: Building &lt;br/&gt;bridges from partitions and
q-series (two intrinsically deep and &lt;br/&gt;charming but sometimes rather
introverted topics) to several &lt;br/&gt;branches of mathematics and science.
The first two sections are &lt;br/&gt;devoted to relating this work to
representation theory and number &lt;br/&gt;theory, two branches of mathematics;
in each instance, it is clear &lt;br/&gt;that this interaction will not only
enrich the object fields, but &lt;br/&gt;also will provide new insights for
partitions and q-series. The &lt;br/&gt;work on the Omega package has great
potential. Here the &lt;br/&gt;investigator and his collaborators have found
numerous instances &lt;br/&gt;where research discoveries have gone from being
unthinkable to &lt;br/&gt;easily reached. The possible applications to multi-
dimensional &lt;br/&gt;partitions should lead to insights in combinatorics and,
&lt;br/&gt;hopefully, the combinatorial aspects of physics. The work on
&lt;br/&gt;Bailey chains in the past has had profound impact on statistical
&lt;br/&gt;mechanics in physics. The more this method is advanced, the more
&lt;br/&gt;we may expect these mutually beneficial applications to continue.
&lt;br/&gt;The final section on three unsolved problems appears, at first,
&lt;br/&gt;to be a purely internal study. However, as has often happend
&lt;br/&gt;in the past, whenever new methods are discovered to solve really
&lt;br/&gt;hard problems, there is almost always a spillover into vital
&lt;br/&gt;applications. &lt;br/&gt;