* 0200541
* Conference on Stark's Conjectures and Related Topics, August 4 - 9, 2002, The Johns Hopkins University
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Cristian Popescu, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 03/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

Originating in the mid-1970's, Stark's Conjecture remains one of the deepest
unsolved problems in number theory. Tate's 1984 book on the sub- ject provided a
generation of researchers with a solid exposition of the state of the conjecture
at that time, and a foundation for further in- vestigation. Work related to the
conjecture has recently grown to in- volve more and more number theorists, but
there has never been a major conference on the subject. This NSF award will
provide major funding for a conference dedicated to Stark's conjecture and its
variations to be held at John's Hopkins University in Baltimore August 4-9,
2002. Plans include plenary talks devoted to background and current research in
the mornings, followed by contributed talks in the afternoons. The gathering of
researchers from various strands of inquiry should lead to insight into the
links between various conjectures and provide an ideal platform for further
research on all aspects of Stark's Conj- ecture. In particular, one would expect
that this conference would lead to a number of new and fruitful collaborations,
and to the greater in- volvement of graduate students in this research. Indeed,
graduate stu- dents, junior faculty members, women, and members of traditionally
under-represented minorities are especially encouraged to attend and to apply
for funding.

Stark's conjecture in number theory suggests that there is astonishing and
useful structure waiting to be discovered behind the fundamental concepts of
higher arithmetic. In higher arithmetic, one seeks to de- scribe the solutions
of polynomial equations and their properties. This is the algebraic side of
number theory. The conjecture states that the solutions of certain polynomial
equations can be obtained from the values of specific limits and infinite sums
which naturally involve the methods of calculus. This is the analytic side of
number theory. Thus Stark's conjecture makes a striking connection between two
branches of mathematics: algebra and analysis. Understanding this type of
connection is just what leads to major breakthroughs. Indeed, the conjecture has
already led to new and more efficient methods of performing certain
computations.