* 0200169
* Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and Related Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Robert Jensen, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 148,569.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0200169: Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and
Nonlinear PDE's&lt;br/&gt;PI: Robert R. Jensen, Co-PI: Emmanuel N.
Barron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
nonlinear essential supremum functionals is the focus&lt;br/&gt;of this project.
In variational problems with such functionals the&lt;br/&gt;natural questions of
interest are existence of an absolute (or&lt;br/&gt;local) minimizer, i.e., a
function which minimizes the functional&lt;br/&gt;on every subdomain, necessary
conditions for the minimizer leading&lt;br/&gt;to very nonlinear differential
equations, and regularity of the&lt;br/&gt;minimizer. In contrast to the
classical calculus of variations,&lt;br/&gt;even under very strong assumptions,
regularity beyond continuous&lt;br/&gt;differentiability is not expected, but
even this much smoothness&lt;br/&gt;is unknown. Virtually every question posed
in classical&lt;br/&gt;variational analysis can be posed for supremum
functionals--&lt;br/&gt;constraints, relaxation, homogenization, duality--and
this can be&lt;br/&gt;done for both scalar and vector valued problems where the
results&lt;br/&gt;are more difficult. This subject has placed a new focus
on&lt;br/&gt;viscosity solutions for fully nonlinear equations, and a
new&lt;br/&gt;emphasis on an old area of convex analysis, quasiconvexity.
The&lt;br/&gt;motivation for the study of such problems comes from
consideration&lt;br/&gt;of physical problems in which the use of the typical
energy norm&lt;br/&gt;is not adequate, that is, one must design for the worst
case.&lt;br/&gt;Supremum norm functionals lack strong differentiability and
the&lt;br/&gt;subsequent difficulties associated with this lack must be
dealt&lt;br/&gt;with using all forms of nonlinear
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of variational analysis in engineering,
physics, medicine,&lt;br/&gt;economics, and other fields is well established.
Extreme value&lt;br/&gt;engineering is an area in which one seeks to consider
the worst&lt;br/&gt;case in order to properly design or build some mechanism. In
this&lt;br/&gt;project these two disciplines are merged to apply
variational&lt;br/&gt;analysis in order to accomodate a worst case analysis. In
certain&lt;br/&gt;areas, such as medicine, or structural engineering, it is
clear&lt;br/&gt;that the worst case analysis is the only realistic design.
For&lt;br/&gt;example, an oncological treatment cannot seek to minimize
the&lt;br/&gt;average tumor load, but must minimize the maximum tumor load.
A&lt;br/&gt;bridge should not be designed to minimize average stresses
but&lt;br/&gt;maximum pointwise stresses. Many control mechanisms
implemented&lt;br/&gt;only when a maximum indicator is triggered. These are all
problems&lt;br/&gt;which are applications of the project considered and in which
many&lt;br/&gt;new techniques must be developed. The basic and
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;results of this area of variational analysis, including
existence&lt;br/&gt;and the determination of criteria sufficient to determine
the&lt;br/&gt;optimal function, will be studied. The analysis leads to the
study&lt;br/&gt;of nonlinear partial differential equations and systems of
such&lt;br/&gt;equations.&lt;br/&gt;