* 0200257
* Magnetic Behavior in Nanoscale Magnetic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Roy Willis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2006
* USD 357,133.00

This condensed matter physics project focuses on the measurement and
understanding of factors that determine the range of spin ordering in metallic
magnets. The fundamental measure of spin ordering is the spin-spin correlation
length, L. For example, the critical temperature, Tc, for magnetic ordering
depends on the strength, i. e. range, of the interactions between individual
spins. This material parameter is often unknown, so that the critical
temperatures at which magnets lose their strength cannot be predicted with
certainty. The parameter L also determines how Tc decreases as the dimensions of
a magnet are reduced. Tc goes precipitously to zero in the nanoscale regime when
the dimensions of the magnet approach L. Plotting and fitting experimental
curves of Tc as a function of the thickness of nanoscale thin films provides a
measure of the intrinsic spin-spin coupling length, L. The experimental plots
also reveal the onset of quantum 'finite-size' effects as the thickness
approaches a few nanometers. The correlation length L also determines the
coupling between thin magnetic layers in magnetic heterostructures. The coupling
strength between spins can be 'tuned' to different values by carefully alloying
different magnetic elements. The research program will investigate these effects
in ultrathin layers and heterostructures of different coupled magnetic materials
as a function of material composition. The results are of importance to the
future development of magnetic recording and magnetic memory devices as the
dimensions approach the nanoscale. The technology is 'cutting edge' so that the
program will serve to train a new generation of scientists in this high
technology field and prepare them for careers in academe, industry and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on measuring and
understanding those factors that determine the range of magnetic coupling
between magnetic moments in magnets. This parameter, the spin-spin correlation
length, is a fundamental quantity that determines how the magnetism decays to
zero with increasing temperature. This parameter is unknown so that the critical
temperatures at which magnets lose their strength cannot be predicted with
certainty. This parameter also determines how the critical temperature decreases
as the dimensions of a magnet is reduced, going precipitously to zero in the
nanoscale regime when the dimensions approach that of this unknown length
parameter. A new discovery reveals that by plotting and fitting experimental
curves of this parameter as a function of the thickness of nanoscale thin films
provides a measure of this parameter. The coupling between thin magnetic layers
in magnetic heterostructures is also a consequence of this same parameter. This
coupling strength can be 'tuned' to different values by carefully alloying
different magnetic elements. The research program will investigate these effects
in ultrathin layers and heterostructures of different coupled magnetic materials
as a function of nanoscale thickness and material composition. The results are
of importance to the future development of magnetic recording and magnetic
memory devices as the dimensions approach the nanoscale. The technology is
'cutting edge' so that the program will serve to educate a new generation of
scientists in a rapidly evolving, high technology field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;