* 0200381
* Distributed Sensors for Damage Detection and Health Monitoring of Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* James Drewniak, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Chang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 140,000.00

The primary objectives of this project are to understand the sensitivity of a
newly designed sensor for strain measurement and crack detection in reinforced
concrete (RC) structures, to validate its performance by testing of a large-
scale structure, and to compare its performance and cost with those of
distributed fiber-optic sensors. A new coaxial cable (distributed sensor) is
developed to meet the critical requirements for high sensitivity and resolution,
low cost, and ruggedness in the structural health monitoring of civil
infrastructure. The new sensor improves the sensitivity of commercial
communication cables for the crack detection of RC members using more flexible
and more permeable dielectric layer between inner and outer conductors. An
additional load transfer mechanism is included to alter the direction of
external disturbance from longitudinal deformation to transverse crushing,
resulting in more sensitive measurement in reflection coefficient of the cable
under tension. Several sensors are designed and fabricated in-house, calibrated
with standard instruments, and finally validated with a large-scale beam-column
assembly for its superior performance. The project involves multidisciplinary
and US-Japan collaboration. It will be a showcase to K-12 students as part of
the high school students summer program at UMR.