* 0200436
* Severe Ground Motions
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* C. Allin Cornell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 06/30/2005
* USD 254,934.00

The objectives of this project are to improve the accuracy and effectiveness of
the way both engineers and scientists address the life-threatening, most severe
ground motions; these are defined as those motions that can induce highly
nonlinear dynamic response and hence damage even those building and structures
that have undergone modern aseismic design. Current means of structural safety
determination are limited by an inability to anticipate what the ground shaking
will look like when it reaches these damaging levels. Based on an effective new
(structure-dependent) scalar measure of ground motion severity, suites of real
and samples of realistic synthetic accelerograms will be ranked and the most
severe identified for study in depth to learn why and how these records differ
from the more benign. Directivity-induced pulses can be one such phenomenon for
certain structures at sites close to large faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
results will lead to project development of joint engineering and earth science
tools for the assessment of the hazard of severe motions. These tools will
include a new probabilistic seismic hazard analysis procedure that takes
advantage of the modern practicing engineer's knowledge of certain linear and
nonlinear dynamic properties of his specific structure to then produce a
particular measure of the threat that far more accurately predicts the demands
on the structure when it is assaulted by these rare, severe ground
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major project product is a dynamic rupture
modeling capability that allows simulations of ground motion in the very near
field of large earthquakes. From this, we gain a better understanding of the
factors that control behavior of aspects of the earthquake source, principally
the rise time, that are important in controlling the level and character of
severe ground motion. Our models are tested relative to their ability to produce
samples of records that accurately capture the properties found earlier to
produce severe effects in structures. Thus the project requires an unusual
degree of interaction between engineering and earth scientists. &lt;br/&gt;