* 0200143
* GOALI:  Optimization-Based Human Motion Simulation Models for Computer-Aided Human-Centric Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Ulrich Raschke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 05/31/2006
* USD 192,853.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
project seeks to integrate the development of a series of optimization-based
models for digital human motion simulation and the synthesis of movement
performance descriptors such that the developed models are physically realistic
and computationally efficient. Three new models, formulated as optimization
problems, will be developed: (1) an end-point trajectory model, (2) a
parameterized differential inverse kinematics model, and (3) a parameterized
forward dynamics model. These models will have open structures to incorporate
movement performance descriptors that can be formulated as objective functions,
constraints, or parameters, and then be empirically synthesized, tested, and
determined. In return, the determined or evaluated descriptors will allow the
models to render complex simulated motions via efficient computations. The
project will employ empirical databases of several types of complex human
movements most relevant to computer-aided workplace or vehicle design and
virtual prototyping.

Digital human motion simulation is an integral part of the enabling technology
that will profoundly change the process of designing and prototyping a wide
variety of products or systems that are used, operated, inhabited, or maintained
by human beings. Such changes, including tremendous cost reduction, efficiency
improvement, and quality (usability, serviceability, and manufacturability)
enhancement in product development, will be central to the vitality of the US
economy and its global competitiveness. The proposed research identifies and
explores a unique and important area for novel, strategic application of various
optimization techniques. A successful completion will lead to a new generation
of digital human motion simulation models for computer-aided human-centric
design and human-machine systems engineering, and will yield results addressing
some of the most fundamental questions about human movement control. Educational
outcomes from this project will include new course materials on advanced
modeling tools for a graduate class, and a collection of examples of operations
research problems in biomechanics and ergonomics.