* 0200808
* Global Methods in the Analysis on Singular Spaces and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Victor Nistor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2005
* USD 130,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nistor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is devoted to the
analysis and spectral theory of differential operators on non-compact manifolds.
The investigator is especially interested in generalizing the classical results
of elliptic theory for compact manifolds, including index theory. Little can be
said about all non-compact manifolds in general, but results of Bismut,
Beunning, Cordes, Mazzeo, Melrose, Meuller, Shubin, and others have
singled&lt;br/&gt;out a class of manifolds that is more amenable to study: the
class of manifolds with a uniform structure at infinity. The local theory
(regularity, local existence) for these manifolds is the same as for compact
manifolds, so our methods will necessarily be global. Thus, in addition to the
methods of Partial differential equations and Differential geometry used by the
above mentioned authors, methods from Operator algebras have come to play an
increasingly important role in the study of non-compact manifolds
with&lt;br/&gt;a uniform structure at infinity, as is seen from the work of
Connes, V.F.R. Jones, Lauter, Monthubert, Skandalis, Taylor, and the
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manifolds with a uniform structure at
infinity appear naturally in Scattering theory, Differential geometry,
Representation theory, Mathematical physics, and certain problems of Applied
mathematics. The results of the proposed research will have, in the long run,
applications to all these domains. The main methods that are proposed belong to
Analysis, especially Partial differential equations, Operator algebras, Spectral
theory, and K-theory. A main technical tool will be provided by algebras
generated by differential&lt;br/&gt;operators on non-compact manifolds with a
uniform structure at infinity. By using Sobolev spaces, one can reduce many of
our basic questions to questions about algebras of bounded operators. A novel
feature of this proposal is the study of boundary value problems for manifolds
with a uniform structure at infinity that have Lipschitz boundaries, as in the
work of Mitrea and Taylor on such compact domains.&lt;br/&gt;