* 0200340
* Biomicromechanics of Heart Muscle Tissue Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Karl Grosh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 09/30/2006
* USD 352,689.00

Biomicromechanics of Heart Muscle Tissue Function&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ellen M.
Arruda, Ph. D., PI&lt;br/&gt;Karl Grosh, Ph. D., co-
PI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sixty thousand patients
under the age of 65 die each year from end-stage heart failure in the U.S. as a
result of cardiomyopathy. Cardiac function is altered as a result of both
systolic and diastolic impairment; usually the diastolic dysfunction precedes
the systolic component. There is a critical need for very early diagnosis of
this disease in order to provide an appropriate treatment. &lt;br/&gt;The long-
term objective of our work in this area is the development of an
echocardiograph-based biosensor of heart muscle tissue for early non-invasive
detection of cardiomyopathy. This will consist of an echocardiograph, a strain
imaging module and a constitutive law for heart muscle tissue. Currently
pressure loads can be estimated via real-time blood flow information available
from the doppler ultrasound measurements of the echocardiograph. A module for
strain imaging is available on only a few specialized machines, but it is
currently not used for diagnosis. The third element that is critically needed in
the development of a biosensor, and addressed in this Proposal, is a predictive
constitutive model of the heart muscle tissue. The aim of this Project is to
develop a constitutive law for cardiac muscle tissue that describes its overall
motion in terms of its response to electrical and mechanical stimuli in vivo.
This will enable a correlation between changes in tissue properties with various
stages of disease and echocardiograph-identified changes in cardiac function
with cardiomyopathy, as well as the establishment of non-invasive criteria for
the early diagnosis of cardiomyopathy prior to the stage of systolic
dysfunction. Strain speckle imaging via echocardiographs will also be developed
in this Project to non-invasively detect early stages of disease in patients
with cardiomyopathy. These studies will lead to a better understanding of the
mechanism of this process and better and earlier treatment of these
patients.&lt;br/&gt;Canines involved in current studies at University of
Michigan, in various stages of health and cardiac disease, will be euthanized
and their ventricles excised for investigation of the changes in cardiac tissue
response with cardiomyopathy. Mechanical tests and histology will be conducted
on the ventricle and papillary muscle tissue to characterize them. Changes in
material properties and physical characteristics with diseased myocardium will
be documented by using dilated and hypertrophied canine populations and
comparing them to the healthy populations. Our orthotropic constitutive model
for soft tissue will be extended by including the role of additional deformation
mechanisms in the response of myocardium, such as muscle activity and
viscoelasticity. Moreover, the ability of the modeling approach to continue to
capture the response of diseased myocardium will be assessed using the various
canine populations. Mechanisms of cardiomyopathies will be described in terms of
the changes in the physical parameters in the model. A commerical ultrasound
strain imaging module donated for this project will be tested as a tool for in
vivo elastography using canines. The accuracy of this technique will be examined
by in vitro mechanical testing of excised cardiac tissue from the same animals.
Mechanisms for cardiomyopathy will be examined by comparing the response of the
myocardium at various stages before and after rejection and comparing these with
echocardiograph-identified changes in cardiac function in the same patients.
&lt;br/&gt;