* 0200733
* Infinite Dimensional Teichmuller Spaces and Conformal Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Nikola Lakic, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 91,007.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0200733&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nikola
Lakic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vector fields defined
on closed sets in the plane have&lt;br/&gt;recently found several new
applications in various branches&lt;br/&gt;of mathematics and other natural
sciences. The definition&lt;br/&gt;of the norm of these vector fields depends on
which&lt;br/&gt;application the fields are used for. One norm comes
from&lt;br/&gt;looking at vector fields as tangent vectors to
the&lt;br/&gt;Teichmuller space of the given closed set. This
norm,&lt;br/&gt;called the Teichmuller norm, is suitable for
applications&lt;br/&gt;in holomorphic motions and complex dynamics. It turns
the&lt;br/&gt;space of vector fields into a space of all
initial&lt;br/&gt;velocities of holomorphic motions of the closed set.
Since&lt;br/&gt;the holomorphic motions of the fixed closed set are
defined&lt;br/&gt;by an intrinsic condition on the closed set, it is
natural&lt;br/&gt;that there is a criterion that guarantees that the
vector&lt;br/&gt;field has bounded norm, and which is expressed purely
in&lt;br/&gt;terms of the values of the vector field on the closed
set.&lt;br/&gt;Such a criterion was found recently by considering
the&lt;br/&gt;velocity of the cross ratio for every possible
quadruple&lt;br/&gt;in the given closed set. The velocity is measured
with&lt;br/&gt;respect to the Poincare density of the Riemann
sphere&lt;br/&gt;punctured at three points. This leads to an
alternative&lt;br/&gt;norm on vector fields, called the cross ratio norm.
The&lt;br/&gt;cross ratio norm is equivalent to the Teichmuller
norm,&lt;br/&gt;and the equivalence constant is universal and
independent&lt;br/&gt;of the closed set or vector field. Hence, a vector
field&lt;br/&gt;is a derivative of some holomorphic motion if, and only
if,&lt;br/&gt;it has bounded cross ratio norm. This equivalence led
to&lt;br/&gt;the introduction of a new canonical density on any
Riemann&lt;br/&gt;surface. The new density is equivalent to Poincare
density,&lt;br/&gt;and this equivalence has several important applications
of&lt;br/&gt;the vector field theory to hyperbolic and conformal
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;It provides a link between, on the one hand,
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;geometry, Riemann surfaces, and geometric function
theory,&lt;br/&gt;and on the other hand, Teichmuller theory,
quadratic&lt;br/&gt;differentials and h olomorphic motions with
their&lt;br/&gt;applications to complex dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For many
years the analytical and geometrical techniques&lt;br/&gt;developed in dynamical
systems and Teichmuller theory have&lt;br/&gt;been applied to a number of
important nonlinear problems&lt;br/&gt;with broad impact on ecology, economics,
and genetics. One&lt;br/&gt;can expect these trends to continue. This project
will&lt;br/&gt;feature the applications of the finite earthquake
theorem&lt;br/&gt;to various directions. This, recently stated and
proved,&lt;br/&gt;theorem provides a way to code each finite or
countable&lt;br/&gt;string of data into the weighted tree associated to
a&lt;br/&gt;finite lamination and vice versa. That could turn out
to&lt;br/&gt;be an efficient way of coding. The applications will
be&lt;br/&gt;based on recently made program in Maple that sketches
the&lt;br/&gt;graph of finite laminations corresponding to a
given&lt;br/&gt;homeomorphism and lists weights associated to each leaf
of&lt;br/&gt;those laminations. The third component of the project
is&lt;br/&gt;based on integrating research and education.