* 0200713
* Multidimensional and Non-Homogeneous Harmonic Analysis:  Bellman Functions, Pertubations of Normal Operators and Two Weight Estimates of Singular Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Alexander Volberg, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 430,452.00

Proposal Numbers: 0200713 and 0200584&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Alexander Volberg, Fedor
Nazarov, and Serguei Treil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Research will
be conducted on non-homogeneous harmonic &lt;br/&gt;analysis and on weighted
norm inequalities with&lt;br/&gt;matrix weights. In previous work by the PIs a
technique&lt;br/&gt;for estimating Calderon-Zygmund operators on spaces
with&lt;br/&gt;non-doubling measures was developed, and a novel
&lt;br/&gt;method of Bellman functions was introduced for problems&lt;br/&gt;in
Harmonic Analysis. These techniques will be applied to &lt;br/&gt;solve several
open problems in harmonic analysis and &lt;br/&gt;operator theory and to
investigate new directions,&lt;br/&gt;which previously were deemed untractable
because of the &lt;br/&gt;lack of technical tools. Special attention will be
paid &lt;br/&gt;to uncovering new relations between Operator Theory,
&lt;br/&gt;Harmonic Analysis and Stochastic Control. Among&lt;br/&gt;the main
directions of the proposed research are:&lt;br/&gt;- Spectral theory for
perturbations of normal operators &lt;br/&gt;and related problems in Harmonic
Analysis: two weight &lt;br/&gt;estimates for Hilbert Transform and embedding
theorems for &lt;br/&gt;the co-invariant subspaces.&lt;br/&gt;- Non-homogeneous
T(b) theorems and their applications to &lt;br/&gt;generalizations of analytic
capacity (electric intensity &lt;br/&gt;capacity); the role of curvature in
higher dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;- Bellman function method in stochastic optimal
control&lt;br/&gt;and in harmonic analysis; functions with matrix
arguments&lt;br/&gt;and their applications to non-commutative
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmonic analysis investigates complex processes
by &lt;br/&gt;representing them as a sum of elementary ones (sinusoidal
&lt;br/&gt;waves, wavelets) with well understood behavior. A
central&lt;br/&gt;part of modern harmonic analysis deals with
"singular&lt;br/&gt;operators" of one type or another. Such operators are
&lt;br/&gt;pervasive in the scientific landscape: they turn up in
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical physics, probability, engineering, image
&lt;br/&gt;processing, etc. A new way to treat multivariate
signals&lt;br/&gt;will be discussed. The main difficulty here is that the
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical objects arising in such problems are &lt;br/&gt;non-
commutative: the product depends on the order of terms,&lt;br/&gt;and that
complicates things immensely. A new method based&lt;br/&gt;on Bellman functions,
which originating in the stochastic &lt;br/&gt;optimal control, will be
exploited in harmonic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;One important direction of research
is the spectral theory &lt;br/&gt;for the perturbation of normal operators:
results in this &lt;br/&gt;direction would have important consequences in
mathematical &lt;br/&gt;physics. Another direction deals with non-commutative
&lt;br/&gt;harmonic analysis, i.e. with treating multivariate&lt;br/&gt;signals.
&lt;br/&gt;