* 0200757
* Regular Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Michaela Vancliff, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2006
* USD 98,640.00

This award supports the research of Michaela Vancliff to work in&lt;br/&gt;non-
commutative algebra, with special emphasis on problems arising &lt;br/&gt;from
the theory of regular algebras and non-commutative algebraic
&lt;br/&gt;geometry. Vancliff's main objective is to add to the body of
knowledge&lt;br/&gt;on regular algebras and to further the existing geometric
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, she is interested in the graded-module
category of such&lt;br/&gt;an algebra viewed as a geometric space, with certain
graded modules &lt;br/&gt;playing the role of geometric objects. The linear
geometric modules &lt;br/&gt;(point modules, line modules, etc) are parametrized
by so-called &lt;br/&gt;linear schemes. Vancliff plans to study how the
structure and role of&lt;br/&gt;higher-dimensional linear schemes generalize the
structure and role of&lt;br/&gt;point schemes. She is also interested in
connections between this type&lt;br/&gt;of geometric analysis and that of
various Poisson-geometric &lt;br/&gt;structures. Some of these activities entail
the development of &lt;br/&gt;fundamental computational algorithms, and their
implementation using &lt;br/&gt;a computer-algebra package, in order to enable
explicit computation of&lt;br/&gt;linear schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems
of polynomial-style equations and their solutions play a &lt;br/&gt;critical
role in almost every scientific field, such as statistical &lt;br/&gt;mechanics,
elementary-particle physics, quantum mechanics, robotics,
&lt;br/&gt;crystallography, networking, etc. The solutions are often results
that&lt;br/&gt;cannot be found by experimentation nor other methods, and often
they &lt;br/&gt;are not numbers but are functions (e.g., differential operators
or &lt;br/&gt;matrices), and so, in general, they do not commute. The business
of &lt;br/&gt;seeking methods that find all solutions to any system of
&lt;br/&gt;polynomial-style equations in non-commuting variables is called
&lt;br/&gt;non-commutative algebra. The main idea to find the solutions is as
&lt;br/&gt;follows. One associates to such a system of equations an abstract
&lt;br/&gt;object called an algebra, which encodes all the properties of the
&lt;br/&gt;system. To the algebra is associated abstract objects called
modules,&lt;br/&gt;and these encode all the properties of the solutions. Hence,
in order&lt;br/&gt;to find all the solutions, one should find and understand all
the &lt;br/&gt;modules for the associated algebra. In many of the applications,
the&lt;br/&gt;algebras that arise in this way tend to share certain properties;
they&lt;br/&gt;are called regular algebras and are the main focus of
Vancliff's&lt;br/&gt;projects. One of the goals of non-commutative algebraic
geometry, the&lt;br/&gt;subfield in which Vancliff works, is to use geometric
techniques to &lt;br/&gt;find some of the modules (point modules, line modules,
etc) of the &lt;br/&gt;regular algebra, and then to use those modules to find
the modules &lt;br/&gt;giving the solutions to the original system of equations.
Vancliff's &lt;br/&gt;underlying goal is to improve on these geometric
techniques and to &lt;br/&gt;understand better how they relate to the structure
of the category
of&lt;br/&gt;modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;