* 0200187
* Greedy Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Vladimir Temlyakov, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 103,500.00

PI: Vladimir Temlyakov, University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0200187&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear approximation seeks ways to
approximate complicated functions by simple functions using methods that depend
nonlinearly on the function being approximated. Recently, a particular kind of
nonlinear approximation, namely, greedy approximation attracted a lot of
attention in both theoretical and applied settings. Greedy type algorithms
proved to be very useful in various applications such as image compression,
signal processing, design of neural networks, and the numerical solution of
nonlinear partial differential equations. The theory of greedy approximation is
emerging now: some fundamental convergence results have already been
established; many fundamental problems remain unsolved. The purpose of the
proposed research is to continue investigations of greedy approximation. We
propose to continue to study greedy approximation with regard to bases, where
substantial progress has been achieved recently. We propose to place emphasis on
studying the efficiency of greedy algorithms with regard to redundant systems
(dictionaries). Redundancy on the one hand offers much promise for greater
efficiency in terms of approximation rate, but on the other hand gives rise to
highly nontrivial theoretical and practical&lt;br/&gt;problems. We note that
there is a solid justification of importance of redundant systems in both
theoretical questions and practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximation theory is a branch of
Mathematics that studies methods of replacing complicated objects by simpler
objects. This idea has proved to be fruitful in many applications to the real
world problems. Among these applications are signal processing, image
compression, finance&lt;br/&gt;problems, and many others. As one of the model
problems consider image compression.&lt;br/&gt;Take for example an image
(picture) on a TV screen. Why should we approximate it? In many cases we cannot
afford to transmit (or store in a computer memory) the whole information of an
image, perhaps because of a high cost for transmission of a bit of information
or&lt;br/&gt;limited channel capacity. This is exactly the point where an
application of approximation theory can be fruitful. Clearly, when we replace an
image by its approximant we lose the quality of picture: the more information we
keep the better approximation to the original image we have. As a result we have
an interplay between the reduction of information and the quality of
approximation. In approximation theory we try to find the best (optimal)
solution to this problem. The purpose of the proposed research is to continue
the investigations of methods of approximation which are motivated by these
types of applications. We note that nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;approximation is at the
current frontiers of approximation theory. Nonlinear approximation is the only
hope at present for the increase in available approximation power still needed
to handle problems of real practical interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;