* 0200649
* Quantization on Cotangent Bundles
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Brian Hall, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 103,369.00

PI: Brian C. Hall, University of Notre Dame DMS-0200649

Abstract:

The PI's research concerns the quantization of certain special classical
systems, those whose classical configuration space is a compact symmetric space,
such as a sphere. The simplest physical example of such a system is (the
rotational degrees of freedom of) a rigid body, whose configuration space is the
rotation group SO(3). The phase space of any such system, namely, the cotangent
bundle of the compact symmetric space, has a natural complex structure that
makes the phase space into a Kahler manifold. Thus the quantization of such a
system can be done in two ways, one using the usual position Hilbert space and
the other using a Hilbert space of holomorphic functions. The latter space
generalizes the classical Segal-Bargmann space. The two possible quantum Hilbert
spaces are related by a unitary transform, the generalized Segal-Bargmann
transform, developed by the PI and M. Stenzel. The unitarity of this transform
can be re-formulated as a resolution of the identity for the associated
"coherent states," as shown in detail by the PI and J. Mitchell. These results
have been applied to the quantization of two-dimensional Yang-Mills theory and
to the classical limit of Thiemann's quantum gravity theory. The PI is
continuing to investigate several aspects of the theory, including the
semiclassical localization properties of the coherent states, properties of the
associated quantization schemes (generalized Wick, anti-Wick, and Weyl
quantizations), and the relationship of the theory to geometric quantization.

Broadly speaking the PI's research is in the boundary region between classical
and quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is the theory that governs the world at
the atomic scale. Although classical (Newtonian) mechanics works well for
macroscopic phenomena, it cannot account for the structure of atoms and
molecules--at this level the quantum theory takes over. For the two theories to
be consistent with one another the predictions of quantum mechanics must pass
smoothly into those of classical mechanics as the scale passes from microscopic
to macroscopic. On the other hand, the mathematical structure of the two
theories is very different, so it is challenging to understand how this quantum-
to-classical transition takes place. The PI's research concerns a reformulation
of quantum mechanics which is equivalent to the usual one but which brings the
description of quantum mechanics closer to that of classical mechanics.
Specifically, the PI's work takes one standard reformulation of quantum
mechanics, the Segal-Bargmann transform, and extends it to apply to systems with
more complicated degrees of freedom, such as rotations. This work has been
applied in a simplified model of the strong interaction in particle physics and
in an ambitious program of T. Thiemann and collaborators to develop a quantum
theory of gravity.

