* 0200671
* Cardinal Invariants and Sets of Reals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Tomek Bartoszynski, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 83,700.00

These research projects concern the set theory of the real line, a part of
descriptive set theory. The principal investigator studies various ideals of
sets of real numbers. Cardinal characteristics of the continuum and the
associated families of small sets are central to this research. Specifically, he
focuses on problems concerning the consistency of various generalizations of the
Borel Conjecture, a statement asserting that the families of sets in question
consist entirely of countable sets. He also studies the extent of the duality
between the two classical notions of smallness: measure zero and the first
category. This problem concerns finding parallels between the measure concepts
such as strong measure zero and universal measure zero, and their first category
analogs.

The study of the structure of the real numbers marks the origins of set theory
and has been the object of systematic research since the beginning of the last
century. Concepts of measure and category have been studied rigorously for about
one hundred years, and have been successfully used in many areas of modern
mathematics. Bartoszynski pursues several problems in this area. These problems
may yield positive answers that are theorems of mathematics or they may turn out
to be independent from the standard axioms of set theory. The positive answers
involve new results in both finite and infinite combinatorics and have
applications reaching beyond traditional set theory to real analysis, measure
theory, and topology. On the other hand, the independence results, particularly
ones using forcing, have applications within set theory itself.