* 0200376
* Toward Quantum Semiconductor Nanocavities
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Hyatt Gibbs, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2005
* USD 210,000.00

The goal of this project is to fabricate high-Q (~10,000), small-volume (cubic
wavelength or smaller) 3D semiconductor nanocavities. Single-oxide-aperture
microcavities have yielded Q = 2,000 with a diameter of 2 microns. The Q will be
increased by fabricating a nanocavity with multiple aluminum-oxide apertures
(Dennis Deppe, U. Texas - Austin), thus combining the advantages of etched
pillars and oxide apertures, or by using a very small volume photonic-crystal
nanocavity (Axel Scherer, Caltech). The Q will be measured by detecting the
linewidth of photoluminescence of the quantum dots grown into the center of the
nanocavity spacer. Professor Deppe, who has much experience with the growth of
InGaAs quantum dots, will grow the material for both types of nanocavities.
During this grant the emphasis will be shifted from interface-fluctuation dots
at 750 nm to the more strongly confined self-assembled quantum dots of InGaAs at
1300 nm. 1.3 mm is an attractive wavelength not only because of its obvious
importance for optical communications but also because the ratio of vacuum Rabi
splitting to photon escape rate from the cavity is more than twice as large
there. The longer wavelength increases the feature size of a wavelength-in-the-
material cavity, making it easier to fabricate. The stronger confinement
promises higher temperature operation. Finally instruments for characterizing
1.3-mm samples have been acquired by the PI.&lt;br/&gt;Minimum-volume, high-Q
nanocavities are the natural nanotechnological limit for the shrinking size of
light-emitting diodes and VCSEL's. Such structures are also of current interest
to quantum information processing as sources of single photons on demand or for
quantum entanglement. The Q/volume ratio can be lower for a useful single-photon
turnstile than for strong coupling, so the values of Q and volume obtained will
determine the emphasis upon single-photon source versus strong coupling.
Radiative coupling between a single quantum dot and a nanocavity mode would be
seen as a narrowing of the cavity linewidth as the cavity mode is temperature
scanned through the dot's lowest energy transition in a dewar with very small
temperature dependence of the sample position. Strong coupling would result in
double-peaked transmission or luminescence, and absorption of a single photon
would already change the absorption spectrum for the next probe photon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;