* 0200326
* Regularity Theory for Partial Differential Equations with Super-critical Nonlinearities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Vladimir Sverak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Vladimir Sverak, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities &lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0200326&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***************&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
"Regularity Theory for Partial Differential Equations with&lt;br/&gt;Super-
critical Nonlinearities" by V.
Sverak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this proposal we
suggest to study open problems in regularity&lt;br/&gt;theory of the following
partial differential equations:&lt;br/&gt;1. strongly elliptic systems arising
as Euler-Lagrange equations&lt;br/&gt; for multiple integrals in the Calculus of
Variations;&lt;br/&gt;2. three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations and some
related&lt;br/&gt; model equations; and&lt;br/&gt;3. Complex Ginzburg-Landau
Equations and Landau-Lifschitz equations.&lt;br/&gt;The regularity theory for
these equations is mainly governed by two&lt;br/&gt;factors: the smoothing
properties of the linearized operator,&lt;br/&gt;and the tendency of the non-
linear part to produce singularities.&lt;br/&gt;In all the cases above there is
a certain critical dimension&lt;br/&gt;below which (and, in many cases, at
which) the natural energy&lt;br/&gt;estimates for the equations together with
smoothing properties of the linearized operator&lt;br/&gt;are sufficient to
guarantee regularity of solutions. For most&lt;br/&gt;of the equations above the
critical dimension is two. The situation&lt;br/&gt;is more complicated above the
critical dimension, when the specifics&lt;br/&gt;of each equation come much more
into play, and not many results&lt;br/&gt;are known. The research will
concentrate on problems in this&lt;br/&gt;relatively unmapped
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The study of regularity theory for Partial
Differential Equations&lt;br/&gt;(PDE) is usually motivated by the following
factors:&lt;br/&gt;(1) A good regularity theory can serve as an important check
that&lt;br/&gt; a PDE is appropriate for modeling a given
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;(2) The more information we have about regularity of
solutions of&lt;br/&gt; a given PDE, the better chance we have to design a good
numerical&lt;br/&gt; method for calculating its solutions on a computer. It is
no&lt;br/&gt; coincidence that the equations for which we can calculate
solutions accurately are more or less exactly those for which we have a good
regularity theory. (Confirming that "There is nothing quite so practical as a
good theory".) Roughly speaking, the more we know about solutions, the easier it
is the avoid some of the many pitfalls into which numerical simulations can
fall.&lt;br/&gt;The work suggested in this proposal will address basic open
problems&lt;br/&gt;in regularity theory for important classes of equations with
strong&lt;br/&gt;non-linearities. Many of these equations (such as
the&lt;br/&gt;Navier-Stokes equations, or the Landau-Lifschitz equations) are
of&lt;br/&gt;considerable practical interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*************
**************************&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;