* 0200839
* Collaborative/FRG Research: Nano-structured Materials of Covalently Bonded Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

A large number of the technologically useful, unusual, and exciting superhard
and superstrong materials such as diamond, carbon nanotubes, and SiC are derived
from carbon by covalent bonding of C to itself, and with other elements such as
N, B, and Si. There are an important class of amorphous, partially amorphous,
and nano-crystalline materials such as diamond like carbon and highly
tetrahedral amorphous carbon with unusual properties. It has been shown that the
amorphous phase plays an important role in the nucleation and growth of diamond
and cubic-BN upon non-equilibrium processing. The primary objectives of this
focussed research group will be to: (1) synthesize unusual C-based covalently-
bonded amorphous and nano-crystalline materials with controlled nano-structures
and properties in the focussed region of the ternary (C-B-N) system, (2)
develop/apply advanced techniques to characterize the nano-structures of these
materials, and (3) relate the scale of the nano-structure and connectivity of
the amorphous network to the selected properties. With this vision in mind, the
premise of the proposed FRG is that the functionality/property of nano-
structured materials in the form of thin films and coatings can be designed by
employing a suitable nanoscale architecture and distribution of the basic
structural building blocks to control the properties. In this FRG comprised of
researchers at the University of Cincinnati and Prof. Kleebe at the CO School of
Mines, the design of nano-structured thin films will go beyond just refining the
polycrystalline microstructural scale, to exploring the amorphous routes for
synthesizing, characterizing, and controlling the nano-structure of new
materials in order to achieve unusual mechanical, physical, thermal, and
possibly other properties. Thus, materials will be first designed and
synthesized/produced to have only short-range order and then nano-structured
thin films will be created by clever modifications of the non-equilibrium
processing methods, and kinetic/thermal manipulation of the
networks/nanostructues to create nano-crystalline thin films. The eventual aim
of these activities will be to develop predictive tools for designing and
synthesizing materials with unusual properties so that a knowledge base for
"creating materials by design" will be obtained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a
broader scale, a successful completion of this research will lead to a knowledge
base for designing nano-structured materials in C-B-N ternary with unusual
mechanical and physical properties for applications in machining, electronic
devices, MEMS, and functional/protective coatings. In particular, the scientific
understanding of the role of the nano-scale structure, microstructure, and
interfacial materials in creating novel materials will be obtained. Graduate and
undergraduate students and research associate/post doc will be trained through
participation on this research project and their theses. A new course on Plasma
Processing of Thin Films will be developed and taught to undergraduate and
graduate students. In addition, minority/women high school students will be
mentored and exposed to this research through NASA-SHARP program at University
of Cincinnati. &lt;br/&gt;