* 0200554
* Protocol Development for Net Shape Powder Metal Part Production Via Cold Compaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Randall German, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 07/31/2005
* USD 500,000.00

Powder metallurgy is a classic discrete component fabrication process that
relies on the flow of metal particles into a die cavity, where the powders are
compressed into a preform that is subsequently sintered. Current technological
limitations trace to the inability to achieve undistorted, full-density parts.
For example, density gradients induced from shaping processes lead to nonuniform
shrinkage during sintering. Thermal debinding, used to remove binders prior to
sintering, introduces defects or shape distortions: subsequent sintering
exacerbates the situation. High temperature sintering can produce full density
microstructures, but dimensional accuracy decreases as powder particle size
increases. Supersolidus liquid phase (SLP) sintering offers an alternate
processing method for high-alloy materials, but thermal protocols are not well
understood. Thus, the industrial protocol has been to work from historical data
and iterations to specify tooling and processing cycles to produce target
components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research addresses these barriers by
forming a team with complementary skills in powder metallurgy, ultrasonic
inspection, binder/lubricant technology, and computer-based design in
manufacturing/processing. Tool steel and 316L stainless steel powder parts with
axisymmetric geometries will be the focus of the investigations. A set of
protocols will be established to reduce the dimensional variability that arises
at two key processing steps: debinding (low temperature), and SLP (high
temperature) sintering. We will establish thermal cycle guidelines to achieve
distortion free, full density components. Furthermore, the investigation will
produce a resource of constitutive models, increase the understanding of the
microstructure evolution, and advance the development of ultrasonic techniques
to evaluate full-field density and detect defects throughout the process cycle.
The educational plan includes integrating undergraduate and graduate student
experiences across the breadth of the research tasks. The creation of design
tools for the powder processing industry will be a significant advance for
industry, and it will be disseminated to some 90 industrial companies from
materials suppliers and equipment manufacturers to part fabricators and end
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;