* 0201614
* U.S.-Czech Research on Down-Regulation of Cytokinin in Plants Through the N-Glucosyltransferase Pathway
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Carol Auer, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 39,190.00

This U.S.-Czech research project involves two teams led by Carol Auer of the
University of Connecticut and her counterparts in Prague, Vaclav Motyka and
Radomira Vandova, from the Institute of Experimental Botany, Czech Academy of
Sciences. Their collaboration features examination of a group of plant hormones
called cytokinins which influence plant growth. Plants regulate the level of
active cytokinin molecules within tissues and cells to achieve normal vegetative
and reproductive development. In the complex process of cytokinin homeostasis,
the regulatory mechanism is the reversible or irreversible conjugation of
cytokinins to sugar molecules. This US-Czech effort looks at irreversible
conjugation that down-regulates active cytokinin levels in
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to biochemicaly characterize the enzyme
N-glucosyltransferase (N-GT) so that we may understand its function in cytokinin
homeostasis and plant development. Radish and Arabidopsis are the primary
experimental materials. The Czech partners will define the biochemical
properties and enzyme(s) of the regulatory pathway while isolation of mutants
and eventually cloning of genes involved in N-GT will be conducted by the U.S.
team members. If successful, findings may be applicable in future efforts to
manipulate plant growth and develop agricultural crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international project in plant hormone research
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
experts in the Untied States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents
and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.