* 0201784
* Cavity QED and Confined Phonons in Semiconductor Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This research is focused on coherent manipulation and cavity QED of confined
phonons in semiconductor quantum dots. In colloidal quantum dots such as CdSe
nanocrystals, not only electronic energy levels but also lattice vibrations are
completely quantized. Properties of confined phonons in these quantum dots will
be investigated and exploited for the development of a mesoscopic system in
which a single or an array of quantum dots couple strongly to a single mode of
electromagnetic fields. Coherent nonlinear optical techniques will be developed
and used for the optical excitation and detection of confined acoustic phonons
in these quantum dots. Optical manipulation at the level of a single phonon per
quantum dot, and understanding decoherence of quantized mechanical excitations
in a nanomechanical system are important goals. A cavity QED system where
confined acoustic phonons coupling to a high-Q whispering gallery mode in a
fused silica microsphere through a driven two-photon Raman transition will also
be developed. The proposed cavity QED system provides a unique model system for
isolating and manipulating fundamental dynamical processes in simple quantum
systems and for creating controlled entanglement of quantum dots. In addition to
potential applications in quantum information processing, the ability of optical
manipulation of confined phonons in colloidal quantum dots can also stimulate
further applications of these quantum dots as nanomechanical systems in areas
such as biology. The research program provides training for graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting edge research techniques in areas including
optics, semiconductor physics, nanotechnology, and quantum information that are
of both scientific and technological importance. This training will prepare them
for a range of careers in academe, industry, and government.

This research program is focused on studies of electronic and mechanical
excitations in semiconductor quantum dots. In semiconductor quantum dots such as
CdSe nanocrystals with a dimension of a few nanometers, both electronic and
mechanical excitations are completely quantized or completely discrete.
Properties of electronic and mechanical excitations will be investigated by
using coherent nonlinear optical techniques and will be exploited for the
development of a mesoscopic system in which a single or an array of quantum dots
couple strongly to a single mode of electromagnetic fields. This composite
quantum dot microcavity system can be used for the coherent manipulation of
dynamical processes in simple quantum systems and for the exploration of quantum
information processing, an area of considerable technological importance. The
ability of optical manipulation of mechanical excitations in semiconductor
nanocrystals can also stimulate further applications of these quantum dots as
nanomechanical systems in areas such as biology. Students involved in this
program receive rigorous training in areas including optics, semiconductor
physics, nanotechnology, and quantum information that are of both scientific and
technological importance and can pursue careers in academe, industry, and
government.

