* 0201317
* Static and Dynamic Instability of Liquefiable Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2007
* USD 269,616.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0201317, Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;"Static
and Dynamic Instability of Liquefiable Soils"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to develop a finite element model for analyzing the dynamic
instability and flow liquefaction of soils, including the accompanying lateral
flow and large ground movement during and following an earthquake. The model is
based on a two-phase mixture theory with the following essential components: (a)
a constitutive model that replicates the buildup of excess pore pressure prior
to liquefaction; (b) a criterion for the onset of flow liquefaction instability;
and (c) a constitutive response at residual state following flow liquefaction. A
bounding surface plasticity model is used to model the anisotropic cyclic
stress-strain behavior of soils before the onset of flow liquefaction, as well
as to predict the accompanying pore pressure buildup. Large deformations are
employed through the use of a finite deformation theory based on a
multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
major component of the project is devoted to analyzing the results of monotonic
undrained triaxial tests and cyclic undrained simple shear tests as a boundary-
value problem. A universal assumption employed in interpreting the results of
these tests is that the specimen is deforming homogeneously, suggesting that any
measured specimen response may be interpreted as a material response. However,
there are strong indications that this is far from being correct. Among the
issues addressed by performing boundary-value problem simulations is whether or
not the quasi-steady state condition commonly observed in saturated sand
specimens of intermediate density is non-local. Also being investigated are the
effects of imperfections and other perturbations on the response of soil
specimens taken as a structural system. Finally, a systematic methodology is
being devised for re-calibrating the constitutive model parameters in the finite
deformation regime, and the finite element model is used to reanalyze the
collapse of the Lower San Fernando Dam following the San Fernando earthquake of
1971.&lt;br/&gt;