* 0201773
* GOALI:   MEMS Based Sensors and Actuators for Medical and Biological Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Frank Lewis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 09/30/2006
* USD 235,098.00

0201773&lt;br/&gt;Lewis&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical ventilators play critical roles in
saving lives of patients with pulmonary dysfunction. Emergency manual
resuscitators are used daily by paramedics to revive trauma patients. For life
support these devices must sense respiratory pressures. Size and electric power
requirements of current pressure transducers restrict sensing of pressures to
points within the machine and distal to patient airways. This can severely
degrade the efficacy of the ventilator or even create patient trauma, as the
natural airway anatomical variability creates unpredictable pressure losses.
Moreover, chronic pulmonary illnesses due to air pollution and asthma are
increasing. To understand and quantify the effects on respiration, better
sensors are needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI proposal focuses on
designing, fabricating and testing in vivo novel microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) pressure and flow sensors based purely on optics that can be deployed
into the airways, e.g. into endotracheal tubes, nasal masks, ventilators and
resuscitators. The research team, which includes collaborations between three
academic units and three industrial partners, will perform fundamental research
in detecting sensor activation effects using purely optical techniques and will
develop new design, analysis, testing, calibration, and production practices for
optical MEMS biosensors. New digital signal processing approaches will be
developed to obtain required accuracies and ranges of measurement.
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the outreach plan, the GOALI team will 1)
develop a new design course on MEMS sensor and actuator analysis, design,
prototyping, and applications, including biomedical, 2) develop courseware that
can be used over the internet for training of industry engineers and students
and 3) offer two industrial seminars on-site at industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;