* 0201141
* Low Energy Nuclear Physics at Princeton - The Borexino Solar Neutrino Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Frank Calaprice, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 02/28/2006
* USD 3,234,924.00

Borexino is a new solar neutrino experiment that will use 300 tons
of&lt;br/&gt;high purity liquid scintillator to measure the low energy part of
the&lt;br/&gt;solar neutrino spectrum (E &lt; 1MeV). More than 30 years of
experiments&lt;br/&gt;have shown that fewer solar neutrinos are detected than
expected from&lt;br/&gt;the nuclear fusion reactions that power the sun. Recent
experiments&lt;br/&gt;indicate that the discrepancy is due to "neutrino
oscillations", a&lt;br/&gt;process in which neutrinos produced in the sun as
"electron-neutrinos",&lt;br/&gt;oscillate to a non-electron-neutrino state. The
oscillation process is&lt;br/&gt;possible if neutrinos do indeed have a finite
mass, rather than a zero&lt;br/&gt;mass, as is the case in the present standard
model of elementary&lt;br/&gt;particles. If oscillations are confirmed, and
neutrinos have mass, the&lt;br/&gt;result would be a major departure from our
current understanding of&lt;br/&gt;elementary particle, with important
implications in physics and&lt;br/&gt;astronomy.&lt;br/&gt; The latest
experimental data of the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory,&lt;br/&gt;together with
the SuperK experiment, provide the most convincing&lt;br/&gt;evidence that
neutrinos are oscillating. The interpretation of these&lt;br/&gt;and other data
in the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein theoretical framework&lt;br/&gt;indicates
that oscillation effects for neutrinos below 1 MeV could be&lt;br/&gt;dramatic.
One observational possibility is a large day/night asymmetry&lt;br/&gt;in count
rate for low energy neutrinos. Borexino is designed to measure&lt;br/&gt;the
0.86 MeV 7Be neutrinos and is thus well positioned to explore
this&lt;br/&gt;unique low energy neutrino oscillation effect.&lt;br/&gt; The
Borexino detector is located in the Gran Sasso underground&lt;br/&gt;laboratory
in Italy. The low background requirements necessary for&lt;br/&gt;detecting 7Be
neutrinos pose formidable technical challenges. After&lt;br/&gt;several years of
R&amp;D with a prototype detector, and four years of&lt;br/&gt;construction,
Borexino is expected to become operational in 2002. The&lt;br/&gt;objective of
this proposal in the two-year period 2002-2004 is to&lt;br/&gt;complete the
commissioning and start-up phase of Borexino and begin&lt;br/&gt;taking solar
neutrino data. This proposal will support the Princeton&lt;br/&gt;University
Group in completing and operating the muon detector and
the&lt;br/&gt;scintillator purification, filling, and containment subsystems of
the&lt;br/&gt;detector. It will also support the early stages of data
acquisition and&lt;br/&gt;data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;