* 0201261
* GOALI:  Local Measurement of Superconducting Nonlinearities
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2002,10/31/2005
* Steven Anlage, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2005
* USD 302,212.00

The identification and elimination of defects that produce nonlinearity in
superconducting microwave materials and devices is an important goal for the
superconducting microwave industry. The measurement of the nonlinear Meissner
effect in d-wave superconductors is a key goal of fundamental condensed matter
research. This GOALI award supports a project uniting the efforts of an
investigator at an academic research laboratory with two corporate research
entities, ISCO International and Neocera, in order to locally measure
nonlinearities in superconductors. The experimental methods employed for the
fundamental research will help the practical project, and vice versa. The
expected outcomes of this project are: 1) the most sensitive measurement of the
intrinsic nonlinear Meissner effect in d-wave and s-wave superconductors, and 2)
identification and elimination of specific extrinsic defects that cause
microwave nonlinearities in practical superconducting materials. The research
contributions of the industrial partners include: assistance with the scanning
near-field microwave measurements, providing materials for imaging, helping to
understand the complicated microstructure of oxide superconductors, helping to
identify and eliminate extrinsic sources of nonlinearity from the materials, and
helping to bring the practical aspects of our research to the applied community.
Through this project it is expected that new local electrodynamics measurements
in superconductors will be made possible. This work will provide key tests of
theories of cuprate superconductivity, and open up new applications of high-Tc
superconducting materials in wireless and high-speed device applications. Two
graduate students will be trained in skills necessary for high-tech careers and
will benefit from the close collaboration with industry. There will also be
substantial outreach activities to engage elementary and secondary schools
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High Temperature Superconductors (HTS) have begun
to make an impact on the commercial wireless communications field. Because of
their low resistance and compact size, HTS thin films produce superior
performance when used to filter out un-wanted signals in wireless telephone base
stations. This translates into improved call quality, longer range and fewer
dropped calls for the wireless consumer, and greater profits for the wireless
operators. However, these advantages are jeopardized by uncontrolled defects and
disorder in the superconducting materials used to make these devices. These
defects limit the use of HTS materials to low power receive applications, and
prevent the benefits of superconductivity from being achieved in high power
transmit applications. This GOALI award supports a microscopic investigation of
the sources of these defects and disorder. The project is also an effort to work
with manufacturers of HTS thin films and wireless devices to eliminate these
defects and therefore substantially enhance their products. In addition the
project involves synergistic fundamental research that will focus on basic
measurements of superconducting nonlinear properties and use these measurements
to rigorously test the leading theories of high temperature superconductivity.
Two graduate students will be trained in skills necessary for high-tech careers
and will benefit from the close collaboration with industry. There will also be
substantial outreach activities to engage elementary and secondary schools
students.&lt;br/&gt;