* 0201092
* Many-body Scattering and Symmetric Spaces
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Andras Vasy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 213,915.00

PI: Andras Vasy, MIT DMS-0201092

Abstract:

The object of the proposed research is the geometric study of scattering theory.
This encompasses such apparently distant areas as many-body scattering and the
Laplacian on symmetric spaces. Powerful geometric techniques recently adapted
from the study of hyperbolic equations have already played a major role in the
detailed study of many-body scattering, which describes how quantum particles
interact, e.g. in an accelerator. The proposed project will employ these
microlocal techniques to explore new problems in many-body scattering, and to
bring insights to analysis on symmetric spaces. These problems include the
detailed study of the behavior of particles at threshold energies, which are
energy levels where new configurations of particles become accessible. For many
chemical phenomena Planck's constant, h, may be considered small, motivating the
study of semiclassical many-body phenomena. A particular example is the spectral
shift function, which has been the subject of an ongoing joint project of the PI
with Xue Ping Wang. Another area of proposed research, joint with Gunther
Uhlmann, is finite energy inverse many-body scattering, i.e. whether one can
determine the interaction between particles from the scattering matrices, which
are objects describing the outcome of scattering experiments. Perhaps
surprisingly, there are very algebraic objects which are analogous to many-body
problems, namely higher rank symmetric spaces. The structure of so-called flats
in these spaces is very similar to the structure of the configuration space in
many-body scattering, with the walls of the Weyl chambers playing the role of
collision planes. In a joint project, Rafe Mazzeo and the PI plan to use the
constructive techniques from many-body scattering to obtain the full asymptotic
behavior of various analytic objects on these spaces, showing that many of the
phenomena observed there have their counterparts in much greater generality.

Indeed, many people are familiar with the following two descriptions of the
propagation of light. First, in geometric optics, light propagates in straight
lines, reflecting from surfaces according to Snell's law. That is, the angles of
incidence and of reflection are the same, as if light consisted of little
billiard balls. Second, light can be described by the wave equation, its
propagation thus being similar to that of water waves. There is a close
relationship between these two viewpoints. Namely, for solutions of the wave
equation, the propagation of sharp signals (or `singularities' of signals),
which are the signals used to carry information, is precisely described by the
simpler geometric optics picture. There is a similar correspondence between
classical and quantum mechanics in many-particle interactions. Namely, for
quantum particles the evolution of wave functions `at infinity' is almost
described by the classical picture, as was proved previously by the PI. The only
divergence between the classical and the quantum pictures is the emergence of
bound states. For example, for a system consisting of two protons and two
electrons, one of the protons and one of the electrons can form a hydrogen atom
-- which may in turn break up if an electron with high energy hits it. In this
proposal the PI will in part use these results, and related tools, for further
investigation of many-body phenomena, such as examining the quantum-classical
correspondence more precisely for small Planck's constant, and analyzing whether
one can determine the interactions between particles from the result of a
scattering experiment, and in part to extend such results to more geometric
settings. These results are thus related to important questions in physics and
chemistry.



