* 0201283
* Guided Ultrasonic Wave Methodology to Characterize the Performance of FRP Patches in Repaired and Rehabilitated Concrete Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Laurence Jacobs, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 07/31/2006
* USD 154,995.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rehabilitation, upgrading and retrofitting of
existing reinforced concrete (RC) structures is one of the most difficult
challenges facing structural engineering today. One retrofitting method that has
gained widespread acceptance over the last decade involves externally bonding
fiber reinforced plastic (FRP) patches on to the tension face of a concrete beam
or slab, thus increasing the beam's (or slab's) flexural stiffness and loading
capacity. The increased usage of these FRP patches in these applications has
created the requirement for reliable nondestructive evaluation (NDE) techniques
capable of characterizing these bonded patches. Any candidate NDE technique must
be capable of providing quantitative and meaningful information (from an
engineering design perspective) about the characteristics of an in situ FRP
patch. &lt;br/&gt;The most critical element from a quality assurance (and thus
NDE inspection) point of view is the adhesive bond layer - as opposed to the FRP
patch itself. Concrete repair procedures typically use a high quality FRP patch
that is manufactured in a controlled environment. This is in contrast to the
adhesive bond layer, which is field assembled, often under adverse conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;There are two important quality assurance/NDE inspection problems for
these adhesively bonded FRP patches that can be addressed with guided wave
techniques. The first is concerned with the measurement of the material
properties of the adhesive layer. Guided waves can be used to determine in situ
adhesive bond properties, such as the shear modulus of an epoxy bond. The second
inspection problem is the measurement of the adhesion properties, the quality of
the bonding at the two interfaces between the adhesive and the adherends. This
is a critical issue for bonded FRP patches, especially the adhesion properties
of the concrete-to-adhesive interface. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research develops
a NDE methodology that uses guided ultrasonic waves to characterize the in situ
bond properties of a FRP patch in three tasks: &lt;br/&gt;Task 1. Understand the
underlying mechanics of the propagation of guided ultrasonic waves in these
bonded components. This task examines the behavior of ultrasonic waves in a FRP
patch bonded to a concrete component, quantifying the effect of certain bond
parameters on the propagation of guided waves in the bonded assembly. This
forward problem involves both experimental studies and numerical simulation of
FRP patches, concentrating on directly measurable acoustic parameters.
&lt;br/&gt;Task 2. Interpret the experimental/numerical results from Task 1 in
terms of relevant, engineering parameters in order to develop a quantitative
relationship between these acoustic measurements and critical FRP patch
performance metrics. This task relates these directly measurable, guided wave
attributes (such as dispersion curves that provide wave speed/frequency
relationships) to material properties that are essential to engineering design.
The specific parameters quantified in this research are: the bulk properties of
the in situ adhesive layer, including thickness and stiffness; and the adhesion
properties of this adhesive layer (particularly the concrete-to-adhesive
interface), including detection of any voids, gaps or regions of disbonds.
&lt;br/&gt;Task 3. Conduct a preliminary study that establishes the
effectiveness of an inversion technique for the evaluation of these guided
waves. This inverse problem uses neural networks to determine the bulk elastic
properties, thickness and adhesion characteristics of an in situ adhesive bond
from experimentally measured guided waves. The results of this proof-of-
principle study are critical for the development of an efficient, real-time
field inspection methodology. &lt;br/&gt; This research project operates under
the premise that education and research are equally important in developing
innovative NDE methodologies for civil infrastructure. In addition to performing
basic and applied research, academic institutions have a primary responsibility
to train students so that they can meet the requirements of the workplace. With
this in mind, an education program is proposed that will educate and train a new
generation of engineers to address issues relating to NDE of repaired and
rehabilitated RC components. &lt;br/&gt;