* 0201560
* Model Development and Control Design of Broadband Nanopositioners
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Murti Salapaka, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* mario rotea
* 02/28/2006
* USD 300,000.00

In the past decade, it has become evident that nanotechnology will make
fundamental contributions to science and technology in diverse areas including
cell-biology, quantum computers and molecular machines. There are considerable
challenges that need to be overcome before the promise of nanotechnology becomes
a reality, pivotal among which is broadband nanopositioning. To overcome the
challenge of providing angstrom resolution at ultra-high bandwidth, a concerted
paradigm of modeling, control design, experimental validation and device
fabrication is proposed in this
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric materials are identified as
the primary means to provide actuation for nanopositioning. However, they
exhibit undesirable nonlinear behavior. In this investigation, these mechanisms
will be quantified in a manner that promotes both a fundamental understanding of
the underlying physics and will provide models amenable to control design and
real-time implementation. The high-bandwidth nanopositioning demands are posed
in a highly uncertain environment, and are multi-input multi-output in nature.
In this investigation multiobjective robust control theory will be employed and
enhanced with regard to nanopositioning. The theory addressed will be
complemented by a comprehensive experimental setup that can be utilized to
validate and suggest various strategies for
nanopositioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will provide
fundamental and broad contributions to atomic force microscopy. Based on the
models and control theory developed in this initiative, in collaboration with
Asylum Research, a new state of the art scanning probe microscope capable of
achieving the speed and resolution required for future applications will be
developed. To expose a broad range of students to this nascent field, related
projects will be solicited for each of the 2002-2005 Industrial Mathematics
Modeling Workshops sponsored annually by the Center for Research in Scientific
Computation at North Carolina State University. In this manner, the
investigation will strongly impact students as well as provide a mechanism for
transferring the technology to a leading biology-related microscope
manufacturer. &lt;br/&gt;