* 0201099
* Estimates of Fourier Transforms and Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* David Jerison, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,000.00

The goal of the project is to investigate the behavior of Fourier transforms
under various restrictions and to obtain sharper estimates of Fourier transforms
and Periodizations. The research will be focused on two main objectives. The
first one is to obtain new versions for the Uncertainty Principle in Harmonic
Analysis. The Uncertainty Principle is a statement which says that a function
and its Fourier transform can not be simultaneously concentrated on small sets.
The famous Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle in Quantum Mechanics is one of the
examples of the more general Uncertainty Principle in Harmonic Analysis. In
particular, the investigator will study functions with Fourier transforms
supported on sets with certain type of densities to get new versions of the
Uncertainty Principle and apply the results for Partial Differential Equations
and Signal Processing. The second objective is devoted to the relation between
functions and their periodizations over integer lattices in higher dimensions.
Periodizations are often used in Harmonic Analysis as a link between Fourier
series and Fourier integrals. They arise in problems having periodic structure
that is why they are an important tool in such applied sciences as Electrical
Engineering, Signal Processing and Crystallography.

In this proposal the investigator studies various properties of Fourier
transforms. The Fourier transform is a major mathematical tool extensively used
to represent, convert and recover digital data, information and signals in
Signal Processing, Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, Crystallography
and Tomography. The author proposes to further investigate properties of Fourier
transformations which should lead to a deeper understanding of the behavior of
Fourier transforms under various restrictions. The development of the proposed
Uncertainty Principle in Harmonic Analysis will lead to tools to determine how
much information is sufficient to recover signals and data. In return, this
study of Fourier transforms will give new techniques not only in theoretical
areas such as Mathematical Physics, in particular, Partial Differential
Equations but also in applied sciences such as Image Processing, Electrical
Engineering and Numerical Methods.