* 0201944
* Unitary Dual of Real Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Susana Salamanca-Riba, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 87,002.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Salamanca-Riba&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Salamanca Riba
intends to investigate various problems in the representation theory of Lie
groups. The first problem is the question of classifying all genuine unitary
representations of the metaplectic group. Jeff Adams and Dan Barbasch have
obtained a correspondence between these representations and a set of unitary
representations of certain inner forms of the metaplectic group. The PI plans to
study this correspondence and see if these representations go to interesting
Zuckerman functor modules under this map. In addition, the PI will also work on
a program already in progress in collaboration with David Vogan. The problem
they want to solve is the following conjecture: There is a bijection between the
set of unitary representations of a Lie group G, whose lowest K type is
associated to a fixed parameter, and the set of unitary representations of a
special subgroup with lowest K types associated to the same
parameter.&lt;br/&gt;Lie groups have connections in many areas of applied
Mathematics like &lt;br/&gt;Materials Science, Quantum Field Theory, Particle
Physics, Control &lt;br/&gt;Theory and Robotics and Biology. For example,
Control Theory and &lt;br/&gt;Robotics is related to some representations of
certain compact Lie &lt;br/&gt;groups. In addition, Lie groups and their
representations have also &lt;br/&gt;connections with other areas of pure
Mathematics as well, like &lt;br/&gt;Differential Equations, Harmonic Analysis,
Topology, Geometry and &lt;br/&gt;Ergodic Theory. For example, the study of
problems in Analysis such as &lt;br/&gt;the behavior of solutions of
differential equations, partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations, integral
equations, etc. leads naturally to &lt;br/&gt;formulating these problems not
only in Euclidean space, but on &lt;br/&gt;differentiable manifolds. Many
examples of these manifolds are classical &lt;br/&gt;Lie groups of matrices.
This is particularly true of problems of this &lt;br/&gt;type arising in
classical mechanics and physics and in modern problems &lt;br/&gt;of Lie groups
and homogeneous spaces. Modern Analysis, when it goes &lt;br/&gt;beyond local
results, becomes analysis on differentiable manifolds and Lie
groups.,&lt;br/&gt;