* 0201825
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Forests, Fields, and Factories: Spatial Contexts of Land Conservation in China
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Ye Qi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2004
* USD 6,100.00

Satellite imagery reveals that China is losing forests and farmland to rapidly
expanding urban areas, with negative consequences for environmental
sustainability and food security. This doctoral dissertation research project
will explain where and under what circumstances land conservation policies
succeed in China, with special emphasis given to identifying the effects of
regional economic contexts on land-use decisions by local officials. This
project will use both remote sensing techniques and social science approaches to
understanding the patterns and causes of land-use change in rural China. Imagery
from AVHRR, DMSP, and Landsat satellites spanning two decades will be being
analyzed to quantify the rates of urban expansion and the loss of undeveloped
land across north China, with detailed studies focusing on Zouping County and
Beijing. In those locations, interviews with land managers and village leaders
will provide community land-use histories, allowing the doctoral student analyze
land-use decisions made in different points within the North China regional
system. Rates of land-use change will be interpreted within the Hierarchical
Regional Space (HRS) model developed by anthropologist G. William Skinner, which
builds on the geographical concepts of von Thunen, Christaller, and Hagerstrand
to explain the spatial structure of agrarian societies. This analysis will test
the importance of the regional economic context, as represented by the HRS
model, in defining the constraints and opportunities for land conservation, and
it will facilitate the development of more effective, spatially targeted
conservation efforts.

Land-use change in China is a phenomenon with global consequences. China is
estimated to be losing millions of hectares of forest and farmland to urban
development, thereby releasing tremendous volumes of carbon into the earth's
atmosphere, which contributes to global climate change. Policies to control land
use must assert a collective claim on land resources, countering the trend of
Chinese society towards economic liberalization. The interdisciplinary methods
applied in this study bridge the gap between remote sensing techniques and the
social sciences, linking "people to pixels." By developing a more nuanced,
theoretically grounded understanding of land-use change in China, this research
will suggest how land-conservation policies can be made more successful by
targeting political and economic incentives appropriate to specific locales. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.