* 0201577
* Development of a Rockbolt Support Element for Discontinuous Deformation Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Mary MacLaughlin,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2005
* USD 115,990.00

CMS-0201577&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mary MacLaughlin&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Montana
Tech&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Development of a Rockbolt Support Element for
Discontinuous Deformation Analysis"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astract:&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this research project is to develop a rockbolt support
element that is capable of modeling actual rockbolt behavior, particularly
nonlinear movement between the bolt and the rock which is critical for numerical
modeling. Discontinuous Deformation Analysis, DDA, has several unique features
that make it a perfect candidate for development of a bolt element that has the
ability to characterize rockbolt behavior to a much higher degree of realism and
accuracy than has previously been possible. DDA is an implicit discrete element
method that already has the capacity to model "blocks" of any irregular shape,
and the contact routines are specifically designed to efficiently capture
contact between blocks with both convex and concave vertex angles. The method
accounts for frictional, cohesive, and tensional forces which are present at the
contacts, and allows blocks to slide, separate, and impact without penetrating.
A rockbolt element will be implemented as a "block" with a particular geometry
and special material properties consistent with those of a typical rockbolt. The
support-rock interaction mechanics will then be incorporated into the model as
manifested by displacement between the bolt element and the surrounding rock
blocks. This capability to model bolt behavior, especially pull-out failure,
will make the DDA rockbolt element a more accurate modeling tool than other
previously developed numerical rockbolt support elements. Mark (2000) states
that "the reinforcement mode is actually dictated to the bolts by the ground,
rather than the reverse." One of the real strengths of the DDA approach is that
this outcome is a natural result of the analysis. The behavior and failure mode
do not have to be specified before or during the analysis - they are part of the
calculated results.&lt;br/&gt;The NIOSH Spokane Research Laboratory, which was a
branch of the US Bureau of Mines until 1995 and is now part of the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, has invested significant resources
into the development, installation and testing of instrumented rockbolts since
the mid-1980's. Analysis of the data collected using the instrumented rockbolts
has contributed a great deal to the general understanding of the behavior of
rockbolt supports, and collaboration with NIOSH personnel is an important
component of this project.&lt;br/&gt;The development of the bolt element will
involve bolt type selection, theoretical development, algorithm development and
implementation. The PI and Ms. Kathryn Clapp, the Montana Tech graduate student
involved in this project, will jointly work on all of these aspects, with
assistance from Mr. Steve Signer of NIOSH. One fairly unique aspect of this
project is that once the theoretical development is finished and the rockbolt
algorithms have been implemented into the software, validation will be performed
using the large archive of NIOSH instrumented rockbolt data which has already
been collected. This is a tremendous advantage and will allow the project to be
completed in a relatively short period of time, with a modest budget. Ms. Clapp
will perform the bulk of the validation activities, which will entail
constructing DDA models corresponding to each of the different laboratory test
configurations used, and performing analyses with model conditions specified to
represent the lab tests as closely as possible. The DDA calculations of the head
displacement and load values at points along the bolt will be recorded and
compared to actual bolt behavior as observed during the
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reference: Mark, C. (2000). "Design of Roof Bolt
Systems." In C. Mark, D.R. Dolinar, and R. Tuchman, eds. New Technology for Coal
Mine Roof Support, Proceedings of the NIOSH Open Industry Briefing, NIOSH IC
9453, pp. 111-132.&lt;br/&gt;