* 0201487
* Cyclic Plasticity and Fatigue of Ultrafine Grain FCC Metals at Low Plastic Strain Amplitudes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* John Moosbrugger, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2007
* USD 196,433.00

Cyclic Plasticity and Fatigue of Ultra Fine Grain FCC Metals at Low Plastic
Strain Amplitudes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at achieving a
fundamental understanding of low plastic strain amplitude cyclic deformation and
fatigue behavior in ultra fine grain FCC metals that have a low initial
dislocation density. Ultra fine grain metals are those that have grain diameters
in the submicron range, but generally greater than about 10 nm. Such materials
are only beginning to be produced in large quantities and little is known about
their mechanical behavior relative to conventional grain size materials, but
ultra fine grain metals have been shown to exhibit exceptional strength with, in
many cases, reasonable ductility. They are generally produced in one of three
ways: by inert gas condensation and powder metallurgy, by severe plastic
deformation of conventional grain size materials, and by electrodeposition.
Materials produced by severe plastic deformation can exhibit both high strength
and good ductility, but they have a very high dislocation density, a property
that is very important in determining subsequent mechanical behavior. Materials
produced by inert gas condensation and powder metallurgy generally exhibit poor
ductility - they are somewhat brittle. Only materials produced by
electrodeposition have both low dislocation density and exhibit high strength
and good ductility. For this reason they offer potential for achieving good
fatigue life characteristics relative to conventional grain size materials and
ultra fine grain materials produced by other means. Because it is possible to
produce large samples of ultra fine grain metals by electrodeposition, there is
significant potential for commercial development for structural uses, but more
needs to be known about the mechanical properties of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will execute a focused experimental program using ultra
fine grain nickel produced by electrodeposition. The objectives of the project
are to develop and analyze a detailed cyclic plasticity database for ultra fine
grain nickel at low plastic strain amplitudes. Fatigue experiments will be
performed on specimens produced using electrodeposition of nickel. Various
techniques such as optical microscopy, scanning and transmission electron
microscopy, and x-ray diffraction will be used for characterizing the materials
produced by electrodeposition and for studying the effects of fatigue loading.
Additional objectives include the development of an understanding of fatigue
crack initiation behavior in ultra fine grain nickel. Fatigue crack initiation
is a precursor to the eventual loss of load-carrying capacity.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will involve at least one graduate student in thesis work that
encompasses elements of materials science, electrochemistry, solid mechanics and
ferromagnetics. It will also involve undergraduate students, particularly those
from underrepresented groups. The results will be disseminated through
conference presentations and publications in referred journals and via a website
maintained by the principal investigators and their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;