* 0201320
* Generic Sensing Modules Development and Hierarchical Technology for Civil and Mechanical Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2009
* Henry Yang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 03/31/2009
* USD 288,208.00

Abstract: This proposal seeks to continue the development of a redundancy-based
monitoring and management system for civil structures with uncertain dynamic
properties located in seismically prone regions. Such a system could also be
applied to other mechanical systems. This Hierarchical Intelligent Monitoring
and Management System will be expanded to five (previously three) integrated
software components that interact seamlessly with each other in real time and
are interfaced with the physical structure. These components have data-
processing and decision making capabilities organized into a hierarchy of
shielded layers, with each layer employing a decentralized topology of
information processing units. The Expert Module coordinates the functions of the
other modules with one another, and with data from outside the system. The
Health Monitoring Module monitors data from the Sensor Module and employs
advanced damage detection, localization, and classification techniques. The
Identification Module is responsible for maintaining an active database of
system models, which are updated based on information from the Health Monitoring
and Sensor Modules. Controller design and implementation are handled by the
Control Module, using models provided by the Identification Module, current data
obtained from the Sensor Module, and some form of actuation. New paradigms for
model identification and control can now be explored based on new options
available in sensor technology. The Sensor Module monitors sensors of a variety
of types and feeds the data from these sensors to the other modules. Rapid
advancements in new types of sensors and methods for monitoring and networking
them provide particular incentives for the development of a generic sensor
module. The objectives of this proposal are: (1) To expand the current expert
system's capabilities to monitor structural systems by encompassing new
technologies in sensing and structural health monitoring; (2) To explore new
opportunities for system identification using these emerging technologies; (3)
To continue with the creation of robust control software, expanding the database
of options available to control designers by using improved models, integrating
new sensor options, and refining control objectives to account for structural
faults; (4) To develop specific damage detection and classification algorithms
and evaluate their utility; (5) To evaluate current and emerging sensor
technologies and their applicability to civil structural monitoring and control
applications; (6) To illustrate features of the monitoring and management system
through simulation studies, and to make recommendations for its practical
implementation on actual structures. It is believed that the proposed study will
broaden the scope and enhance the capabilities of ongoing research by the
Principal Investigator by integrating new ideas in structural monitoring and
sensor technology and thus contribute significantly to the development of safer
and more reliable civil structures.

