* 0201319
* Analysis of Electromechanically-Induced Failure of Metallic Thin Films Mediated by Void Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2002
* Dimitrios Maroudas, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 10/31/2002
* USD 238,848.00

0201319 Maroudas Device interconnections in modern integrated circuits consist
of metallic lines with cross-sections characterized by sub-micron length scales.
Electromechanically-induced failure of such metallic lines is a major materials
reliability problem in microelectronics. Failure is commonly mediated by the
dynamics of microvoids that exist in these metallic lines. Void migration,
growth, and morphological change are driven by electromigration, curvature-
driven surface diffusion, and stress-induced surface diffusion, coupled with
plastic flow in the strained metallic film. Fundamental understanding of such
microstructural-scale dynamical phenomena and development of computational tools
for their quantitative analysis are necessary for enabling engineering
strategies to improve interconnect reliability. Toward this end, the proposed
research addresses systematically the complex, nonlinear void dynamics in
ductile metallic thin films over the range of electromechanical conditions that
interconnect lines are subjected to. A number of interrelated problems will be
pursued that involve single- and multiple-void dynamics, including: (i) combined
effects of electromigration and mechanical stress on the migration and
morphological stability of single voids, (ii) current-induced wave propagation
on single void surfaces, (iii) void-void interactions that may lead to void
breakup and coalescence phenomena, (iv) plastic deformation mechanisms around
evolving voids, and (v) the role of plastic flow in interconnect failure. The
proposed research plan emphasizes a self-consistent mesoscopic formulation of
void surface evolution due to surface mass transport and plastic flow under the
action of electric and stress fields, as well as systematic parametric studies
to determine the onset of instabilities that may trigger failure modes.
Computational implementation of the self-consistent model will be based on novel
boundary-integral methods, standard finite-element methods, and recently
developed methods for tracking moving interfaces. The predictive capabilities of
this mesoscopic modeling will be enhanced by atomistic calculations of surface
and interface properties according to many-body interatomic potentials. In
addition, multi-million-atom molecular-dynamics (MD) simulations will be carried
out to probe the nano-scale mechanisms that govern plastic deformation in the
vicinity of voids in strained ductile metallic systems. Analysis of the MD
results will provide the constitutive relations for plastic deformation required
for the closure of the meso-scale problem. ***