* 0201160
* Toward RNA Genomics: A Pilot Study in the Analysis, Design, and Prediction of RNA Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2009
* Tamar Schlick, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 03/31/2009
* USD 861,500.00

We propose a pilot study to analyze, design, and predict RNA structures using a
combination of graph theory and computational methods. The design and prediction
work aims to expand the set of RNA sequences and structures available, and hence
our knowledge of RNA functions. By representing RNA secondary structures as tree
or pseudoknot graphs, we exploit the mathematical results in graph theory for
graph comparison, enumeration, and construction. This approach allows us to
enumerate all possible RNA graphs which may represent both natural and
hypothetical RNA topologies. Our proposed investigations consist of three
related stages: (1) survey and analyze existing RNAs; (2) design RNA sequences
for novel RNA tree topologies; and (3) predict the three-dimensional structures
of designed RNA sequences. In survey and analysis (goal 1), we will
systematically search for the occurrence of RNAs within a larger RNA system,
especially for ribosome structures; use RNA topological characteristics to
survey and classify functional RNA families; and develop graph theory algorithms
to estimate the probable size and diversity of various functional RNA groups
within genomes. Our RNA search tools, survey results, and classification methods
will be made available to the public through the Nucleic Acid Database. To
generate novel RNA topologies for three-dimensional structure prediction (goal
2), we will apply two strategies: sequence mutation of known RNAs and de novo
sequence design. Finally, our goal of predicting the three-dimensional
structures of designed sequences (goal 3) will be accomplished through the
development of empirical force fields and folding algorithms for reduced RNA
models. For this challenging goal, we will consider several computational
approaches, including the use of elastic energy models with Brownian dynamics as
employed for long DNAs. RNA molecules play vital and diverse biological roles in
the cell. In parallel with protein genomics efforts, the development of RNA
genomics or ribonomics --- a systematic analysis and prediction of RNA
sequence/structure relationships --- will help advance our understanding of the
biological functions of RNAs. In marked contrast to proteins, only a small
number of distinct RNA structures is currently known. The methodologies
currently used to search for novel functional RNAs are either restricted to
small RNAs or to known RNA classes. In an effort to overcome these limitations,
we have developed a novel approach based on an area in mathematics called graph
theory and computational biology methods to allow comprehensive search through
RNA's structural possibilities. Since known RNA structures represent only a
small subset of all distinct structures, we postulate that some of the missing
structures represent novel functional RNAs which may occur naturally in cells or
be generated in the laboratory, but as yet unidentified or do not exist. The
three-dimensional structures of novel RNAs will be predicted through design and
folding methodologies. Our approaches will likely expand the number of RNA types
and lead to the identification of unknown RNA families. Designed RNAs with novel
properties have potential applications as catalysts, molecular sensors, and
therapeutic agents in biotechnology and molecular medicine. In addition to RNA
structure prediction, graph theory will allow us to systematically characterize,
classify and establish structural/functional relationships between existing
RNAs. The results and tools developed for this analysis will be made available
through the publicly accessible Nucleic Acid Database. Our proposed
investigations will contribute to the development of RNA genomics, a field
currently lagging behind protein genomics or proteomics. This grant is made
under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of
Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
Health.

