* 0201948
* Topological Quantum Numbers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* David Thouless, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 265,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education on topological defects in
condensed matter physics. Research will focus on three areas: (1) The PI will
use results from the previous grant period related to the forces acting on
quantized vortices to make detailed studies of vortices in liquid helium, in
dilute systems of trapped atoms, and in superconductors. A clear understanding
of the vortices in superconductors is particularly important, as it is the
dynamics of vortices that primarily determines dissipation of energy in
superconducting magnets. (2) Trapped atoms at low temperatures will be studied
with an aim to understand what happens when the interactions are not very weak,
and to understand how the rotational motion observed in such systems relates to
rotational motion in superfluid helium and to the penetration of magnetic flux
in superconductors. (3) The PI will continue work on the construction of a
theory of the size of corrections to topological quantum numbers. It is supposed
that corrections to flux quantization in superconductors and to quantization of
electrical conductance in the quantum Hall effect can readily be made negligibly
small; modern determinations of fundamental constants are based on the precision
of the Josephson voltage-frequency relation and of the integer quantum Hall
effect. The PI intends to examine more closely the corrections to quantization
in the Josephson effects for neutral superfluids, and the possible edge
corrections to the quantum Hall effect.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on topological defects in a wide
range of condensed matter systems. Topological defects play a fundamental and
ubiquitous role in condensed matter and materials physics. They are key players
in dissipation processes in superconductors and in determining the mechanical
strength of materials. This award is concerned with fundamental aspects of
topological defects and has an emphasis on the study of a particular kind of
topological defect, vortices in superfluids and superconductors. 'Superfluid'
includes not only the traditional superfluid states of the helium liquids that
occur upon cooling to very low temperatures, but also the quantum coherent
states recently realized in dilute gases of alkali atoms. The latter is not only
of fundamental interest but contributes to the emerging area of quantum
coherence control; quantum computing may be viewed as an application in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;