* 0201474
* Effect of Grain Size on the Mechanical Properties of Multi-Phase Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,07/31/2006
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2006
* USD 591,739.00

The goal of this research is to understand the influence of second-phase
particles on the mechanical behavior of selected metals and alloys as their
grain sizes are reduced to the smallest nanosized scales that can be achieved
with processing methods that produce bulk, artifact-free metals. The scientific
approach is as follows: (1) introduce second-phase particles with controlled
size, spacing and volume fraction into selected fcc, bcc and hcp metal matrices;
(2) reduce the grain size of the matrix to the order of 100- 200 nm and the
parameters that define the particle distributions by suitable processing and
heat-treatment methods; (3) characterize the grain size distributions and
particle distributions using electron microscopy, scanning-probe microscopy,
x-ray diffraction and thermal analysis; (4) compare mechanical behavior of
multi-phase alloys with matrix metals to reveal effects of second phases on the
mechanical properties as the grain size is reduced to nanometer size scales; (5)
develop test methods suited for the available sample sizes to optimize the
mechanical testing effort. Hardness, automated ball-indentation and miniaturized
disk-bend testing are employed to provide an initial screening. Tension and
compression testing will be added for selected ranges of the test conditions and
microstructural parameters. Task (6) involves analysis and modeling using
phenomenological and model-based analyses appropriate for the identification of
the underlying deformation mechanisms. A micro-mechanical model for stress-
strain behavior mechanisms as a function of grain size should aid in defining
strategies for optimizing the properties and performance of this class of
alloys.

To optimize their mechanical properties and performance, structural metals used
for engineering applications are predominately multi-phase alloys rather than
pure metals. It is expected that multi-phase alloys will provide these same
benefits in nanocrystalline form. The properties of this class of metals and
alloys have not been documented by systematic mechanical testing, and the
deformation mechanisms as a function of grain size are not understood with any
degree of confidence.