* 0201741
* CONFERENCE:  2002 Gordon Research Conference on Magnesium in Biochemical Processes &amp; Medicine, February 3 - 8, 2002 in Ventura, California
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Klaus Beyenbach, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2002
* USD 7,200.00

Although the role of magnesium (Mg2+) in biochemical and physiological processes
is more widely appreciated now than it ever was, huge gaps remain in our
understanding of normal Mg2+ physiology. Compared to our understanding of the
multifarious roles of calcium, our understanding of the molecular, biochemical
and physiological roles of Mg2+ are woefully inadequate. For example, Mg2+
concentrations are tightly regulated inside cells, but the mechanism of Mg2+
entry into cells is entirely unknown. No Mg2+-channel has been identified to
this date, and the first membrane Mg2+ transporter (channel, carrier, or pump)
has yet to be isolated. As to Mg2+ outside cells, Mg2+ concentrations in the
blood (plasma) are tightly regulated (like calcium), but a Mg2+ hormone has not
been discovered to date. Hence it is important that new, young investigators of
magnesium biology are encouraged intellectually and supported financially. This
award provides funds to support the travel of 12 young molecular biologists to
present posters of their work at the 8th Gordon Conference on Magnesium in
Biological Processes and Medicine to be held in Ventura CA from Feb. 3 to Feb.
8, 2002. In view of the promise that molecular biology holds for our
understanding of magnesium in basic processes of life (photosynthesis, the
stabilization of DNA and proteins, the activation of over 300 cell enzymes), the
NSF funds will be earmarked for young investigators who study the basic science
of magnesium. The funds will be used to subsidize their travel and/or conference
fees at the level of $ 600 each. This new cadre of magnesium investigators will
be selected according to three criteria: 1) they must have published a
significant paper on the chemistry, physiology, or molecular biology of
magnesium in the past 3 years, 2) they must be new to the Magnesium Gordon
Research Conference, and 3) they are likely to make a long-term commitment to
basic research on the physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology of
magnesium. The recruitment and the nurturing of young investigators are
particularly appropriate for the Gordon Conferences that focus on the Frontiers
of Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;