* 0201307
* Automated Telemetry System to Study Animal Interactions in Rainforests
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Martin Wikelski, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2007
* USD 272,600.00

A Multi-user Automated Telemetry System for the study of ecological interactions
in a tropical rainforest&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr.
Martin Wikelski at Princeton University to purchase an automated telemetry
system (ATS) that allows him to track position, activity and physiological data
on up to 200 rainforest animals consecutively and in real time. His study site
is on Barro Colorado Island (BCI) Panama, the premier research station of the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI). Wikelski's tracking system is
planned around specialized automated receivers that utilize electrically
steerable antenna arrays. Six of these units will operate above-canopy tower-
mounted antenna arrays for general coverage of the entire BCI rainforest area
supplemented with 10 portable units for below-canopy deployment in specific
areas for special project needs. The tower-deployed units will communicate data
through radio-transmission to a central laboratory and processing center. The
maintenance and expansion of the ATS equipment will be financed by modest user
fees. The ATS system is currently being constructed on BCI, with first field
tests projected for June 2002. The PI envisions a future expansion of the system
to include state of the art monitoring techniques (digitally encoded
physiological or locomotor transmissions, GPS).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ATS
will allow researchers from all over the world to pursue basic ecological, eco-
physiological, applied management, and conservation questions that are currently
beyond scientific reach. ATS research will start with the following exemplary
projects: In basic ecology researchers will address the importance of species
interactions for the maintenance of rainforest diversity. In particular,
'keystone' predators like ocelots may control population sizes of rodents, which
in turn are thought to be major seed dispersers and predators for trees. ATS
enables researchers to study the interactions among animals as well as between
animals and seeds - a prerequisite for the understanding of these basic
ecological principles. In eco-physiology, research projects will address why
many tropical birds live longer than their temperate zone counterparts, using
heart rate telemetry to quantify energy expenditure in the wild. Other research
groups will study the neuro-endocrinology of year-round territoriality vs.
commuter territoriality. Such territorial and associated aggression systems are
currently largely elusive. Conservation projects include the reintroduction of
Harpy Eagles and other locally extinct birds on BCI and a study of the influence
of habitat fragmentation on species persistence and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical biodiversity, conservation, and
management of tropical rainforests are key components of modern biology.
Automated telemetry allows biologists to address key ecological and conservation
questions that are presently beyond reach because of methodological
inadequacies. The ATS will also enable field ecologists to conduct large-scale,
controlled experiments. The ATS will be constructed at one of the world's
premier rainforest study sites allowing researchers to build upon, and
incorporate new data into the largest existing framework of botanical,
zoological and conservation knowledge of a single tropical site. Researchers and
students from &gt;30 nations will have access to ATS. Such a pioneering effort
is expected to be emulated by research groups on different continents to
supplement existing rainforest research networks such as the rainforest canopy
network.&lt;br/&gt;