* 0201981
* Science for Future Elementary School Teachers: Connecting College Coursework to Pre-Professional Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Judy Kasabian, El Camino College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 07/31/2006
* USD 333,696.00

Science for Future Elementary School Teachers (FEST) joins El Camino College
(ECC), Moffett Elementary School, and California State Universities Dominguez
Hills and Long Beach in a partnership to (1) link the content taught in two ECC
science courses with pre-teaching experiences in the elementary schools; (2)
introduce preservice teachers to the use of instructional technologies in
science education; and (3) strengthen and sustain an articulated transfer path
for future science teachers. Science FEST participants (1) take reformed
physical and life science courses targeted for future teachers to develop their
knowledge of content and pedagogy; (2) concurrently enroll in a curriculum
development course in which they design inquiry-based, technology-enhanced
science modules for elementary school students; (3) present the modules in
classrooms, informal education settings, and at professional conferences; (4)
develop leadership skills by advising and mentoring elementary school students
via the After School Science Clubs and field trips; and (5) receive additional
support services (academic/career counseling, technology training, transfer
admission assistance) to facilitate their transfer into four-year teacher
preparation programs. As a result, these future teachers have a stronger
foundation in science and instructional technology, experience inquiry-based
science, and better understand the integral nature of science in the world. This
foundation helps them deliver science content more effectively once they enter
their own classrooms.