* 0201977
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Material Landscapes and the Consolidation of Agriculture: The Canoles Archaeological Survey Project(CASP), Valencia, Spain
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Michael Jochim, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael A. Jochim, Ms Sarah McClure will collect data
in eastern Spain for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological
survey of the Canoles river valley in the Province of Valencia, Spain to
identify changes in land use patterns during the transition from hunting and
gathering to agricultural economies (8000-2500 BC). Domestic plants (wheat,
emmer and legumes) and animals (goats, sheep, pigs and cows) were introduced to
the area by 5600 BC. The remains of these domesticates are found in conjunction
with the first ceramics of the region. However, in stark contrast to other parts
of the Mediterranean, the farmers of eastern Spain did not live in villages
until over a millennium later. The aggregation of people in villages indicates
changes in their economies such as an intensification of agricultural practices
and corresponding changes in social organization and cultural behavior.

Current research in the Province of Valencia suggests that this reconstruction
of the transition to farming may well be biased, since it is based largely on
information from individual sites (caves and rockshelters). Ms McClure will use
a regional approach to characterize the timing and nature of the shift to
village farming economies. The primary aim of the study is to investigate the
commonly held idea of a slow shift to intensified farming and to examine the
social and ecological underpinnings of the transition. The archaeological survey
of the Canoles valley will elucidate the role available wild resources played in
the transition to agriculture. The Canoles valley is particularly suitable for
this kind of analysis since it is a large valley connecting the Mediterranean
coastal plain with the central plateau (Meseta) and contains a wealth of
different ecological zones. Land use patterns will indicate how people were
using their landscape and how this changed with new forms of subsistence
practices.

The transition to agriculture was a major turning point in human and
environmental history, setting the stage for the rise of civilizations and
changing the relationship between humans and their environment. In order to
understand this transition, archaeologists must look to different regions of the
world to identify fundamental similarities and differences in the timing, tempo,
and impact of the cultural and organizational changes associated with the
transition to food producing economies. Ms McClure's research in eastern Spain
will contribute to the understanding of this fundamental shift and will also
assist in training a promising young scientist.