* 0201475
* Sensor-Based Seismic Performance and Safety Enhancement of Elevators in Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Mahendra Singh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/2006
* USD 298,696.00

The project will study the use of fiber optic sensors for health monitoring, for
continuous data collection, and for sensor-based operational control of the
elevator movements to ensure safety and improved performance during earthquakes
and during abnormal events such as a terrorist-induced emergencies. Both
analytical and experimental studies will be conducted. Several Fabry-Perot
Interferometric sensors, especially developed for this task, will be installed
on the guide rail system of the counterweight and the car. The dynamic sensor
information will be used to make a decision about the operation of the
elevators. The fiber optic sensors for temperature measurements will also be
developed to aid the rescue operations in case of fire-induced emergencies. All
sensors will be multiplexed. New technology for effective multiplexing of a
large number of optical sensors will be developed. Experimental setup will be
used to verify the effectiveness of the sensor and data acquisition and
processing systems. The completed system will be able to collect technical data
of much use during future earthquake occurrences. A sensor-based robust control
scheme will be developed for operational control of the elevators. The control
scheme will be based on the dynamic characteristics of the elevator-building
systems and would include the uncertainties associated with the ground motion,
uncertainties in the system parameters, and reliability of the sensor system