* 0201287
* Thermomechanical Fracture of Compositionally Graded Thermal Barrier Coatings with Time-Dependent Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Klod Kokini, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 06/30/2006
* USD 253,849.00

ABSTRACT

Thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) offer the potential of increased performance for
high temperature applications such as diesel engines, gas turbines and aircraft
engines. Compositionally graded TBCs offer an excellent alternative to enhance
the resistance to thermomechanical damage by providing a gradual transition in
properties through the coating thickness. The objective of this project is to
study analytically and experimentally, compositionally graded material systems
of similar thermal resistances, but different architectures. At high
temperatures, thermally activated time-dependent (viscoplastic) effects in the
lower layers comprised of ceramic/bond coat alloy mixtures are expected to
become significant. Therefore it is proposed to: (1) develop new models that
allow the prediction of viscoplastic behavior of zirconia-bond coat alloy
mixtures; (2) to use these models to study the time-dependent behavior, crack
initiation and propagation in compositionally graded TBC systems of similar
thermal resistances; (3) to perform controlled experiments with high heat fluxes
that provide verification of the analytical predictions. The results are
expected to yield design guidelines that would allow TBC designers to optimize
the architecture of graded TBC systems to achieve improved durability for
specific temperature loading conditions. In addition, these investigations will
enhance basic scientific knowledge in the areas of viscoplastic deformation and
fracture in two-phase and compositionally graded material systems. This new
knowledge will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate courses and help in
the education of women and minority undergraduate students with the possibility
they may embark on graduate studies.

