* 0201889
* RUI:  Undergraduate Research on the Intelligent Prosthetic Arm Project
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Roger Gonzalez, LeTourneau University
* Continuing Grant
* Marshall M. Lih
* 08/31/2007
* USD 399,880.00

0201889&lt;br/&gt;Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;Upper extremity movement coordination and
control remains a critical area of research as the mapping from neural control
to specified movements becomes better understood. The areas of (1) upper
extremity motor control and musculoskeletal dynamics, (2) the interaction of the
upper extremity with the surroundings, and ultimately (3) fine end-user control
of prosthetics in normal and altered environments, have been individually
studied by many investigators. These three distinct areas are merged into one
cohesive project, permitting the development of a comprehensive research tool to
aid in studying upper extremity motor-control and musculoskeletal dynamics, and
new scientific advancements in prosthetic neural-control. This research
instrument represents the anatomical characteristics of the human arm in a
fully-functional linkage that can be controlled by a user via a series of muscle
electrical signals (EMG). Control of this human-like arm that can accurately
simulate movements based only on a user's neural signals, is termed the
"Intelligent Prosthetic Arm."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research entails the
design and development of a graphical and musculoskeletal dynamic model using 4
degrees-of-freedom at the elbow and wrist joints to study the interaction of the
major muscles crossing these joints. The computational model will be used
subsequently with a hybrid optimal control / neural network algorithm to predict
joint moments from a series of EMG signals. The predicted trajectory will direct
the position of the "Intelligent Prosthetic Arm" in order for a subject to test
the reliability of the motion of the prosthetic arm under various tasks. The arm
will be adapted into different virtual environments by the use of a servomotor
and a mobile Adept robot to simulate various altered dynamic environments.
Extensive sets of experimental data will be gathered to quantify the motion of
the elbow and wrist joints. These data will represent joint kinematics and EMG
signals from a variety of muscles and are used to develop and verify the
computational model. Experimental data will also be used to train the model
toward accurate predictions of joint motion for use in the Intelligent
Prosthetic Arm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will be performed
primarily by undergraduate students at LeTourneau University. To enhance the
experience, 2 to 3 weeks during the summer months will be spent at the
biomechanics lab at the University of Delaware to review and consult with other
investigators and students involved in related research projects.&lt;br/&gt;