* 0201880
* Microwave Imaging via Space-Time Signal Processing for Early-Stage Breast Cancer Detection, Monitoring, and Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Susan Hagness, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2007
* USD 296,931.00

0201880 Hagness Under this Investigator Initiated Award, studies will be
preformed to develop an ultrawideband microwave imaging method for detection,
monitoring and noninvasive treatment of early-stage breast cancer. The intrinsic
dielectric-properties contrast between malignant and normal breast tissue
provides the basis for highly sensitive detection of malignant lesions using
microwaves. The objectives are to: 1) develop robust space-time signal
processing algorithms that exploit the dielectric-properties contrast for the
detection and monitoring of malignant lesions, 2) develop space-time signal-
processing algorithms for non-invasive microwave hyperthermia treatment of
malignant breast lesions, 3) investigate the performance of the approach for
early-stage cancer detection, monitoring, and treatment using anatomically
realistic numerical breast models, 4) develop realistic physical breast phantoms
and pre-clinical hardware prototype instrumentation, and 5) investigate the
performance of the approach for breast cancer detection using the pre-clinical
instrument in both synthetic breast phantom and ex vivo breast tissue imaging
experiments. The proposed approach offers the potential of a easy-to-use, low
cost, comfortable, non-ionizing breast screening technology capable of reducing
the rate of false negatives and false positives associated with conventional
X-ray mammography. The treatment protocol will minimize the complications,
discomfort, and need for invasive procedures for women with breast cancer.