* 0201623
* United States Representation to the International Federation of Medical and Biological Engineering (IFMBE)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Kevin O'Connor, AIMBE
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 04/30/2006
* USD 29,300.00

0201623 O'Connor This award provides continued funding to the American Institute
for Medical and Biological Engineering (AIMBE) to help promote scientific
collaboration and improve communication among Biomedical Engineering researchers
and their professional societies from 48 countries worldwide. AIMBE is the U.S.
member organization to the International Federation of Medical and Biological
Engineering and this award provides funds to support travel of AIMBE'S appointed
representative to participate in meetings of IFMBE's Administrative Council.
Representation on the Administrative Council provides the United States with the
opportunity to develop new lines of communications and collaborative projects
among biomedical engineering researchers globally, thereby extending the U.S.
leadership role in medical science and technology research and development. This
is particularly relevant to investigations concerning emerging medical
technologies.

The current AIMBE representative to IFMBE is Dr. Dov Jaron, who also serves as
the current President of IFMBE. Proceeds from a grant would be used to support
the cost of attending Council meetings and regional conferences in Asia, Latin
America, and Europe. The Council meetings entail strategic planning of the
organization, planning of scientific meetings, publications, dissemination of
scientific information and initiation of advanced projects in critical and
emerging areas. The regional conferences are designed to promote collaboration
and networking among Bioengineering researchers and educators from the United
States and developing countries and as a mechanism to implement the critical
projects.

The funding level is modest compared to the anticipated value for the U.S.
community of biomedical engineering researchers. And the project is expected to
promote the role of the National Science Foundation in advancing research and
education in this field globally while assisting NSF in achieving its strategic
objectives.