* 0201939
* High-Resolution Electrocardiographic Localization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Bin He, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/29/2004
* USD 189,745.00

0201939&lt;br/&gt;He&lt;br/&gt;Locating the source of cardiac arrhythmia
currently requires an invasive and complex procedure. Noninvasive localization
of sites of origin of arrhythmia would be of enormous value for numerous
patients and would allow cardiologists to focus the intervention at the source
of the arrhythmia without the need for lengthy intra-cardiac mapping. Currently,
invasive mapping procedures in conjunction with programmed stimulation
techniques have been steadily increasing in use in combination with newer
therapeutic techniques including implantation of automatic intra-cardiac
defibrillators and selective radio-frequency ablation of myocardial tissue. The
availability of a noninvasive means of localizing sites of origin of activation
in three-dimensional (3D) myocardium will greatly increase the ability to help
monitor and guide invasive therapeutic and diagnostic techniques such as
programmed stimulation and selective catheter-tip ablation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and evaluate a
novel electrocardiographic localization methodology for accurate and rapid
localization of sites of origin of cardiac activation from noninvasive
electrocardiogram (ECG) measurements. To accomplish this goal the following aims
will be addressed: (1) To develop and evaluate a novel heart-model-based
approach to rapidly and accurately localize sites of origin of cardiac
activation from noninvasive body surface ECG measurements, with the aid of an
anisotropic realistically shaped heart model. (2) To systematically evaluate the
capability of the proposed 3D electrocardiographic localization approach in a
series of well-controlled computer simulations. (3) To validate the proposed 3D
electrocardiographic localization approach in a clinical setting. The working
hypothesis for these aims is that, by incorporating a priori information on
physiological processes, one will be able to achieve greater stability and
accuracy when solving the inverse problem, allowing accurately localizing sites
of origin of cardiac activation.&lt;br/&gt;