* 0201297
* Upgrade of Geodynamics Laboratory Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Richard Stephenson, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2004
* USD 70,179.00

0201297, Ronaldo Luna, U. Missouri-Rolla&lt;br/&gt;"Upgrade of Geodynamics
Laboratory Equipment"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action is to upgrade and
modernize the existing geodynamics equipment available in the Department of
Civil Engineering at the University of Missouri at Rolla. The existing equipment
is old and obsolete and requires upgrading or replacement. It will be upgraded
to full digital control and data acquisition. The UMR Civil Engineering Building
is being renovated and a new geodynamics laboratory will house this equipment.
The new equipment will consist of triaxial equipment capable of dynamic soil
testing at the low and large strains, in order to develop modulus degradation
and damping curves to be used in ground and structural response analysis. These
upgrades and modernization will make the new geodynamics laboratory a state-of-
the-art laboratory for research and graduate instruction. They will be of
immediate use in two existing projects, and for future projects that require
dynamic material properties of soils. The equipment will be used in earthquake
engineering research projects; in particular for projects related to the Midwest
United States region. One of the largest liquefiable soil deposits in the
country occurs near the New Madrid Seismic Zone in the southeastern corner of
Missouri and adjoining states (the Mississippi Embayment).&lt;br/&gt;