* 0201303
* The Sixth Conference on Clifford Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical Physics, Tennessee Technogical University, May 20-26, 2002, Cookville, Tennessee
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Rafal Ablamowicz, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 03/31/2003
* USD 24,990.00

DDMS-0201303&lt;br/&gt;Rafal Ablamowicz and John Ryan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides partial support for active research mathematicians
and&lt;br/&gt;scientists with limited means of support to attend in The 6th
Conference on&lt;br/&gt;Clifford Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical
Physics to be held at&lt;br/&gt;the Tennessee Technological University from May
20 through May 26, 2002, in&lt;br/&gt;Cookeville, Tennessee. The award, together
with other funding, will provide&lt;br/&gt;travel support for some of the
speakers and for some participants who do not&lt;br/&gt;have funds available
through other source, with priority given to graduate&lt;br/&gt;students, recent
Ph.D.'s, minorities and women. As part of the conference, a&lt;br/&gt;Lecture
Series on Clifford Algebras and Applications aimed at graduate
students&lt;br/&gt;and recent Ph.D.'s will be presented on May 18 and 19,
2002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 6th Conference will be sponsored by the National
Science Foundation, the&lt;br/&gt;American Mathematical Society, the
International Society for Analysis, its&lt;br/&gt;Applications and Computation
(ISAAC), University of Arkansas, George Mason&lt;br/&gt;University, and the
Tennessee Technological University. The organizers of the&lt;br/&gt;conference
look for interaction among mathematicians, scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will include the following speakers, five
sessions, six 90 minute&lt;br/&gt;lectures, and other
activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speakers: Christian Bar, Helga Baum, Carlos A.
Berenstein, Michael Eastwood, Bertfried&lt;br/&gt;Fauser, Alexander J. Hahn,
Jacques Helmstetter, David Hestenes, Tadeusz Iwaniec,&lt;br/&gt;Jan J.
Koenderink, Bertram Kostant, Heinz Kruger, Anthony Lasenby, Shahn
Majid,&lt;br/&gt;Michael McCarthy, Marius Mitrea, Victor Nistor, Tao Qian, Lee
Smolin, Joseph&lt;br/&gt;Varilly, S.L. Woronowicz, Sijue
Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sessions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Clifford analysis
(Dirac operators, Wavelets, non-linear transformations,&lt;br/&gt;Harmonic
analysis/Fourier analysis, Singular integral operators,
Discrete&lt;br/&gt;potential theory, Initial value and boundary value
problems)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Geometry (Geometric index theory, Conformal and
noncommutative geometry,&lt;br/&gt;Geometric integral transforms, Spin
structures and Dirac operators, Twistors,&lt;br/&gt;tractors, and related
topics, Invariant differential operators,
Quaternionic&lt;br/&gt;geometry)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Mathematical structures
(Hopf algebras and quantum groups, Category theory,&lt;br/&gt;structural
methods, Quadratic forms, Hermitian forms, Witt groups,
Clifford&lt;br/&gt;algebras over arbitrary fields, Lie algebras, spinor
representations,&lt;br/&gt;exceptional Lie algebras, super Lie algebras,
Clifford algebras and their&lt;br/&gt;generalizations, Infinite dimensional
Clifford algebras and Clifford bundles)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Physics
(Perturbative renormalization and Hopf algebra antipodes,
Spectral&lt;br/&gt;triples and elementary particle physics, q-deformations and
noncommutative&lt;br/&gt;spacetime, Quantum Field Theory using Hopf algebras and
other algebraic&lt;br/&gt;techniques, Spin foams and quantum gravity,
Quaternionic quantum mechanics and&lt;br/&gt;quantum fields, Dirac equation in
electron physics, Electrodynamics,&lt;br/&gt;Non-associative structures,
octonions, division algebras and their applications&lt;br/&gt;in
physics)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Applications in computer science, robotics,
engineering (Quantum computers,&lt;br/&gt;error correction, algorithms,
Robotics, inverse kinematics, space control,&lt;br/&gt;navigation, cybernetics,
image processing and engineering, Neural networks)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lectures
on Clifford Algebras and Applications (May 18 and 19,
2002):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lecture 1: Introduction to Clifford algebras (Pertti
Lounesto)&lt;br/&gt;Lecture 2: Mathematical structure of Clifford algebras (Ian
R. Porteous)&lt;br/&gt;Lecture 3: Clifford analysis (John
Ryan)&lt;br/&gt;Lecture 4: Clifford algebras in mathematical physics (Heinz
Kruger)&lt;br/&gt;Lecture 5: Clifford algebras in engineering (Jon
Selig)&lt;br/&gt;Lecture 6: Clifford algebras in differential geometry (Tom
Branson)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, poster session, round table
discussion, and book exhibits are also&lt;br/&gt;planned. The organizers expect
to recruit two additional speakers. Further&lt;br/&gt; information is available
at&lt;br/&gt;http://math.tntech.edu/rafal/cookeville/cookeville.html.&lt;br/&gt;