* 0201114
* U.S.-Czech Republic Materials Research on Novel Magnetic Semiconductors Based on Antimony Telluride [Sb2Te3]
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Ctirad Uher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2007
* USD 69,386.00

This U.S.-Czech materials research project involving Ctirad Uher of the
University of Michigan and his Czech partner, Petr Lostak at the University of
Pardubice, will build upon their recently reported observation of long-range
ferromagnetism in a class of ansiotropic semiconductors based on antimony
telluride [Sb2Te3], doped with a minute amount of vanadium. They now plan to
study the effect of transition metal ions incorporated in the crystal lattice of
Sb2Te3 single crystals with the goal of identifying dopants that enhance the
Curie temperature beyond the vanadium-doped value (~25K). Specifically, the
researchers will examine the role of chromium, manganese, iron, nickel and
cobalt. The collaborative effort benefits from the Michigan group's expertise in
transport and magnetic properties of tetradymite-type structure semiconductors
and the Czech partners' strengths in growth of single crystals and
characterization of these materials. Results in this area of diluted magnetic
semiconductors may lead to applications in information technology given the
promising dual features of charge carrier transport and spin manipulation in
thin films. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project in condensed matter
physics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.