* 0201848
*  Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2002,06/30/2005
* William Lineberger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2005
* USD 966,600.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Lineberger will conduct research in negative ion
photoelectron spectroscopy, time resolved photodissociation spectroscopy, and
time resolved photoelectron spectroscopy. Systems to be studied include
biradical and triradical (e.g., 1,3,5-dehydrobenzene anion) species; complex
biradical and clustered radical species; and anion complexes for the
investigations of transition state spectroscopies and time resolved
spectroscopy. A Negative Ion-Neutral-Positive Ion (NeNePo) technique will be
developed to investigate the evolving structure of complexes along a reaction
coordinate. Ongoing studies of energy flow and caging dynamics in size-selected
anionic clusters will be continued, with extensions to include asymmetric
chromophores, triatomic chromophores, and mixed solvents, in order to provide
deep new insights into their dynamics. Studies of time resolved dynamics in
cluster ions will be extended from diatomic chromophores to triatomic species.
This work will include work on prereactive complexes where photoexcitation can
stimulate chemical reaction. Here the emphasis will be on photoexcitation that
results in significant charge redistribution in the cluster complex, affording a
direct look at solvent reorganization processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research deals with fundamental problems of reaction chemistry. The goal is to
obtain new insights into the structure and reactive processes of chemical
intermediates and solvated ions. The research will be conducted with internal
and external collaborators as well as with postdoctoral research associates and
graduate students. The postdocs and students gain valuable experience in one of
the forefront areas of physical chemistry in preparation for advanced studies or
employment in industry, academia, or government laboratories. An active outreach
program is conducted for the recruitment of the next generation of scientists
and to bring the excitement of chemistry to high school and college students as
a contribution to the development of a scientifically educated
citizenry.&lt;br/&gt;