* 0201805
* Turbulence on a Free Surface
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Walter Goldburg, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2006
* USD 238,120.00

This research project deals with fluid dynamics. It is co-funded between the
Condensed Matter Physics Program In the Division of Materials Research and the
Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulics Program in the Division of Chemical and Transport
Systems. It is a study of turbulence at the free surface of a closed body of
fluid. The fluid motion or turbulence is detected by observing the in plane,
horizontal velocity components of small particles entrained at the air/water
interface. A large laser illuminates the surface particles, which are tracked
with a fast camera. At points at and below the surface, the flow is
incompressible; this implies that the surface velocity is, by contrast,
compressible. Because energy and vorticity can be freely exchanged with the
fluid below, Kolmogorov-type dimensional arguments are not available, so one
must turn to computer simulations to model the motion. One phenomenon of
interest is the tendency of particles to cluster rather than disperse. The
observations are relevant to practical issues such as dispersal of pollutants at
the surface of a turbulent sea and the growth rate of biological organisms at an
air/water interface. The educational component is focused entirely on
undergraduate students. The experimental techniques, which are computer
intensive, provide an excellent training ground for physics majors, engineers,
and those interested in pattern recognition issues. They will be prepared for a
range of careers in academe, industry and government&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
fluid dynamics turbulence research project is co-funded between the Condensed
Matter Physics Program In the Division of Materials Research and the Fluid
Dynamics and Hydraulics Program in the Division of Chemical and Transport
Systems. Turbulence invariably appears when objects move rapidly through the air
or the sea. An understanding of the complex phenomenon of turbulence is
necessary in order to improve weather prediction and to better cope with natural
and man-made disasters such as storms and pollution spills. The focus here is on
the motion of small particles that float on a turbulent body of water. These
'floaters' may be thought of as a surrogate for the motion of buoys, ships, or
floating pollutants. Turbulence at the surface has the unusual effect of causing
the floaters to clump together, whereas they are dispersed elsewhere in the bulk
sea or the air. This study is one of the first to be carried out under
laboratory-controlled conditions. The educational component is focused entirely
on undergraduate students. The research utilizes cutting-edge technology for
tracking the particle motion (high-speed cameras and powerful new solid-state
lasers) and provides an excellent training ground for students majoring in
fundamental science or engineering.&lt;br/&gt;