* 0201508
* Analysis of Improved Ground and Reinforced Soil Systems Performance during the 1999 Turkey and 2001 Nisqually Earthquakes - Part 1 Reinforced Soil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2005
* James Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2005
* USD 136,982.00

0201508, James R. Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;"Analysis of
Improved Ground and Reinforced Soil System Performance During the 1999 Turkey
and 2001 Nisqually Earthquakes: Reinforced Soil
Structures"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reinforced soil structures, such as soil-nailed
walls and mechanically-stabilized embankments, have been shown to be feasible
alternatives to conventional earth retaining structures. They are becoming
increasingly popular, and designs are becoming more challenging with taller
walls and a wider variety of reinforcing and facing materials. Design methods
for static conditions are fairly well established; however there is a lack of
knowledge regarding seismic performance, and a corresponding lack of
comprehensive seismic design procedures. Current guidelines are very limited and
are based on generalized assumptions due to the scarcity of documented seismic
field performance data. Also, there are no simplified methods that can be used
to predict permanent wall displacement - often the controlling serviceability
criterion. Although some centrifuge and shake table model experiments have been
performed to simulate seismic loadings, these experiments were not designed to
assist in the development of improved design procedures. There is a need for
case history analysis, parametric numerical study, and additional model
experiments to fully understand the seismic behavior of reinforced soil
structures and to develop improved seismic design
guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique opportunity to evaluate the behavior
of these systems under a range of ground shaking levels and for a variety of
soil conditions and performance levels is provided by the more than sixteen
reinforced-soil structures located within the affected region of the M (7+) 1999
earthquakes in Turkey, and four walls associated with large earthquakes in
Taiwan and Seattle, WA. Through field reconnaissance studies, the principal
investigator collected required performance data, construction details, and
subsoil data, providing a comprehensive database of wall
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to:
1.) perform a detailed case history analysis of the most promising and
potentially instructive reinforced soil systems identified, and document the
findings; 2.) use the field cases to calibrate and/or assess the predictive
capability of the numerical models; 3.) perform dynamic parametric numerical
analyses to establish behavioral trends and effectively extend the database of
wall performance under seismic loading; and, 4.) use this data to develop
improved seismic design guidelines for reinforced soil
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project ivolves a collaboration between
Virginia Tech and Turkish researchers at Bogazici University and Zetas, Inc, and
interfaces with a collaborative microzonation project in Turkey involving
Virginia Tech, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Bogazici University,
and Yokohama National University. It also addresses limitations in current
seismic design methods for reinforced-soil systems that have been identified by
the Federal Highway Administration in Demonstration Project No. 82
(1999).&lt;br/&gt;