* 0201829
* A Non-Invasive Approach for Studying Muscle-Tendon In-vivo
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* David Hawkins, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 09/30/2006
* USD 296,859.00

0201829 Hawkins Muscle-tendon units are complex biological actuators able to
impart considerable force to bones to stabilize and/or move segments of the body
and to absorb energy imparted to the body. Due to the integral role muscle-
tendon (MT) units play in human function and quality of life, considerable
interest exists in understanding 1) the basic structural properties of MT units,
2) how MT properties change throughout life and in response to altered
environmental stimuli (e.g. disuse, exercise), 3) risk factors associated with
MT injury, 4) how best to maintain or restore normal MT function throughout
life, and 5) how to compensate for a loss in MT function. Difficulty in
quantifying the structural properties of muscle-tendon units in-vivo has limited
understanding of the normal and adaptive behavior of these units. The two
objectives of this study are: 1) to develop a methodology to non-invasively
quantify muscle and tendon force-deformation properties in-vivo, and 2) to
demonstrate the utility of this approach by using it to investigate two specific
questions (a) are there age-related differences in the strain induced in a
tendon during a maximum isometric muscle contraction performed by people of
similar physical activity level, and (b) are there age-related differences in
the rate of structural property adaptation of a tendon relative to the rate of
muscle strength adaptation in people of similar initial physical activity level?

A methodology that combines ultrasonography, a force transducer, and an ankle-
testing fixture is being developed to study the Gastrocnemius-Soleus-Achilles
Tendon Complex, which provide the primary forces to plantar flex the ankle. The
ultrasound images will be used to quantify the length and cross-sectional area
of the Achilles Tendon, muscle fascicle orientation, and movement of anatomical
landmarks during muscle contractions or joint movements. The ankle-testing
device will be used to quantify ankle position and torque for a given muscle
effort. Anthropometric data will be used to relate joint torque to Achilles
Tendon force. Force-deformation and stress-strain behaviors of the tendon are
quantified. The validity of these methods will be tested using instrumented
cadaver specimens. Tissue force and/or deformation will be controlled within the
cadaver leg and compared to similar quantities determined from the non-invasive
ultrasound and joint testing procedures.

The utility of the non-invasive technique for studying basic muscle-tendon
performance and adaptation will be investigated by studying the affects that
aging and exercise have on MT behavior and joint mechanics. Twenty-five subjects
within three age groups will participate in a 16-week strength-training program
and an 8-week detraining program. Every two weeks the subjects will perform
gradually increasing isometric plantar flexion efforts while Achilles tendon
force and deformation are recorded. These data will be used to construct force-
deformation curves for the tendon and to quantify tendon stiffness, maximum
isometric muscle strength, and tendon strain during maximum isometric muscle
force. Additionally, electromyography from the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles
will be recorded to quantify muscle recruitment strategies during these muscular
efforts. Data will be compared between subjects, test sessions, and age groups.