* 0201561
* Triggering of Submarine Slides Under Multidirectional Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Raymond Seed, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2006
* USD 176,072.00

0201561, Juan Pestana-Nascimento, UC Berkeley "Triggering of Submarine Slide
Under Multidirectional Loading" Juan M. Pestana-Nascimento

The behavior of relatively gentle submerged slopes on the continental shelf has
become an important element in risk assessment, and in predicting the
performance of offshore structures, and the complex network of pipelines
carrying oil and gas from offshore drilling platforms. In addition to the
obvious environmental disaster resulting from the failure of such oil/gas
pipeline network, underwater slide failures can potentially generate destructive
tsunamis such as the 1964 Great Alaska Earthquake that devastated towns along
the Gulf of Alaska and caused damage and loss of life at locations as far away
as Hawaii; or more recently in the Papua New Guinea 1998 disaster associated
with a submarine landslide. It is now recognized that submarine slides are a
major threat to the integrity of engineered structures and to the safety of
coastal communities.

The ultimate goal of this project is to develop a tool for predicting the
stability and displacements of submerged slopes due to irregular
multidirectional cyclic loading. The research will improve the ability of
numerical analyses to predict the response of submerged slides under
multidimensional excitation, including both storm and seismic loading.

The modeling component of the project includes the initial development of a two-
dimensional site response analysis program for sloping ground (stand alone
version), in which the new simplified constitutive model will be implemented and
available on the web. This combination permits including the effects of the
slope, and the interaction between the shearing on the plane parallel to the
slope, in the dip and strike direction. Extensive parametric studies will be
performed to evaluate uncertainty in the soil parameters and heterogeneity of
the soil profile.

The research will contribute to the fundamental understanding and prediction of
failure mechanisms for submerged slopes - and these can be extended to "aerial"
slopes. The incorporation of the constitutive model into a finite element code
to predict earthquake or storm induced permanent deformations and/or failure
represents a significant contribution to performance-based engineering. It will
enhance the estimation of forces induced on pipelines due to moving sediments,
and will be the basis for more elaborate analyses coupling the hydrodynamic
fluid-sediment interaction. In addition to the benefit to the geotechnical
component, the results are expected to contribute to the estimation of masses
that may mobilize during a slope failure and its consequences in the generation
of tsunamis.