* 0201005
* Exploring Massive Gene Expression Data With A Novel Statistical Notion-Liquid Association
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Ker-Chau Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 760,000.00

Underlying most methods for analyzing gene expression is the key notion of
profile similarity. Genes with similar profiles are likely to form structural
complex or to participate in common cellular processes. Yet whether two genes
are co-expressed or not is often affected by activities of other genes and
sometimes a positive correlation can be turned into a negative one. In this
research, Liquid association (LA) is introduced as a method to quantify changes
in correlation. A preliminary study showed that LA can help identify
functionally related genes that have no profile similarity. This development is
harbored on three fronts: biological motivation, large scale computation, and
statistical theory. The specific aims of the LA system include (1) to identify a
small list of master expression genes- genes that have more expressional
influence than others; (2) to help understand how genes regulate each other
through important metabolic intermediates; (3) to analyze the co-expression
pattern for genes associated with a known pathway; (4) to help the functional
prediction of unknown genes; and (5) to provide an expression network through
master genes. Large scale gene expression profiling has become increasingly more
popular in tumor research and many other biological areas. Microarrays enable
the full genome mRNA measurement. They have been applied to monitor gene
activities under various physiological or environmental conditions.
Investigations on differential expression between normal and disease tissues or
cell-lines have also led to the identification of genes with potential
diagnostic and clinic values. The LA-system will help unearth the biological
information hidden beneath many expression databases that are publicly
accessible. The results will be available for free use by other academic
researchers. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support
Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition
sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science
Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the
National Institutes of Health.