* 0201807
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Climate and Disturbance Variation on Post-Fire Regeneration of Madrean Pine-Oak Forests in Mexico's Sierra Madre Occidental
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 05/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The ecological effects of anthropogenic global climate change are of increasing
concern for understanding and predicting climate driven vegetation change.
Global circulation models exist that predict future climates and changes in
coarse scale vegetation patterns. However, the efficacy of these models is
limited by temporal and spatial scale problems and a poor understanding of how
climate variation and human land use changes influence disturbance regimes and
subsequent vegetation patterns. This doctoral dissertation research project will
help to understand how annual to decadal scale climatic variation interacts with
human influences on the landscape in north-central Mexico to effect changes in
the fire regime and subsequently affect the regeneration success and species
distributions of Madrean pine-oak ecosystems after fire. The specific objectives
are: 1) to assess how climate variation and changes in human land use practices
influence the fire regime in Madrean pine-oak ecosystems, 2) how climate
variation and alterations to the fire regime interact to regulate seedling
establishment and success, and 3) to test if ecosystem/community responses to
climate and land use identified in other regions of North America are general
ecological responses or are dependent on the life history traits of specific
taxa. Standard tree-ring study techniques will be used to derive tree
establishment dates, tree age frequencies, and reconstruct past fire regimes in
a set of study sites that have been repeatedly disturbed by humans within a
context of pronounced climatic variability. A combination of correlation
analysis and regression analysis techniques will be used to identify temporal
patterns of tree establishment at different spatial and temporal scales. The
results of this study will be used to test the general hypothesis that seedling
establishment in Madrean pine-oak ecosystems is related to climate variation and
variations in the fire regime. Seedling establishment is predicted to occur
during multi-annual to decadal periods of above average precipitation that
follow widespread, biologically severe fires. Widespread fire years are
predicted to occur during annual to multi-annual periods of below-average
precipitation and above-average temperature. Humans are predicted to influence
the occurrence and severity of fires by altering fuel quantity and continuity
and serving as ignition sources. Ultimately, the site specific
ecosystem/community responses to climate and land use variation identified in
north-central Mexico will be compared with previous results from studies in
other regions to test if these are general ecological responses, or if they are
dependent on the life history traits of specific taxa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of how climate variation and human land use affect the fire regime and
subsequent vegetation patterns has important consequences for predicting the
ecological effects of global change. This study will provide basic information
concerning how climate and human interactions with the fire regime affect the
success of seedling establishment after fires in north-central Mexico. This
research has broad ecological significance in that it will test previous
hypotheses of climatic influences on fire, tree establishment, and tree
mortality that were developed in other regions of North America with
taxonomically different ecosystems under different precipitation and temperature
trends. This study will also provide additional information to clarify the roles
of climatic and human influences on vegetation change due to the climatic
differences, and the differences in the timing of human migrations and
subsequent land use practices throughout North America. Moreover, the
differences in ecosystem characteristics between our sites in Mexico and other
areas of North America will allow us to test whether the ecosystem responses to
climate and land use changes identified in previous studies are general
ecological responses or are if they dependent on the life history traits of
specific taxa. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;