* 0201837
* Collaborative Research:    Sensing and Control of Digital Color Xerographic Imaging Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2005
* George Chiu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2005
* USD 172,000.00

A collaborative research and education relationship among Purdue University,
University of Minnesota, and Xerox Corporation is being formed to engage in the
high risk and high payoff task of developing new theoretical perspectives for
sensing and control for the 39 billion on-demand printing industry. The charge
of the industry-university research team is to develop fundamental understanding
of the sensing and control issues for digital color xerography and to develop
practical and theoretically sound control systems that expand the operation
envelop of printing systems while producing consistent, high quality prints in a
predictable manner. Our approach will 1) use existing models of human visual
perception in control analysis and synthesis, 2) exploit process elements to
maximize sensing and actuation opportunities, 3) use the principle of
coordination to achieve the final performance objectives, and 4) exploit the
transformation between spatial and temporal system representations. The
methodology and control-centric system approach developed by this endeavor will
significantly improve the image quality of digital color xerography. This
technology will help propel the industry to a new era and maintain the
competitive edge of the U.S. short-run and office printing industry. The control
strategies and design methodologies will be applicable to other printing and
imaging systems, such as inkjet, image scanners and microscopy