* 0201898
* Attention and Performance Meeting to be held July 1-7, 2002 in Erice, Sicily
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Nancy Kanwisher, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Parsons
* 01/31/2003
* USD 18,000.00

Attention and Performance Meeting&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
National Science Foundation support, junior researchers will be provided the
funds to participate in the XXth meeting of the International Association for
the Study of Attention and Performance (IASAP). This meeting will be held from
July 1-7 in Erice, Sicily, and will address the topic of Functional Brain
Imaging of Visual Cognition. Functional brain imaging may have by now surpassed
all other techniques in cognitive science in terms of expense, growth rate, and
public visibility. But how much has this new set of techniques actually
contributed to the study of human cognition? When if ever has a finding from
brain imaging constrained a cognitive theory? We are sympathetic to those who
have watched from the sidelines and felt underwhelmed by the contributions of
brain imaging to cognitive science. Many of the early imaging studies in fact
had little to offer researchers interested in cognition. However, we are
encouraged by more recent results and hopeful that a new era is beginning in
which functional brain imaging may realize its potential as a powerful tool for
the study of cognition. It is the goal of this meeting to tackle all of these
issues by addressing whether, when, and how functional brain imaging can
constrain theories of human cognition. We have chosen to focus our discussions
around the specific topic of visual cognition, where much of the best recent
imaging work has been carried out. We have selected 65 of the top researchers in
the world who either do imaging work on visual cognition, or who have expertise
in a closely related field the understanding of which is critical for our
advancement of brain imaging research (e.g., cognitive psychology, single-unit
recording, computational modeling). At the meeting, these researchers will
present the latest results from their labs and discuss the ways in which imaging
can and cannot provide answers to cognitive questions. The meeting will include
sessions on modularity, visual object representation, development and
plasticity, visual attention, and sensorimotor integration. Every effort was
made to include minorities, women, and researchers at early stages of their
careers. We anticipate that several factors will guarantee that this meeting
will have a broad impact not only on those attending it, but also on the field
as a whole. These factors include the prestige of the IASAP, the high visibility
of many of the meeting participants, and the long tradition of publishing from
each Attention &amp; Performance meeting an excellent and widely-cited volume of
articles.&lt;br/&gt;