* 0201382
* Role of Deformation Twinning in Strain Hardening and Texture Evolution in Titanium: Experiments and Numerical Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Surya Kalidindi, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

The project is aimed at understanding the physics of the formation of
deformation twins in a-Ti and its alloys and the precise role of deformation
twinning in strain hardening response of the a-Ti and its alloys. A major goal
is to develop robust crystal plasticity models and simulation tools that can
predict the evolution of both the anisotropic stress-strain response as well as
the crystallographic texture evolution in these metals subjected to large
plastic strains in a range of industrially relevant cold-working processes. The
experimental work involves a combined experimental and modeling study. The
experimental work involves includes a range of large strain mechanical tests in
a variety of deformation paths and deformation path changes, and a systematic
characterization of the deformed samples using optical microscopy, orientation
image mapping in the scanning electron microscope, X-ray texture studies and
transmission electron microscopy. The modeling work constitutes formulation of
appropriate constitutive functions for evolution of the twin volume fraction in
the individual crystals, and constitutive descriptions for slip and twin
hardening including the coupling between them. The physics elucidated from the
experiments will guide the formulation of these constitutive functions. The
proposed work also includes an extensive validation of the models by direct
comparison of the crystal plasticity model predictions for both the anisotropic
stress-strain response as well as crystallographic texture evolution against
corresponding measurements. Both the Taylor-type models and the finite element
polycrystal models will be considered in the crystal plasticity model. The
microstructural state of the material plays a governing role in shape and size
control during deformation processing, structural integrity of the produced
component, and its performance characteristics in service (including mechanical,
electrical and magnetic properties, and their anisotropy). Since the tools
developed in this study can be used for designing the deformation process to
yield optimal microstructures for a given application, they can lead to
substantial improvements in performance characteristics of various metallic
components. This study will produce two Ph.D.s with expertise in a technical
field important to the US metal working industry, in which the United States is
currently lagging behind several European countries. In addition, two
undergraduate students will be participating in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is expected to have a strong
impact on the metal working industry, since it will provide predictive tools
that can yield a great deal of quantitative information on microstructure
evolution during deformation of Ti alloys. Titanium and titanium alloys
constitute an important class of metals with many commercial applications in the
defense, aerospace, biomedical, and sporting goods industries.&lt;br/&gt;