* 0201482
* Collaborative Research:  Strength of Clay Shale in Relation to Mineralogy, Micromorphology and Pore Water Chemistry
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Vernon Schaefer, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2003
* USD 137,186.00

CMS-0201482&lt;br/&gt;PI: Vernon Schaefer&lt;br/&gt;Institution: South Dakota
State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Collaborative Proposal for Research on the
Strength of Clay Shale in Relation to Mineralogy, Micromorphology, and Pore
Water Chemistry"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;O
verconsolidated clays and clay shales provide engineers with some of their most
challenging geotechnical problems, generally involving landslides and expansive
behavior. It has been estimated that the average annual direct and indirect
economic cost of landslides to public and private entities in the United States
is over $3 billion in 2000 dollars. The areas most affected by landslides and
expansive soils in the continental United States coincide with locations of
overconsolidated clays and clay shales, including the Appalachian Mountains
region, much of prairies of the Midwest from Texas to North Dakota, and the
front range of the Rocky Mountains. In recent years considerable advances have
been made in understanding the role of mineralogy and system chemistry on the
behavior of overconsolidated clays and clay shales. In particular, it has been
observed that weathering of the materials combined with changes in the pore
water chemistry of the soil system can lead to significant reductions in the
soil's strength. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study a fundamental investigation
of the physiochemical changes associated with the weathering of clay shales will
be undertaken, using the Pierre shale of South Dakota as the test material. The
objective is to identify changes in mineralogy, micromorphology and pore water
chemistry that accompany the weathering processes of the Pierre shale and to
correlate these changes with the reduction in shear strength. If these processes
are better understood, it is likely that materials susceptible to strength loss
can be more readily identified and that more effective means of mitigation can
be devised. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the conceptual understanding
developed in this research it is anticipated that recommendations for improved
construction and mitigation procedures for shale slopes can be developed. Shale
is one of the most commonly encountered earth materials in civil construction
works. Hence, the results of this research may have a significant impact to
society in terms of reduced costs associated with public works including dams,
bridges and highways, as well as private projects such as housing developments
and commercial properties. &lt;br/&gt;