* 0201271
* Micron and Submicron Aerosol Transport in Representative Human Conducting  Zones
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Clement Kleinstreuer, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 224,997.00

0201271 Kleinstreuer The knowledge of detailed and accurate deposition of toxic
particles in the human respiratory system is most important for toxicologists
and regulatory agencies to use in evaluating possible health effects, especially
in vulnerable population groups such as industrial workers, children, and the
elderly. For drug aerosols, it is desirable to predict where and at what
concentration the medicine reaches targeted lung areas. In this project an
experimentally validated computer simulation model will be developed to predict
and analyze micron and submicron aerosol transport in representative human
conducting zones.

Computer simulations and analyses of airflow, particle transport, and particle
deposition such as to be made in this project are invaluable tools to provide
answers to research problems in both toxic particles and aerosol areas. The
computational fluid-particle dynamics studies to be conducted are most useful
for: (a) quantitative exposure-dose-and-health-effect studies done by regulatory
agencies; (b) hypotheses/effect testing, e.g., air-particle inlet conditions,
airway geometry features, and particle characteristics; (c) comparison studies
on particulate matter deposition in upper airways between people with
respiratory diseases (i.e., partially occluded airways) and normal individuals;
(d) the development of transient one-dimensional particle deposition models for
whole-lung representations; as well as (e) for medical researchers interested in
biological impact analyses of toxic or therapeutic aerosols; and (f) for the
development of drug aerosol inhalers and subsequent lung site targeting or
interest to manufacturers and pharmaceutical companies.

Dissemination of results from the investigations will be made through peer-
reviewed journal articles, review chapters, conference presentations, and fluid-
particle flow visualizations to impact textbook writing, teaching, and learning.