* 0202223
* Pathways to Technology: The Community College Route
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Denise Blumenthal, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,330,943.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project is showcasing a diverse range of ground-breaking
Advanced Technology Education (ATE) programs currently operating in community
colleges across the country, through production and dissemination of a series of
media-based products. The project also features a robust outreach campaign to
awaken students, parents, guidance and career counselors, policymakers, and
community colleges themselves to the enormous potential of these
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five 15-minute videotapes illustrate successful
ATE programs in such fields as Agriculture, Biotechnology, Chemical or Process
Technology, Information Technology, and Manufacturing. Each video profiles two
students, highlighting the ethnic, geographic, and age diversity reflected in
community college demographics. In addition, an introductory video, drawn from
the library as a whole and also produced in CD-ROM format, provides an overview
of exemplary ATE programs in community colleges across the country. A companion
Web site is expanding on the topics addressed in the videos, providing
additional information through text, interactive activities, streamed clips from
the series, and links to related sites. A National Advisory Group is guiding all
aspects of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination activities feature
widespread distribution of copies of the video series, the overview CD-ROM, and
print guides to facilitate use. In addition, through partnerships with the
American Association of Community Colleges (AACC), the American School Counselor
Association (ASCA), and Jobs for the Future, Inc., there is use of common
messaging to place listings and articles about the series in the online
community college guides published by Peterson's, USA Today, and U.S. News and
World Report.The project is also working to reach the 5 million members Phi
Theta Kappa and marketing the series via general educational distributors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All project materials are designed for use as tools by
community colleges in recruiting students, educating policymakers, and
encouraging expanded involvement of business and industry in ATE programs.The
intention of the project is to bring community colleges to the forefront of
consideration when students (e.g., high schoolers, older-adults, displaced
workers) and those who support them (e.g., guidance counselors, workplace
supervisors, and parents) are exploring educational and career
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;