* 0202847
* SMAR2T:  Science and Mathematics Academy for the Recruitment and Retention of Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Meera Chandrasekhar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2008
* USD 872,690.00

In order to address the increasing science and mathematics teacher shortage in
rural Missouri, the Science and Mathematics Academy for the Recruitment and
Retention of Teachers (SMAR2T) project is developing and testing models of
Alternative Pathways to Teaching that will recruit and prepare individuals who
possess STEM baccalaureate degrees to teach at the middle and secondary levels.
The University of Missouri-Columbia (MU), with five rural school district
partners, is designing and implementing two models of post baccalaureate
certification: 1) an accelerated post baccalaureate program (APB) which
certifies individuals within a 15-month intensive program that takes place both
at the university and in residence in a partner school; and 2) a 2-year
alternative certification program (ALT) in which individuals with provisional
teaching licenses, who are employed full time by a school district, are
supported over three summers and two academic years. A defining feature of the
program design is the partnership among science and mathematics educators,
scientists and mathematicians, and Missouri school districts in the preparation
and induction of these teachers into the profession. Another defining feature is
the role of technology in delivering innovative Internet-based distance learning
opportunities for interns, their mentors, and university faculty through the
Shadow netWorkspace software developed at MU. Project evaluation includes
formative assessments to inform and continuously improve the project, and
summative measures that allow the dissemination of project outcomes to a wider
audience across the state and nationwide. The 4-year project is resulting in the
certification of 80 new science and mathematics teachers for Missouri schools,
as well as effective models of recruitment, preparation, and induction for post-
baccalaureate students that can be adopted on a broader
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;