* 0202476
* Perpendicular-Current Spin-Polarized Transport Studies at Low Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jack Bass, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 420,000.00

Science and technology are driving attempts to understand the physics underlying
spin-polarized transport in metallic magnetic multilayers. Such understanding
can usually be achieved most directly in the geometry with current flow
perpendicular (CPP) to the metallic layers, pioneered by the Michigan State
University group. Novel experiments will be performed to address the following
questions: (1) What is the source of unexpectedly large spin-flipping found at
certain non-magnetic/non-magnetic metal interfaces? (2) What are the resistances
and dynamics of individual magnetic domain walls and vortices? (3) What is the
importance of interfacial roughness on the CPP magnetoresistances of Fe/Cr
multilayers? (4) How far can a polarized current penetrate into a
superconductor? (5) Can a predicted magnetic analog of the AC Josephson effect
be observed? This research will play an important role in educating BS, MS, and
PhD students, including women and minorities. An outreach component of this
program involves supervision of the physics portion of the Michigan Science
Olympiad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In one decade, Giant Magnetoresistance in
metallic magnetic multilayers has moved from discovery to marketed devices, such
as read heads for high-density computer disk drives. But further progress
requires still larger magnetoresistance and still smaller detectors. A candidate
for the next generation of detectors is Giant Magnetorisistance multilayers
measured with current flow perpendicular to the layers, a geometry pioneered by
the group at Michigan State University. This geometry promises larger
magnetoresistance in smaller samples. But both fundamental and practical issues
still need to be resolved. This research program will address several such
issues in novel ways, and will involve BS, MS, and PhD students, including women
and minorities. The students will learn how to pose significant scientific
questions, assemble state-of-the-art equipment to address them, and analyze data
obtained with the equipment.&lt;br/&gt;