* 0202373
* High School Technology Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Marilyn Barger, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 05/31/2007
* USD 484,056.00

The goals of the High School Technology Initiative (HSTI) are to attract and
retain more high school students in science and technology career paths. Today's
high school students, while familiar with high technology as users, frequently
fail to connect underlying scientific principles to the technologies that enable
their lives in so many ways. The objective of this project is to create
curriculum content modules that engender an interest in pursuing technology,
engineering, or science related careers by providing students with connections
between technology and its underlying science as part of state mandated science
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HSTI team consists of high school science
teachers from schools in the greater Tampa Bay region, the University of South
Florida (USF) Engineering College, Hillsborough Community College (HCC) faculty,
engineering graduate students, and professional multimedia and video personnel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each HSTI educational module contributes to the project
goals and objectives by: &lt;br/&gt;1. Providing instructional materials to
teachers on topics they currently teach, but packaged in the context of high
technology examples that are relevant to their students' everyday lives.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Providing the curriculum material in a high-tech, computer based
presentation format so the lessons grab the student's interest and hold their
attention. &lt;br/&gt;3. Making the materials easy to use by including detailed
instructions and suggestions on how to use the curriculum materials as well as
background materials about the engineering and technology involved.
&lt;br/&gt;4. Making the instructional materials integrate throughout all levels
of high school physical sciences (chemistry, physics, and physical science) and
some mathematics courses so students work with the same concepts several times
during their high school studies but from different perspectives and to
different depths and details.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HSTI was created as a follow
up and extension to a traditional set of high school pipeline activities for
science teachers. USF and HCC presented these pipeline activities as
participants in an NSF Advanced Technology Education grant (DUE-9950106) aimed
at developing a high technology workforce for semiconductor manufacturing
industries within the State of Florida. During these workshop-type activities to
increase technology awareness, teachers requested materials for classroom use,
but also stipulated a number of constraints for any materials produced.
Continued interaction with a group of teachers resulted in the HSTI curriculum
concept and initial material development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
serving to refine materials currently under development and create, evaluate,
and distribute two additional modules. Additionally, HSTI is providing an array
of science and mathematics teachers' professional development opportunities to
teach the teachers about the technologies integrated into the modules and also
to provide them with hands-on training experience for using the multimedia
materials (CD navigation, downloads, altering and adapting, etc). Finally, an
efficient and cost-effective nationwide distribution system for the materials is
being developed with the help of MATEC (Maricopa Advanced Technology Education
Center).