* 0202580
* International Research Fellowship Program:  'Egg-box'  Energy Absorption Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Marc Zupan, Zupan                   Marcus         P
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2003
* USD 57,500.00

0202580 Zupan

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Marc Zupan
to work with Dr. Norman A. Fleck at the University of Cambridge, in the United
Kingdom.

This goal of this project is to demonstrate strategies for minimum weight energy
absorption systems based on egg-box panels and to develop a group of design
parameters that allow egg-box panels to be adapted for specific protection
needs. The realizations will be manifested in (1) characterizing the mechanical
response of egg-box panels in both crash and blast situations; (2) analytical
models will be developed so that minimum weight designs can be achieved for
specific needs; (3) design maps will be produced and validated by the production
and experimental analysis of new geometries to meet current industry demands.
Egg-box panels are a new category of energy absorption devices. It is feasible
that egg-box cores, when configured correctly, can be used in a broad range of
protective situations for both crash and blast protection. Energy absorbers
based on egg-box panels promise to have a significant influence on vehicle
protection providing a novel minimum weight, low cost energy absorber leading to
the combined goal of reduced weight, and superior energy absorption across
widespread applications.

The University of Cambridge's Micromechanics Centre will provide a diverse
environment, providing direct partnerships not only with the host, but also with
many others. The interdisciplinary facility currently maintains close
international links with both European and American research groups.