* 0202656
* Spectral and Transport Properties of Random Media
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Peter Hislop, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 116,020.00

&lt;br/&gt;Spectral and Transport Properties of Random
Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Peter D. Hislop, University of Kentucky&lt;br/&gt
;DMS-0202656&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
concerns continuing investigations of the principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator into
the spectral and transport properties of random media.&lt;br/&gt;The basic
question is: How do random perturbations of a background&lt;br/&gt;medium, for
example, a perfect crystal, influence the propagation&lt;br/&gt;of quantum and
classical waves in the medium?&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work concentrates on
properties of the integrated density of&lt;br/&gt;states and models related to
the quantum Hall effect.&lt;br/&gt;Several other models and related technical
problems are discussed.&lt;br/&gt;The main aspects of the proposal
include:&lt;br/&gt;1) Continuity and Regularity of the Integrated Density of
States;&lt;br/&gt;2) Spectral and Transport Problems in the Quantum Hall
Effect;&lt;br/&gt;3) the Aizenman-Molchanov Method for Localization, Energy-
Level Statistics,&lt;br/&gt;and Random Magnetic Fields.&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this work is to describe the effect of&lt;br/&gt;disorder on the
measurable properties of the system,&lt;br/&gt;such as the density of states,
the conductivity,&lt;br/&gt;and the edge currents. The proposer also
discusses&lt;br/&gt;localization for some previously untreated
systems&lt;br/&gt;like random magnetic fields and nonlocal
potentials.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methods will contribute to
the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of wave propagation in random
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of many basic electronic
properties of solids is&lt;br/&gt;based on the simple one-electron model of an
electron propagating&lt;br/&gt;in a periodic array of atoms. This simple idea
explains many fundamental&lt;br/&gt;phenomena such as metals, insulators, and
semiconductors. One of the&lt;br/&gt;limitations of this model is that it
predicts infinite conductivity. In&lt;br/&gt;1958, P. W. Anderson proposed
disorder as a mechanism for limiting the&lt;br/&gt;ballistic behavior of an
electron in a periodic array of atoms. He argued&lt;br/&gt;that the electron
wave function should be localized in space&lt;br/&gt;due to multiple and
incoherent scattering from the randomly distributed&lt;br/&gt;impurities, with
probability one. Disorder-induced localization of states&lt;br/&gt;for many
models has now been proved. Some of the work in this proposal&lt;br/&gt;involves
applying these ideas to the study of systems with
interesting&lt;br/&gt;geometries, such as a strip or a torus, that exhibit the
quantum Hall&lt;br/&gt;effect. The principal investigator is interested in the
nature of &lt;br/&gt;the quantum Hall edge-currents, and the nature of the
&lt;br/&gt;electron states for regions with two-edges, such as a strip. One of
the tools for studying these systems is the density of states that provides a
measure of the number of electronic&lt;br/&gt;states per unit volume. The
continuity of the density of states measure&lt;br/&gt;provides a measure of the
effectiveness of the disorder in breaking degeneracy of the ordered system. Very
little is known about this function. The principal investigator is also
interested in exploring the effect on electron propagation of randomness in the
magnetic field, and the influence of randomness on certain systems with nonlocal
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;