* 0202595
* Workshop on Fundamental Issues and Future Research Directions for Parallel Mechanisms and Manipulators; October 3-4, 2002; Quebec City, Quebec, Canada
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Imme Ebert-Uphoff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2004
* USD 14,510.00

This workshop seeks to bring together experts in the area of parallel
manipulators from around the globe for two days in order to disseminate recent
research progress and to identify the most promising future research directions
for parallel manipulators. This meeting is not a routine conference, wherein the
primary responsibility of the participant is to present his or her paper.
Instead, through a series of focused keynote presentations, round-tables,
focused paper and poster sessions and in-depth discussion sessions the
participants will seek convergence on key issues related to parallel
manipulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the workshop include: (1)
Identify roadblocks that must be resolved to increase the industrial use of
parallel manipulators; (2) Identify promising approaches that may yield
significant advances in the theoretical framework; (3) Discuss educational needs
and methods; (4) Develop a strategy for the research community as a whole to
accelerate the development and use of parallel manipulators; (5) Establish and
reinforce international collaboration and collaboration between academia and
industry. The workshop will be held in Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, on Oct 3-4,
2002, immediately following the ASME DETC conferences in Montreal (Sept 29-Oct
2, 2002).