* 0202653
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Exotic Species Invasion:  Direct and Indirect Interference in Native Species Persistence
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Kelly Lyons, Lyons                   Kelly          G
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 03/31/2004
* USD 66,312.00

0202653 Lyons

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two month research fellowship by Dr. Kelly G.
Lyons to work with Dr. Alberto Burquez at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
Mexico, in Hermosillo, Mexico.

This project is designed to test the general hypothesis that the presence of an
invasive, exotic plant species negatively affects native plant species with
emphasis on documenting changes in native species abundance and separating the
effects of direct and indirect interactions. Four studies will be conducted.
Three of these will employ paired plots in invaded and non-invaded areas along
an invasion front in intact, native habitat. A descriptive study (1) will test
whether the presence of an exotic species adversely affects native species
through direct and/or indirect means by correlating native and exotic species'
abundance on either side of an invasion front. Two studies will employ
descriptive and manipulative experiments to test the hypothesis that an
aggressive exotic impacts native species' fitness indirectly by altering
community food web dynamics and pollinator mutualisms. Finally, through
experimental removal of an exotic, a fourth study will examine exotic species'
effects on native species persistence. The investigation will take place in the
Plains of Sonora subdivision in the Sonora Desert near Hermosillo, Sonora,
Mexico where the aggressive perennial grass Pennisetum ciliare (L.) Link
(buffelgrass) has been introduced for rangeland improvement. This exotic species
is spreading from grazed areas into natural, intact habitats and is a widely
perceived threat to native biodiversity. These studies are expected to
demonstrate the role of exotic species invasions in the decline of native
species abundance and fitness and highlight the more elusive, indirect
mechanisms mediated by native pollinators and insect herbivores. Invasive
species honor no boundaries, and this project will facilitate a dialogue between
the U.S. and Mexico on this pressing conservation issue.

Dr. Burquez specializes in pollination ecology, is an expert of plant
biogeography and pollinator fauna of the region and has been documenting the
spread of P. ciliare into native desert thornscrub for 6 years.