* 0202086
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Marine Reserves and Local Fisheries Replenishment in Papua, New Guinea
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Glenn Almany, Almany                  Glenn          R
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2006
* USD 118,959.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Glenn R.
Almany to work with Dr. Geoffrey P. Jones at James Cook University in
Townsville, Australia, and with Mr. Max Benjamin and Mr. Shannon Seeto at
Mahonia Na Dari Conservation and Research Centre in Papua, New Guinea.

A majority of scientists and managers advocate a network of marine reserves to
help rebuild depleted fisheries. One principal mechanism by which reserves can
rebuild fisheries is the "spillover effect", whereby juveniles and adults
emigrate from protected reserves to nearby fishing areas. Although there is
indirect evidence that spillover occurs, little is known about the underlying
mechanisms of this phenomenon. If we understand how ecological and behavioral
factors influence spillover, we can predict which systems, habitats, and species
are most likely to exhibit spillover before reserves are established. Only with
such detailed insight can we effectively design and manage marine reserves
established to help rebuild fisheries. The goals of this project are to document
whether and under what circumstances spillover occurs, to determine which
ecological and behavioral factors are correlated with spillover, and to document
movement patterns of important food fishes over short (days to months) and long
(years) time scales, and small (<100 meters) and large (kilometers) spatial
scales. The PI will use acoustic telemetry to monitor the movements of
individuals tagged within each of four fully-protected reserves and external
tagging to document fish movement via tag returns and experimental trapping. The
PI expects that increased movement will correlate with high fish density, large
fish size, high predator density, high habitat connectivity, small reef size,
and the reproductive season.

The coral reefs and marine reserves in Kimbe Bay, Papua New Guinea provide an
ideal system in which to study spillover.