* 0202150
* US/Germany Joint Meeting on Nanoscale Science and Engineering to be held at Massachusetts Institute of Technology December 5 and 6, 2001
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Henry Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 11/30/2002
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract CTS-0202150 Henry I. Smith, MIT

Partial travel support for the speakers at the U.S. - Germany Joint Meeting on
Nanoscale Science and Engineering to be held at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology on December 5 and 6, 2001. The objectives are to evaluate new trends
in research and education and exchange information among leading research
centers in both countries, to promote the exchange of researchers and
establishment of joint projects, to introduce younger investigators to
nanotechnology, and create opportunities for long-term collaboration. The main
list of topics includes self-organization, molecular electronics, nanotubes and
applications, nanoparticles, nanomechanics, catalysts, polymers and
pharmaceutics. Representatives of the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Centers
(NSEC) from U.S. and Centers of Excellence in Nanotechnology from Germany, as
well as leading experts and young reserachers from both countries will
participate. The meeting is co-organized by MIT (U.S.) and the University of
Munster (Germany). About 60 participants, half from U. S. and half from Germany
will have the opportunity to participate in presentations and discussions during
the two-day meeting. A website will be created to post the program and
contributed papers. Visits at the MIT and Harvard nanotechnology laboratories
will be organized.