* 0202423
* A National Partnership to Develop a Strategic Plan for the Development of the National Center for Pulp and Paper Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Linda North, Alabama Southern Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth M. Dorland
* 06/30/2003
* USD 50,000.00

This project formulates a strategic plan for the development of the national
center for pulp and paper technology through the partnership of the four two-
year colleges and with strong backing and support from industry. The center is
going to establish and perpetuate a technology program and network providing
students around the nation an effective education and training program. The
center is also going to provide the pulp and paper sector of the U. S. forest
products industry with a globally competitive, technologically advanced
workforce. Alabama Southern Community College (ASCC) and Auburn University
alliance continues in this project with the addition of four two-year colleges
strategically located throughout the United States. These institutions include:
(1) Kennebec Valley Technical College, a rural college in Fairfield, Maine, (2)
Fox Valley Technical College in a more urban area in Appleton, Wisconsin, (3)
Century Community Technical College in White Bear Lake, Minnesota, and (4) Lower
Columbia College in a more urban area in Longview, Washington.

The project includes participation of several national pulp and paper industry
organizations under an industry-academia-governmental initiative called Agenda
2020. These national organizations consist of (1) The American Forest and Paper
Association (AF&PA), (2) The Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper
Industry (TAPPI), and (3) The Paper, Allied-Industrial, Chemical & Energy
Workers International Union (PACE). This initiative enables focusing the
industry's technology vision, sets the industry's technology agenda, and
provides science and technology foundation for the industry. A major focus of
Agenda 2020 is the development of a technologically advanced workforce (TAW) to
operate and maintain the new technologies of today, and more importantly, in the
coming years. The planning for this center is going to closely coordinate the
workforce development needs of today and in the future as new and sophisticated
technology is ushered in for purposes of efficiency and quality improvement so
that our nation's pulp and paper industries can successfully compete
internationally.