* 0202823
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  A Comparative Study of Catarrhine Bone Microstructure and Life History
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Timothy Bromage, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,507.00

Life history refers to the reproductive patterns characteristic of species, and
the schedule and processes by which their members grow, mature, and die. The
evolution and diversification of life history strategies among Old World monkeys
and apes, and the origin of the unique life history pattern characteristic of
humans, is a major interest of anthropologists. To extend investigations to
extinct primates, including hominids, a focus has been the identification of
anatomical "signatures" of life history that can be recognized in fossilized
bones and teeth. The majority of studies to date have focused on aspects of
dental development (e.g., microscopic near-weekly increments in enamel) that
reflect the growth patterns of individuals. However, numerous studies of other
vertebrates have demonstrated that microscopic structures in bone tissue
constitute another important source of information about life history, thus
expanding the foundation for studies of fossils. The current study is designed
to examine the influence of life history on the developing micro-structural
organization of the midshaft femur and humerus, focusing on a restricted
comparative sample comprised of growth series of vervet monkeys, white-handed
gibbons, and common chimpanzees. Using novel microscopy techniques, the specific
aims of this study are: 1) to describe and quantify variability in several
microscopic features of bone known to reflect individual growth patterns; 2) to
assess the correspondence of micro-structural variables with more traditional
measures of postnatal growth (e.g., known body weight, bone length, and dental
eruption); 3) to determine whether species differences in bone micro-structural
variables reflect life history variation; and 4) to consider the influence of
changes in bone related to skeletal function on interpretations of life history.
If the potential of bone micro-structure for discriminating aspects of life
history is established in modern animals, this approach may contribute to our
understanding of the evolution and diversification of life history strategies
among primates, including the growth patterns of early hominids and their
paleoenvironments.