* 0202078
* Support of the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR) Facility
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2010
* Maury Tigner, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 03/31/2010
* USD 99,355,712.00

This proposal is a request to support the operation of the Cornell Electron
Storage Ring (CESR) and the CLEO detector for the next five years. Since the new
B-Factories, PEP-II at Stanford and KEK-B at the Japanese National Laboratory
for Accelerator Research, KEK, now have luminosities routinely exceeding that of
CESR, this is a proposal to alter CESR for operation over the energy range 1.5
to 5.6 GeV per beam to provide CLEO with access to unique and important physics
and to address some of the original goals of the CESR/CLEO program in a way
complementary to the PEP and KEK machines. In addition to the particle physics
program, it is proposed to continue a vigorous program of accelerator science
and technology for the future. The Cornell University group proposes to continue
a strong program in x-ray science at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source
that, using synchrotron radiation from the CESR beams, has operated
simultaneously with particle physics since the inception of CESR. The program
described herein will be complete in 2006. At that time it will be appropriate
to cease using CESR for particle physics and to devote it largely to x-ray
science and to some accelerator R&D measurements.

The funds are requested primarily to support operation of the CESR facility,
support infrastructure for CLEO collaborators including operation of the
laboratory computing facility, research by the Cornell portion of the CLEO
collaboration, accelerator R&D, and related educational and outreach activities.
The proposed particle physics program contains opportunities for original
discovery, precision measurements for unique tests of the Standard Model and
enabling measurements that will be necessary for analyzing data to be taken at
the B-factories and the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, Geneva. The program will
begin with a year of Upsilon 1S, 2S and 3S resonance running. For the majority
of the operation, however, it is proposed to run at and near the charm
resonances and above DsDs threshold. By exploiting capabilities that are unique
to the charm energy region, CLEO measurements will explore a large set of
critical weak and strong interaction phenomena, will extend and enable flavor
physics worldwide and will lay the foundation for mastery of a non-perturbative,
strongly interacting theory. This is essential for a full understanding of QCD,
will quite likely be crucial for understanding new theories revealed by the next
generation of frontier accelerators and will impact many fields beyond particle
physics where strongly-coupled theories arise. During this period, the CESR/CLEO
program will serve as an important vehicle for accelerator and detector R&D in
support of the national and world particle physics programs to come. Because of
its great flexibility, CESR is an excellent laboratory for studying the effects
of non-linearities attending the use of strong wiggler magnets and space charge
detuning in high-density beams, both important features of the damping rings
planned for future linear colliders. Additionally, they propose continued R&D in
the physics of superconducting radio frequency acceleration techniques. As a
result of this R&D, the Energy Recovery Linac has been put forward as an ultra
bright source of synchrotron radiation, capturing worldwide attention and
interest.

To their routine training of science and engineering graduates and
undergraduates in particle physics and accelerator science, they propose to add
a professional degree MS program in accelerator science and technology. An
education outreach coordinator has been added to enhance their K-12 outreach to
local and inner city young people.