* 0202636
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Role of Advection on CO2 Flux Measurements at the Cabauw Tall Tower, the Netherlands
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Cynthia Werner, Werner                  Cynthia        A
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,051.00

0202636 Werner The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a ten month research fellowship by Dr. Cynthia
A. Werner to work with Dr. Fred Bosveld at the Royal Netherland Meteorological
Institute in De Bilt, The Netherlands. This project will evaluate the CO2 fluxes
by instrumenting the Cabauw meteorological tower in the Netherlands. This
experiment should yield the first realistic estimates of the errors in CO2 flux
measurement and in advective CO2 flux. The Cabauw site affords a unique
opportunity because of its height and lack of surface heterogeneity. Dr. Werner
will establish a baseline value for advective flux which will determine the
minimal amount of error that sites located in more complicated terrain can
expect due to the advective component. This baseline value is particularly
significant because only a few sites have the ability to assess the advective
componenet and typically this is performed only when very large errors are
expected. The data collected will complement research done by others studying
the carbon cycle and global climate change across Europe.

In addition to working with Dr. Bosveld, who is in charge of all measurements
made at Cabauw, the PI will also work with Dr. Peter Duynkerke of the Institute
for Marine and Atmospheric Research (IMAU), Dr. Alex Vermeulen of the Energy
Research center of the Netherlands (ECN).