* 0202131
* Teaching Approved Methods of Tuning and Adjusting Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Control Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Allan Watton, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/2006
* USD 155,324.00

The Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) industry is presently
struggling with a problem that affects its credibility with owners and occupants
of buildings: installed, renovated, and maintained building HVAC systems are not
meeting the conditions, comfort, and economy of operation expectations of
owners, occupants and other end users. As evidenced by articles and letters of
concern in HVAC and building trade periodicals, building mechanical system
owners, designers, installers, and occupant representatives need a commonly
understood, scientific means of field testing HVAC system control performance
which can more readily determine compliance with desired and specified
operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A previous NSF grant to the Sinclair Community
College (DUE 9544183) sponsored a symposium attended by national representatives
of colleges and universities, HVAC industry professionals, and HVAC equipment
manufacturers. At the symposium it was demonstrated that control systems
performance could be analyzed through hard copy recordings of controller
responses. This textbook-described method of analysis was in lieu of the non-
scientific practice of visual monitoring, or vague "self tuning" programs used
for observing and correcting controller behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
result of a request at the symposium, Sinclair faculty is developing a
curriculum module to teach the utilization of a hand-held graphing calculator to
be substituted for the fragile, expensive, sophisticated laboratory test
equipment that was used at the symposium to demonstrate the method of controller
behavior analysis based on textbook control theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
curriculum module is used in existing HVAC control courses at Sinclair Community
College and is available to other Associate and Bachelor degree programs in
mechanical engineering technology. All materials and technology developed are
disseminated through engineering education professional associations. The final
report serves as the basis of technical papers presented to general meetings of
such professional societies as ASHRAE, IEEE, ASEE, and
ISA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of curriculum is accomplished in
cooperation with faculty from the University of Dayton, a professional advisory
panel, and curriculum developers at the National Center of Excellence for
Advanced Manufacturing Education. The Sinclair faculty researchers administering
this development project have years of experience in designing and installing
major commercial HVAC control systems. In addition, such material can find ready
use nationally in continuing-education courses offered by two-year colleges to
employees of local industry. With the articulation agreements and working
arrangements that Sinclair has with such four-year colleges as the University of
Dayton, Miami University of Middletown, University of Cincinnati College of
Applied Science, University of Toledo, and Ferris State University, the
developed material is being used in many engineering and technical
programs.&lt;br/&gt;