* 0202386
* Bronx Community College Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Panayiotis Meleties, CUNY Bronx Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 08/31/2007
* USD 694,513.00

Project Summary The Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology (PMT) program is
establishing an A.A.S. degree in PMT at Bronx Community College, the first of
its kind in the City University of New York. The PMT program is a chemical
technology program specifically designed to prepare technicians to meet the
growing needs of the New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut tri-state
pharmaceutical, cosmetics, and related industries. To accomplish the primary
goals of the PMT program, objectives and activities addressing the following
categories are being implemented: a) Curriculum and course development; b)
Instructional materials adaptation and development; c) College faculty and high
school teacher training and professional development; and d) Student enrichment
and internship activities. The PMT curriculum is incorporating the Voluntary
Industry Standards (VIS) of the American Chemical Society. Long established ties
between the Department and local chemical and pharmaceutical industries are an
integral component in the design of this program.

The Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology A.A.S. degree curriculum is related
to a series of secondary school programs such as the Tech Prep, School-To-Work,
STEP and C-STEP programs in the Bronx and supported by the Bronx Educational
Alliance and the Greater New Jersey Process Technology Alliance. Articulation
agreements leading to the B.S. and B.A. science degree programs in CUNY and
other colleges are in place. Thus, the program is providing new career pathways
for minority students and other individuals by establishing strong viable links
from high school to college level science and technology education to job
placement. Graduates of the program will be in a competitive position to fill
rewarding entry-level technician positions in the regional industries. Other
long-term results, beyond the duration of the project, will be to increase the
retention and the enrollment of minority and female Bronx students in science
and technology programs.