* 0202178
* Graduate Alliance for Education in Louisiana
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2012
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,595,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Graduate Alliance for Education in
Louisiana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose
to establish an alliance for increasing diversity in graduate education and the
professoriate in Louisiana. Alliance partners will include Tulane and Louisiana
State University (the two Carnegie Research I universities in the state and the
institutions responsible for 94% of the minority doctoral degree production in
the state between 1994-2001), Xavier University of Louisiana, Dillard
University, and Southern University Baton Rouge and New Orleans. The Graduate
Alliance for Education in Louisiana (GAELA) will build upon existing minority
SME research training programs at these institutions, and develop new programs
to encourage more minority students to pursue SME graduate education and
academic careers. One of the goals of the GAELA project will be the early
identification and nurturing of promising students during their undergraduate
years. A concerted effort will be made to recruit doctoral fellows from
participants in LS-LAMP, the College Fund - Xavier AMP, and other pre-graduate
training programs in the state. We expect that the nurturing students receive in
these programs, and the familiarity they gain working with faculty at Tulane and
LSU will increase their chances of successfully completing their doctoral
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second major goal of the GAELA Program will
be to affect significant change in the culture of graduate education at the
State of Louisiana's top research universities in order to significantly
increase minority SME doctoral degree production. We have set a numerical goal
of 45 Ph.D. per year by 2006, more than triple the 2001 annual output on
minority doctoral degrees. The project has a strong component of recruitment and
early exposure of students to academic career opportunities focused on
participating HBCU's, and a variety of retention activities focused on the two
graduate research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recruitment component
consists of exposing students at HBCU's to study and academic career
opportunities at LSU and Tulane through recruiting visits by LSU and Tulane
faculty, annual recruitment fairs on Tulane and LSU campuses, and involving HBCU
students in Tulane/LSU faculty-mentored research. We will establish GAELA campus
programs at Xavier, Dillard, SUBR and SUNO to coordinate these activities. The
retention component will consist of mentoring workshops for Tulane and LSU
faculty, awarding research funds and professional travel grants to doctoral
students that are making satisfactory progress toward completing their degrees,
SME academic career training sessions, and #I survival sessions" for helping
minority students cope with the majority graduate educational
environment.&lt;br/&gt;