* 0202067
* CISE Research Infrastructure: SENSORIUM:  Research Infrastructure for Managing Spatio-Temporal Objects in Video Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,428,861.00

EIA 02-02067&lt;br/&gt;Bestavros, Azer&lt;br/&gt;Betke, Margrit; Crovella, Mark
E.; Matta, Ibrahim; Sclaroff, Stan&lt;br/&gt;Boston University &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;RI: SENSORIUM: Research Infrastructure for Managing Spatio-Temporal
Objects in Video Sensor Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing
an open sensor network research infrastructure (SENSORIUM), aims to catalyze
fundamental advances in image and video computing, network protocols, and
resource management to deal with unique spatio-temporal constraints of sensor
networks. SENSORIUM is composed of a sensor network of video cameras spanning
several rooms, networked processing units, and a terabyte database, managed
together to satisfy queries using those generated by mobile users within this
environment. The infrastructure enables the following research
projects:&lt;br/&gt;a. Modeling, interpretation, and prediction of human motion
in video streams at multiple &lt;br/&gt;scales in space/time and at multiple
layers of detail; &lt;br/&gt;b. Development of efficient location management,
routing, transport, and content &lt;br/&gt;distribution protocols for multi-
resolution/scale streaming sensory data networks; &lt;br/&gt;c. Characterization
of traffic and access patterns in mobile sensory networks; &lt;br/&gt;d.
Instrumentation of embedded real-time operating systems to enable coordinated
resource management and the development of middleware services for the
management of active sensor networks; &lt;br/&gt;e. Indexing and mining of large
spatio-temporal non-textual sensory datasets, with a particular emphasis on
mining of human motions and activities; &lt;br/&gt;f. Enhancing code safety for
embedded systems through the use of type systems and run-time support, with
emphasis on flow-oriented programming; &lt;br/&gt;g. Development of algorithms
and protocols for supporting security and trust, and for protecting the
confidentiality and integrity of data in video sensor networks and
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These collaborative projects target two
vertical applications. The first aims to merge the physical and cyber worlds in
an integrated, well defined, privacy-protecting manner. It involves the
development of a system capable of gathering, interpreting, routing, and storing
data from distributed video sensors, and answering queries about the physical
world on the Web. The second aims to develop assistive environments for people
with severe disabilities, to help them gain access to computers, and thereby
obtain a tool to communicate with their environments. These applications will
unify the various research projects leveraged by the SENSORIUM by acting as
catalysts for the development of generic technologies that could be used (and
reused) in other vertical applications. &lt;br/&gt;