* 0202175
* Biodiversity of the Russian Far East: Sakhalin Island
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Theodore Pietsch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Woolley
* 05/31/2004
* USD 207,712.00

"Biodiversity of the Russian Far East" is a long-term international
effort&lt;br/&gt;to document the diversity of plants and animals that occupy the
landmasses&lt;br/&gt;that surround and enclose the Sea of Okhotsk. This region
is one of the&lt;br/&gt;most biologically diverse yet poorly known areas within
the northern hemisphere. At the same time, compared to most other high-latitude
regions of&lt;br/&gt;comparable size around the world, its biota is relatively
undisturbed.&lt;br/&gt;For political reasons, but also because of its remoteness
and severe&lt;br/&gt;climate, all but a few Russian biologists have ignored this
region.&lt;br/&gt;Information about the plants and animals of Okhotskia is
largely unknown&lt;br/&gt;outside of Russian and what little is available is
published in Russian&lt;br/&gt;and thus relatively inaccessible. Each summer
since 1994, three-dozen&lt;br/&gt;scientists, along with their students, from
the University of Washington,&lt;br/&gt;the Far East Branch of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, and the Sapporo&lt;br/&gt;and Hakodate campuses of Hokkaido
University, Japan, spend eight weeks&lt;br/&gt;exploring remote islands and
continental shorelines, utilizing land-based&lt;br/&gt;field stations or ocean-
going Russian research vessels. While our primary&lt;br/&gt;center of focus has
been the island biotas of the Kuril Archipelago, our&lt;br/&gt;destination over
the next two years will be Sakhalin Island. Our goals&lt;br/&gt;are to record
the detailed species-level diversity of life in aquatic
and&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial habitats of the Russian Far East as a prologue
to&lt;br/&gt;investigations of biological patterns and processes, and as a basis
for&lt;br/&gt;the development of conservation strategies for this part of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological materials from lichens to liverworts,
from spiders to frogs are&lt;br/&gt;being collected, curated, and made available
to specialists around the&lt;br/&gt;world. Dozens of species new to science are
being named, described, and&lt;br/&gt;classified, and numerous scientific and
popular articles are being&lt;br/&gt;published. In the area of conservation, our
work is providing an&lt;br/&gt;important foundation of information that will
promote long-term&lt;br/&gt;environmental protection of these unique biotas.
Finally, our&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity studies in the Russian Far East contribute
significantly to&lt;br/&gt;education and to the development of human resources
in science at the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate levels.
Since 1994, the&lt;br/&gt;project has provided financial support and direct
involvement in field and&lt;br/&gt;laboratory research for dozens of students.
With major responsibility for&lt;br/&gt;collecting, identification, and
curation, as well as data collection,&lt;br/&gt;analysis, and interpretation,
students share authorship on scientific&lt;br/&gt;publications. International
collaborative interaction between students&lt;br/&gt;and scientists of diverse
interest and training provides unique&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to address
important new questions ranging from comparative&lt;br/&gt;biology to
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;