* 0202832
* Applications of Non-Commutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Paul Baum, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Baum&lt;br/&gt;Non-commutative geometry seeks to extend
geometry and topology from the classical setting of Riemannian manifolds and
topological spaces to a new setting of mathematical structures whose coordinate
algebras are non-commutative. In this context, approximately twenty years ago,
P.Baum and A.Connes conjectured a formula for the K-theory of the (reduced) C*
algebra of any locally compact topological group. At the present time no
counter-example is known to the conjecture and-due to the work of many
mathematicians-the conjecture has been proved for several very interesting
classes of groups (e.g. real Lie groups, p-adic algebraic groups, adelic
algebraic groups, discrete hyperbolic groups, amenable groups). Also established
is that the conjecture, when valid, has many corollaries (e.g. Mackey analogy,
Atiyah-Schmid construction of the discrete series, Novikov higher signature
conjecture, stable Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg conjecture, Kadison-Kaplansky
conjecture). This project aims to discover and develop further corollaries of
the conjecture in representation theory and in geometry-
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis is the branch of mathematics based on
calculus. The fundamental ideas of calculus (differentiation and integration)
were introduced by Newton and Leibniz and played a central role in the
scientific revolution of their era. Topology is the most basic form of geometry
and was founded by such eminent nineteenth and twentieth century mathematicians
as Riemann, Poincare and Lefschetz. A major theme in modern mathematics has been
the interplay between analysis and topology. For example, Maxwell's equations
for electricity-magnetism are formulated via analysis, but many of the
implications are topological. This project continues the interaction of topology
and analysis by using and applying a new synthesis of analysis and topology
known as "non-commutative geometry".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;