* 0202328
* RoboEducators Project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Scott Griffith, Los Rios Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 06/30/2005
* USD 600,000.00

The RoboEducators' ATE project was initiated by the faculty in the Engineering
Technology Center at American River College in conjunction with staff at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory to create an engaging pathway for student to enter the
world of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) via robotics
competition. The work is a collaborative effort between three regional
engineering and technology consortia in California. Through their efforts they
have been able to join the Silicon Valley Engineering/ Technology Consortia
(SVE/TC) and the Sacramento Regional Engineering and Technology Consortia
(SETRC) together with California State University-Northridge (CSUN) to establish
the Los Angeles Engineering and Technology Consortia and create/deliver/support
a world-class K-12 robotics curriculum. The project has two structural and three
functional components. The structural elements are to organize the Los Angeles
consortium and expand the interrelationships of the regional consortia in the
state to create a pathway for K-16 students engaged in manufacturing and
technology careers. Functionally the project builds a standards-based K-12
robotics curriculum to attract and engage students in manufacturing and
technology and provide extensive professional development in support of robotics
curricula and competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also engaging
non-traditional students and teachers in technology careers through robotics
courses. Teachers are contracted to develop the curriculum and training
materials as well as deliver workshops specific to the needs of a range of
teachers from entry through advanced levels. Strong industry support is expected
for these training activities that range from conference presentations up to
two-week workshops. During the second and third years, a Statewide Robotics
Conference is held in the Los Angeles area. Efforts have been directed toward
creating an infrastructure to engage middle and high school students along with
an audience of K-16. Teachers are delivering and receiving robotics-related
professional development through the three regional consortia and their industry
partners. The ultimate goal is to continually excite students and engage them in
order to encourage them toward careers in STEM. The project is doing this by
engaging students in regional and national competitions including Lego League,
Bot Ball, Red Rover and Robotics
FIRST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;