* 0202207
* Current Polarized Ion-Selective Membranes for Enhanced Analytical Performances
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Erno Lindner, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2006
* USD 284,685.00

In research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program, Professor
Lindner and his coworkers at the University of Memphis are developing ion-
selective electrodes with sub-micromolar detection limits. The best results are
expected when the parasitic, transmembrane ion fluxes, across the ion-selective
membrane, are prevented through the application of a few nA/cm2 direct current.
Chrono-amperometric and chrono-potentiometric measurements will be employed in
combination with spectroscopic imaging of transport processes in the sensing
membrane to develop measurement protocols for the analysis of extremely dilute
samples. The methods will be adapted to small size, microfabricated sensors and
tested in environmental and biological samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion-
selective electrodes are simple, accurate and cost effective devices for both in
vivo and in vitro measurement of ion concentrations. Dr. Lindner and his
coworkers in the Joint Graduate Program for Biomedical Engineering at the
University of Memphis are working on experimental techniques that project
several orders of magnitudes improvement in the performance of ion sensors. This
improvement is expected to profoundly affect the role of ion-selective
electrodes in microanalysis, e.g., in environmental monitoring, or cellular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;