* 0202514
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Fire Management and Carbon Storage in Spain and the U.S.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Jason Kaye, Kaye                    Jason          P
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2005
* USD 32,125.00

0202514&lt;br/&gt;Kaye&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a six-month research
fellowship by Dr. Jason Kaye to work with Dr. Ramon Vallejo at the Centro de
Estudios Ambientales del Mediterraneo (CEAM) in Valencia, Spain over a period of
36 months.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to quantify the effects of
fire and fire management on carbon storage in eastern Spain and the southwestern
United States. Both of these regions contain dry forests that supported frequent
fires prior to human management (millennia ago in Spain, a century ago in the
U.S.). Contemporary fire suppression facilitates tree establishment, carbon
storage, and fuel accumulation. In Spain, this accumulated fuel eventually burns
in stand-replacing fires that convert plant material to atmospheric CO2. In the
U.S., fire suppression is more effective and most forests have not burned for a
century. Thus, these regions contain complementary information regarding fire-
based CO2 emissions. The Spanish ecosystems provide information on CO2 released
from forests experiencing repeated stand-replacing fires. The U.S. ecosystems
provide information on CO2 stored in forests when fire is persistently
suppressed. To measure carbon accumulation following stand-replacing fires in
eastern Spain, the PI will locate forests that have burned at different times in
the past and measure the total amount of carbon in each ecosystem. The rate of
carbon accumulation can be calculated from the age and carbon content of each
forest. To measure carbon accumulation following fire suppression in the U.S.,
the PI will use tree-ring reconstructions of past forest density and mass. Tree-
rings represent an annual record of tree size that can be converted into carbon
storage. The main results from this research will be equations describing the
accumulation of carbon in dry forests following fire suppression and stand
replacing fires. These equations will rapidly be incorporated into global carbon
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Vallejo has been studying fire in this region
for 25 years. He has on-going projects with researchers in the European Union,
which will enable interactions with international carbon and fire scientists.
Dr. Vallejo has already established research sites that are ideally suited for
the carbon sampling outlined above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;