* 0202713
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Benthic-Pelagic Coupling in the Ocean:  Integrating Across the Life-cycle
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Nicole Phillips, Phillips                Nicole         E
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/2004
* USD 77,000.00

0202713 Phillips

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Nicole E.
Phillips to work with Dr. Jonathan Gardner at Victoria University of Wellington
in New Zealand. Support for this project is provided by the U.S.-New Zealand
Program.

The influence of larger scale ocean processes on the local ecology of marine
species is poorly understood. This project addresses these processes, using
intertidal mussel populations in New Zealand as a model system. In marine
ecosystems, most species have complex life cycles characterized by a benthic, or
bottom-dwelling, adult stage and a larval stage that is free-living and drifts
in the plankton for weeks to months. The ocean environment can, therefore, shape
patterns of distribution and abundance of these organisms through its action on
both the free-living and the bottom-dwelling stages. To date, no studies have
applied the necessary integrative approaches to ascertain how the ocean
environment influences benthic invertebrates over the course of their entire
life cycle. Such integrative approaches are critical to our understanding of the
cumulative ecological effects of oceanographic processes on marine populations,
because different life-stages may respond differentially to the same ocean
features. The focus of this project will be the influence of ocean processes on
larval stages and the subsequent interactions that arise from varied responses
by different life-stages. Two approaches will be used, field monitoring and
manipulative experiments, to examine the role of oceanographic processes shaping
larval dynamics and how different life-stages of marine organisms interact to
ultimately shape local and regional patterns of distribution and abundance. This
collaboration will produce a more complete understanding of the role of benthic-
pelagic coupling on the abundance and distribution of benthic marine
invertebrates on rocky shores.

Dr. Gardner's current focus is on demographic consequences of variable ocean
conditions to populations of adult mussels on the shore, mediated through
effects of variable planktonic food.