* 0202330
* Collaborative Industry/Community College System ATE Professional Development Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Lauren Kaufman, CBIA Education Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2006
* USD 638,262.00

The Connecticut Business and Industry Association (CBIA) Education Foundation,
the Connecticut Community College System, Central Connecticut State University,
the State Departments of Education and Higher Education, more than 15 technology
companies, and other partners are collaborating in a statewide NSF Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) project. This project supports comprehensive
professional development for community college faculty, high school mathematics,
science and technology teachers and limited numbers of pre-service teachers.
This project complements two existing NSF grants to the Connecticut Community
College System (CCCS), including a new NSF grant for ATE curriculum development
and a new CSEMS award for students entering state, two-year postsecondary ATE
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals are to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) strengthen
relationships among business and industry, the CCCS, state comprehensive and
vocational high schools, and other ATE institutions; &lt;br/&gt;(2) build a
stronger feeder system for the state's two-year ATE programs in three areas:
manufacturing, engineering technologies and computer science/information
technology; and &lt;br/&gt;(3) increase the supply of technically trained AS
graduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the state's largest business association,
with over 10,000 companies, CBIA is extremely well positioned to work with the
state's secondary and post-secondary institutions to develop a more effective
feeder system and expand the supply of technically trained workers. The members
of this ATE collaborative are co-developing and co-sponsoring an array of
professional development technology activities. Two cohorts of 12 ATE faculty
and 10 high school "ATE Leaders" are participating in intensive professional
development, including instructional leadership, industry-based hands-on
applications of technology, collaborative research, and ongoing technical
experiences. An additional 256 community college faculty and secondary teachers
are involved in larger group professional development activities. This ATE
project builds on CBIA and CCCS industry collaborative education and training
initiatives and involves at least three other national ATE Centers (NWCET, NCTT
and the South Carolina Center of Excellence) for ongoing technical assistance
and guidance.