* 0202375
* Project ProBase
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Rodney Custer, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 06/30/2007
* USD 757,024.00

Project ProBase&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Project ProBase (Problem-
based technology curriculum) will develop an innovative&lt;br/&gt;set of 8
secondary level, technology-rich curriculum units based on a validated set
of&lt;br/&gt;bridge competencies. The materials will be targeted for the 11th
and 12th grade levels and&lt;br/&gt;will be designed to develop a comprehensive
technical foundation for post-secondary&lt;br/&gt;community college technician
education. The materials will be designed to be delivered&lt;br/&gt;using a
constuctivist approach that utilizes a series of technological problem
solving&lt;br/&gt;activities. ProBase will provide pre-technical high school
students with a comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;curriculum, designed to prepare them to
enter community college technician programs.&lt;br/&gt;ProBase will develop and
field-test curriculum materials designed to fill the gap between&lt;br/&gt;(a)
the curriculum content standards developed at the national level (i.e.,
Standards for&lt;br/&gt;Technological Literacy, the National Science Education
Standards, and the Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;Standards for School Mathematics) and
(b) the entry-level knowledge and skills needed&lt;br/&gt;by students entering
community college technical education programs. This curriculum&lt;br/&gt;will
focus on core concepts identified in the Standards for Technological Literacy as
well&lt;br/&gt;as a set of Bridge Competencies identified by the Community
College consortium&lt;br/&gt;involved in the project. The materials will be
produced and disseminated by the&lt;br/&gt;International Technology Education
Association.