* 0202801
* Free Boundaries, PDE's, and Geometric Measure Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Donatella Danielli, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 30,616.00

PI: Donatella Danielli, Purdue University DMS-0202801
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract:

This proposal presents a collection of problems motivated by the study of
elliptic and parabolic free boundary problems, calculus of variations, and
geometric measure theory. The P.I proposes to study a class of free boundary
problems of interest in flame propagation. The model is obtained via an
asymptotic method that simplifies a complicated system of conservation laws
describing the process of combustion on the basis of physically sound
approximations. The very way the problem is derived suggests viewing it as the
limit of regularizing problems. One of the main objectives of the proposed
research is to determine conditions under which limit solutions of the
approximating problems converge to classical solutions to the original one, and
to prove optimal regularity properties of the free boundary. Another area of
interest is the optimal regularity of the solution and of the free boundary in
the subelliptic obstacle problem. The necessary tools from harmonic analysis and
pde's for the study of these problems will be developed concurrently. The P.I.
has also a program aimed at developing the regularity theory of minimal surfaces
in Carnot groups, and at investigating the validity of the Bernstein property in
this setting. Such program entails the study of several basic questions. Among
these, we mention the existence and characterization of traces on lower
dimensional manifolds of Sobolev or BV functions. This question is instrumental
also in the study of boundary value problems for subelliptic operators. In
particular, the P.I. plans to investigate the solvability of the Neumann problem
for sub-Laplacians, and to determine the optimal regularity of solutions.

Free boundary problems naturally arise in physics and engineering when a
conserved quantity or relation changes discontinuously across some value of the
variables under consideration. The free boundary appears, for instance, as the
interface between a fluid and the air, or water and ice. One of the proposed
projects aims at studying regularity properties of the free boundary in burnt-
unburnt mixtures. The results of this investigation will lead to a better
understanding of the models, to the improvement of simulation methods, and
ultimately to a description of how flames propagate in non-homogeneous media.
The P.I. has also a research program that lies at the interface of calculus of
variations, partial differential equations, and geometric measure theory. The
focus is on the study of analytic and geometric properties of solutions to
variational inequalities and pde's involving a system of non-commuting vector
fields. The problems described in the proposal not only arise in a variety of
mathematical context (e.g. optimal control theory, mathematical finance, and
geometry), but are also of interest in other fields such as mechanical
engineering and robotics.