* 0202812
* Midwest Geometry Conference:  2002-2004
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Anthony Ryan, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 01/31/2005
* USD 34,800.00

DMS-0202812&lt;br/&gt;L. Peterson, T. Branson, G. Jensen, G. Olafsson, A.
Ryan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for students and
active research&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians and scientists with limited means of
support to attend&lt;br/&gt;and participate in the 2002, 2003, and 2004 meetings
of the Midwest&lt;br/&gt;Geometry Conference. The award together with other
funding will cover&lt;br/&gt;all expenses of the plenary
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2002 conference will be held on the main
campus of the University&lt;br/&gt;of North Dakota (April 26-28) and will be
sponsored by the NSF, North&lt;br/&gt;Dakota EPSCoR, North Dakota State
University, and the University of&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota. The conference will
include the following four sessions&lt;br/&gt;and
speakers:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Lie Groups and Geometry. Speakers: Jiri Dadok
(Indiana), C. Robin Graham &lt;br/&gt;(Univ. of Washington), and Bernhard Kroetz
(Ohio State)&lt;br/&gt;2. Quantum Geometry and Topology. Speakers: Abhay
Ashtekar (Penn State, Physics),&lt;br/&gt;Louis Kauffman (Univ. of Illinois at
Chicago), and Jack Morava (Johns Hopkins Univ.)&lt;br/&gt;3. Geometric PDE.
Speakers: Sigurd Angenent (Wisconsin), Bennett Chow (Univ. of California, San
Diego),&lt;br/&gt;4. Gravitation. Speakers: Peter van Nieuwenhuizen (SUNY Stony
Brook, Physics),&lt;br/&gt;Andrew Waldron (Univ. of California,
Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers expect to recruit two additional
speakers. Further&lt;br/&gt;information is available at
http://www.und.nodak.edu/dept/math/mgc2002&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2003
conference will take place at Washington University in&lt;br/&gt;St. Louis,
probably in May. Gary Jensen, of Washington University, is&lt;br/&gt;the lead
organizer. Tentative conference plans include sessions on&lt;br/&gt;the
following four topics:&lt;br/&gt;1. Three-manifolds, hyperbolic geometry, and
geometric group theory&lt;br/&gt;2. Geometry, analysis, and probability on
discrete groups&lt;br/&gt;3. Minimal submanifolds&lt;br/&gt;4. Surface
immersions in space&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arkansas will host
the 2004 conference sometime in&lt;br/&gt;2004, most likely in the spring. John
Ryan, of the University of&lt;br/&gt;Arkansas, will be the lead organizer. A
tentative list of topics for&lt;br/&gt;the conference is as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. Nonlinear analysis on manifolds and metric
spaces&lt;br/&gt;2. Spinor geometry&lt;br/&gt;3. Geometric group
theory&lt;br/&gt;4. Non-commutative differential
geometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organizers of the 2003 and 2004 conferences will
develop more detailed&lt;br/&gt;plans in the months immediately preceding the
respective conferences.&lt;br/&gt;