* 0202923
* Enlist, Equip, and Empower (E3): An Integrated Program for Middle School Science Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,09/30/2008
* William Cobern, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2008
* USD 899,294.00

Michigan, like the rest of the nation, faces a critical shortage of qualified
middle school science teachers. This shortage reflects a complex set of
interrelated problems associated with recruiting new individuals into the
profession, preparing them to meet the needs of young adolescents, and providing
them with sufficient professional support during the crucial first few years of
their careers. This project models excellence in middle school science teacher
preparation as well as addressing local needs by developing programs that
comprise an integrated solution to these problems. Faculty and staff at Western
Michigan University, Lake Michigan College and Kalamazoo Valley Community
College and Kalamazoo, Portage and Vicksburg school districts are working
together in the pursuit of several distinct strategies aimed at:1) enlisting
motivated and qualified prospective middle school science teachers by promoting
teacher education programs at Western Michigan University, Lake Michigan
College, and Kalamazoo Valley Community College and disseminating this
information to K-12 counselors in participating school districts, 2) equipping
prospective middle school teachers by deepening and extending the program of
science content courses offered at these colleges that model effective teaching
strategies and meet their unique needs. This project is also creating a middle
school science minor, composed of specific inquiry-based science courses for
elementary teachers and science discipline courses for majors and minors, and 3)
empowering middle school science teachers by providing professional mentoring
and developing appropriate programs for novice teachers that address their needs
for additional content background and inquiry-based learning strategies.
Professional development meetings and workshops in the cooperating districts to
support novice teachers and their mentors are a part of the project. Workshops
for graduate credit through existing organizations are offered as well. In the
short term, implementation of this program is resulting in the creation of a new
middle science minor, enhanced science content courses, and professional
development meetings and workshops. Curricular materials from undergraduate and
graduate courses, as well as professional development meetings, are available
nationwide via written materials, seminars, and the world wide web. In the long
term, current research suggests that this comprehensive approach leads to
improved scores on teacher certification exams, increased participation of
teachers at regional and national meetings, lower teacher attrition rates, and
improved student scores on local, state, and national standardized exams.