* 0202477
* Compactness of Critical Metrics and Some Fully Nonlinear Equations in Conformal Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Jeff Viaclovsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 115,383.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0202477.

Jeff A. Viaclovsky's project has three parts. The first part is joint work with
Gang Tian, dealing with orbifold compactness of Bach flat metrics in dimension
4. The second part is joint work with Matt Gursky, and is about curvature
functionals and conformal deformation of curvatures in dimension 3. The third
part deals with existence of solutions to some fully nonlinear equations in
conformal geometry. The first project is to understand compactness properties of
the moduli space of critical points of the L2 norm of the Weyl tensor in 4
dimensions. The Euler-Lagrange equations are known as the Bach equations, and
there are many known solutions, for example, metrics that are locally
conformally Einsten, and self-dual or anti-self-dual metrics. Since it is known
that these metrics exist in abundance, it is an interesting problem to
understand the moduli space of solutions. The project of Viaclovsky and Tian is
to show that, with certain geometric conditions, one may compactify this space
by adding metrics with orbifold singularities. The other parts of the project
deal with fully nonlinear equations in conformal geometry. The goal is to
conformally deform a metric so that the kth elementary symmetric function of the
eigenvalues of the Schouten tensor is constant. This may be viewed as a fully
nonlinear generalization of the well-known Yamabe problem. An application of
this is to improve the curvature by conformal deformation. For example, given an
initial metric, conditions are found so that the metric can be conformally
deformed to positive sectional curvature.

The project with Tian generalizes some well-known results for Einstein metrics.
Einstein metrics are particularly interesting from the connection with
Eisteins's theory of general relativity, and the Bach equations are a natural
higher order generalization of the Einstein equation. The work in conformal
geometry is naturally conformally invariant and also has applications in physics
through conformal field theory. Firthermore, new notions of mass arise for these
equations, and this is also of interest in general relativity. These equations
also have applications to determining the topology of 3-manifolds, given some
geometric constraint on the curvature.