* 0202957
* South Carolina Middle School Science and Mathematics Teacher Recruitment, Certification and Retention Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Nathan Carnes, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2007
* USD 616,072.00

South Carolina is facing a critical shortage of properly prepared teachers of
science and mathematics at the middle school level. The state must recruit more
teachers into the profession, these teachers must be properly prepared for the
duties they will assume, and well-trained and experienced teachers must be
encouraged to remain in the classroom. To be successful in the middle school,
science and mathematics teachers must have a strong background in content as
well as pedagogy, and they must be familiar with the way students learn in the
middle years. In response to these needs, the University of South Carolina
College of Science and Mathematics and College of Education in collaboration
with selected middle schools in the Columbia, South Carolina Metropolitan area
are developing and evaluating a Science and Mathematics Middle School Teacher
Training program to provide pre-service middle school teachers of science and
mathematics with the content and pedagogy they require to successfully enter and
succeed in the teaching profession. The content portion of the program consists
of six new courses in science and three new courses in mathematics for pre-
service teachers. These courses are taught by content area faculty in
association with master middle school teachers and faculty from the College of
Education. The objective in each course is to provide the appropriate content
while modeling proper pedagogy and assessment strategies. In addition, the
project is designing a new professional education course in which the pre-
service teachers study and develop ways to describe what goes on in a classroom
and how it can influence the interests, learning, and social development of the
students. The future teachers observe middle school students and record what the
students are doing and how they set about learning the concepts presented to
them. The pre-service teachers also have the opportunity to take part in a
"rounds" program that allows them to observe and discuss exemplary teaching in
the middle school. Finally, the future teachers spend at least six hours each
week working with a middle school teacher. These experiences allow the new
teachers to enter their classrooms with a broad knowledge of how schools work,
how students react to learning, and how best to help students learn while they
cope with all of the changes occurring within them and around them. An important
part of the project is recruitment of additional candidates for the middle
school certification program in university science and mathematics classes and
in college transfer programs in Technical Colleges. &lt;br/&gt;