* 0202165
* Studies of Mesoscopic Spin Systems:   Magnetic Molecules and Formalism
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Anupam Garg, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 210,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education in the study of magnetic
macroscopic quantum phenomena and large magnetic molecules. The PI will
investigate: (a) the magnetic properties of solids containing large magnetic
molecules, (b) the semiclassical formalism for spin, and (c) unresolved physical
issues in magnetic macroscopic quantum phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;The observations of
hysteresis loop steps in the compounds commonly abbreviated&lt;br/&gt;Mn 12 and
Fe 8 and oscillatory tunnel splittings in Fe 8, have opened new areas for the
study of spin dynamics with novel interplays of quantal and classical behavior.
The PI will study these single molecule magnets, especially the way in which
they interact with their solid state environment. As an example, the PI will
study how the sound propagation in these materials is affected by the
magnetization dynamics, as a way of probing the latter. These studies are
expected to elucidate magnetic hysteresis at the molecular level and to lead to
ways of manipulating the dynamics of such systems. The formalism of the
semiclassical limit for spin will be studied with a view to remedying gaps in
present understanding. The physical origin of a rich and unexpected structure of
degeneracies that has been discovered in models for Fe 8 and rotating nuclei
will be sought. These degeneracies suggest an as yet undiscovered 'higher
symmetry.' The PI will also exploit connections between molecular magnets and
macroscopic quantum phenomena in magnets to examine outstanding questions that
may impact future attempts to look for magnetic macroscopic quantum phenomena.
This research also provides an environment for training of doctoral students at
the frontiers of theoretical condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in the study of magnetic macroscopic quantum phenomena and large
magnetic molecules. The work focuses on large molecules that have a large spin
associated with them. The spin is large enough that it can be considered to be
macroscopic, but at the same time small enough to exhibit various quantum
mechanical phenomena, such as quantum mechanical tunneling of the spin
orientation. Two examples of families of these large molecules are Mn12 and Fe8,
in a standard shorthand notation. The PI will investigate: (a) the magnetic
properties of solids containing large magnetic molecules, (b) the semiclassical
formalism for spin, and (c) unresolved physical issues in magnetic macroscopic
quantum phenomena. This work contributes to the intellectual foundation of
quantum mechanical and magnetic phenomena in real materials and may contribute
to future information and communication technologies. This research also
provides an environment for training of doctoral students at the frontiers of
theoretical condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;