* 0202309
* Research in Large Deviations and Applications to Statistical Mechanical Models of Turbulence
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Richard Ellis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Wen Chen Masters
* 07/31/2005
* USD 227,701.00

0202309 Ellis The main focus of this project is on the asymptotic analysis of
statistical mechanical models of turbulence, using powerful techniques in the
theory of large deviations as well as other areas of analysis. The research will
consider a number of problems, including the following: (1) a detailed study of
the equivalence and nonequivalence of statistical mechanical ensembles for a
wide range of models of turbulence; (2) an investigation of central-limit-type
fluctuations of the stochastic processes arising in the large deviation analysis
of the various ensembles; (3) a new approach, based on large deviation results
for Gaussian measures, to the asymptotic analysis of soliton turbulence governed
by the nonlinear Schroedinger equation; (4) a refinement, based on ideas arising
in the study of nonequivalence of ensembles, of classical results due to Arnold
on the nonlinear stability of flows for a class of partial differential
equations governing turbulence phenomena; (5) an analysis of a random walk model
having applications to queueing theory, communication theory, and stochastic
approximation. In the context of problems (1)-(4) the principal investigator
will develop mathematical tools that can be applied to one of the great unsolved
problems of the physical sciences, which is the understanding of turbulent fluid
flows. In this project the inherent unpredictability and randomness of turbulent
flows are studied via sophisticated probabilistic models based on the formalism
of statistical mechanics. The models are analyzed using techniques in the theory
of large deviations and probability theory, convex analysis, partial
differential equations, and other areas.