* 0202359
* Interdisciplinary Mathematics and Science Initiative for Developmental Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Timothy Dave, Chabot-Las Positas Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2006
* USD 488,247.00

This project establishes an interdisciplinary mathematics and science program
that engages students and faculty in real world technology projects. The goal is
to improve core mathematics and science education in an effort to better prepare
remedial two-year college students for higher-level coursework and careers in
technical fields. Instructional innovations integrate basic mathematics,
elementary algebra, introductory physics, and basic reading, writing, and study
skills. Activities include curriculum adaptation and implementation, industry
field experiences for community college faculty and students, and professional
development opportunities for regional community college instructors and K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its heart, this project remedies basic skill
deficits and fosters motivation for the pursuit of technical careers among a
regional student population increasingly under-prepared for college-level work
in mathematics and science. To accomplish this mission, this three year effort:
1) establishes a year-long interdisciplinary mathematics and science learning
community for developmental two-year college students that emphasizes problem
solving and collaborative learning strategies; 2) integrates faculty internships
and hands-on class projects into the curriculum to ensure workplace relevancy
and enhance student motivation; and 3) facilitates regional training and
dialogue activities for K-12 teachers and community college faculty, with an
emphasis on interdisciplinary teaching methods, technology applications, and
success strategies for underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chabot
College has established critical partnerships with the University of California,
Davis, Edward Teller Education Center (ETEC), Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory (LLNL), Sandia National Laboratories (SNL), and the Hayward Unified
School District to support this initiative. ETEC and the national laboratories
actively participate in curriculum modifications, faculty internships, and
hands-on student class projects in robotics, optics, and laser technologies.
Additionally, ETEC and the Hayward Unified School District collaborate on the
project's faculty enhancement activities. &lt;br/&gt;The project's underlying
mission is to increase students' educational and career options through
challenging, applications-oriented curriculum. Working collaboratively, this
project revitalizes core mathematics and science education at Chabot College and
serves as a model for developmental reform efforts.&lt;br/&gt;