* 0202383
* Virginia Advanced Technology Demonstration Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Diann Holt, Tidewater Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 07/31/2006
* USD 699,002.00

The Advanced Technology Education Demonstration Project (ATEDP) is structured to
take full advantage of the new Advanced Technology Center (ATC) in Norfolk, Va.
The ATC is located on Tidewater Community College's (TCC) Virginia Beach Campus.
This center is described as the most advanced joint workforce/technology project
in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The ATEDP brings together an initial consortium
of Tidewater Community College, the Virginia Beach City Public Schools, the
regional workforce investment board, three manufacturing business partners, and
the City of Virginia Beach to create shared curricula and materials for science
and engineering technology students in both high school and college.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATEDP improves the learning environment, course
content and learning experiences each year for 850 to 1,000 Virginia Beach high
school students enrolled at the ATC in CADD, industrial engineering technology,
and information systems technologies. New curricula and materials in the area of
Metrology, as well as the above technology areas, are also being used for about
800 Tidewater Community College students. The ATEDP provides intensive shared
professional development and technical experiences for high school and college
faculty in collaboration with the industrial employers. The new curriculum and
educational materials are being developed for articulated placement of students,
dual enrollment and distance education courses. High school students in these
curricula are able to earn a minimum of 12 credits toward an associate degree
while attending the ATC. TCC faculty are involved in completing laboratory-
intensive course content, including a distance education component, for a
recently approved metrology curriculum. The employer partners are providing
mentored, on-site internships for students, while the workforce investment board
continues to develop new employer partners, particularly in manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes/deliverables include:&lt;br/&gt;1) curricula for
articulated and/or dual enrollment courses, targeted to the
industry&lt;br/&gt;standard, which enables high school students to earn a
minimum of 12 college&lt;br/&gt;credits toward A.A.S. degrees in
Industrial/Manufacturing Engineering Technology,&lt;br/&gt;Information Systems
Technology, Computer Aided Drafting and Design or related&lt;br/&gt;options of
the A.A.S. degree in Technical Studies, while they are completing
their&lt;br/&gt;high school diplomas.&lt;br/&gt;2) content for a laboratory-
intensive metrology curriculum and at least six new or&lt;br/&gt;upgraded
modules for other courses in the identified curricula not scheduled
for&lt;br/&gt;implementation as dual enrollment and/or articulated
courses.&lt;br/&gt;3) relevant, mentored, 80-hour or longer work site
experiences for both high school&lt;br/&gt;and other TCC students.&lt;br/&gt;4)
an 80 percent pass rate for those students who attempt regional and
national&lt;br/&gt;certifications after completing the relevant courses and
taking the certification&lt;br/&gt;exams.&lt;br/&gt;5) detailed plans for
implementing the reforms in the other three school systems in
the&lt;br/&gt;college service area and for disseminating them nationally.