* 0202396
* California Regional Consortium for Engineering Advances in Technological Education (CREATE) Center for Information & Manufacturing Technologies
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Kathleen Alfano, College of the Canyons
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2007
* USD 2,820,413.00

The CREATE Center is a joint effort between seven community colleges, five
universities, and over fifty employers in a regional approach to educate the
workforce in new technological advances in a wide range of high demand
information and manufacturing technologies. The consortium members serve a large
portion of coastal and central California of over 9,000 square miles,
representing a population of over one million. Two previous NSF-ATE projects
have educated over 4,000 students, developed and implemented 30 new degree
programs and 105 new courses, and facilitated more than a million dollars in
additional funding through innovative industry and college partnerships.

The goals of the Center are: 1. Increase pools of trained teachers for both
Information Technology and Manufacturing Technology. An award winning training
program (Hesburgh Certificate of Excellence) at College of the Canyons has been
adapted to a three-year model to train part-time teachers from industry to be
pedagogically strong and adept classroom teachers. 2. Increase feeder programs
at the high school level. Summer hands-on workshops for high school faculty and
academic year mentoring give high school faculty easy to use electronics
kits/modules to incorporate back at their schools. 3. Increase Bachelor's level
transfer programs that both articulate and are accessible with the new
technology Associate degree programs. Five universities are working with CREATE
to not only develop strong articulation between all the programs, but to also
begin to offer BS programs on-site at the community college campus, a University
Center concept already successfully pilot tested at College of the Canyons and
now at Allan Hancock College. 4. Create an organized system for developing,
documenting (through student portfolio), and implementing work site internship
experiences for both Information Technology and Manufacturing Technology. 5.
Develop, adapt, and implement regionally programs in network security, wireless
and telecommunications technologies and more problem-based, modularized
manufacturing technology curricula and standardization 6. Evaluate and contrast
the learning, workplace competencies, and pass rate in industry certification
programs of students who complete technical certifications in on-line (learner-
centered vs. traditional) vs. in-class formats. 7. Implement a model evaluation
that is going to follow both past and future students as they enter and
participate in the workplace and/or transfer to measure longitudinally the
success of the educational experience for all stakeholders, including colleges,
students, and employers.

The CREATE Center colleges and their partners act as demonstration sites for
curricula implementation, regional meetings, teacher training, and continue to
foster the consortium partnerships to deliver the best set of skilled
technicians for the region. All curricula and material developed both in
technical and teacher training is available to any college who would like to
adapt them to their needs. Dissemination includes conference presentations,
publications, and center web site.