* 0202048
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  A Research Infrastructure for Collaborative, High-Performance Grid Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* David Wise, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,311,875.00

0202048&lt;br/&gt;Wise, David S.&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University -
Bloomington&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;RI: A Research Infrastructure for
Collaborative, High-Performance Grid Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing an experimental infrastructure for distributed high
performance computing, supports ten research projects extending the location-
transparency that the Grid provides for computation resources to the full
spectrum of activities which end-users require. Services being explored include
software development, parallel code middleware, distributed software components
for scientific computing, security for parallel remote method invocation,
&lt;br/&gt;managing large-scale data streams, and collaboration methodologies.
The research builds on and extends the institutions collaborations with several
national Grid research teams. In contrast to existing national and university
infrastructure available through production machines, this research requires an
environment tolerant of experimental network protocols, temporary middleware,
and other system-level changes. The infrastructure will contribute to the
following research projects:&lt;br/&gt;a. Opie: basic work on parallel matrix
algorithms that achieve high efficiency across many architectural
platforms&lt;br/&gt;b. LAM: middleware MPI implementations supporting
hierarchical and fault-tolerant parallel computing&lt;br/&gt;c. dQUOB:
application of SQL queries to live data streams&lt;br/&gt;d. RMI Security: basic
research into security mechanisms for remote method invocation, allowing
security to be traded off with efficiency&lt;br/&gt;e. HPJ: High Performance
Java creating a language platform for portable high performance
coding&lt;br/&gt;f. Grid Broker: reliable, robust publish/subscribe service for
introducing fault tolerance into the distributed Grid environment&lt;br/&gt;g.
Community Grids Collaboratory: advanced collaboration capabilities with
applications to both distance education and distributed communities&lt;br/&gt;h.
Xports: design of methodologies for remote instrument access and data management
of the resulting extremely large data sets&lt;br/&gt;i. Software Components:
distributed software component model designed for applications that use parallel
computing "nodes" in wide-area Grid environments&lt;br/&gt;j. Science Portals:
set of tools that allow programmers to build Grid distributed applications
accessed and controlled from desktop environments and web
browsers&lt;br/&gt;Major improvements to infrastructure supporting all these
projects include a 16-node cycle server and a large-scale file server as well as
network upgrades to and within the building. &lt;br/&gt;