* 0202185
* Computational Studies of the Rotational Structure of Atomic and Molecular Clusters with Weak Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* David Farrelly, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 04/30/2005
* USD 290,000.00

David Farrelly of Utah State University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to use diffusion Monte Carlo (DCM) methods to
study the rotational structure of atomic and molecular clusters with weak
interactions. The major project goal is to develop new computational approaches
for examining large amplitude rotational dynamics of impurity molecules and
cluster impurities in liquid helium nanodroplets, as in helium nanodroplet
isolation spectroscopy. The new techniques will be generally applicable to
rotational structure of assemblages of rigid top molecules in helium droplets or
in the gas phase. Also, investigations will continue into ultrahigh molecular
Rydberg states, with applications to zero electron-kinetic energy (ZEKE)
spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important task in theoretical chemistry
is the computation of properties of matter in unusual or extreme situations. It
is often under such conditions that new and interesting properties come to
light. Nanodroplets of superfluid liquid helium provide such an environment to
explore molecules or small, weakly bound clusters of molecules inserted into
them. Such droplets have been called the ultimate spectroscopic matrix, because
of their very low temperatures and the weak influence they exert on the dopant
molecules under study. These nanodroplets present significant opportunities to
understand new properties of matter and fundamental solvent effects.