* 0202799
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  A Biochemical and Molecular Investigation of Piezophilic Bacterial Adaptation to the Deep-Sea High Pressure Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Jiasong Fang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 05/31/2006
* USD 30,665.00

0202799&lt;br/&gt;Fang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
collaborative research project between Professor Jiasong Fang at Iowa State
University and Dr. Chiaki Kato at the Japan Marine Science and Technology Center
(JAMSTEC) in Kanagawa, Japan. The researchers will undertake a study of the
biochemical and molecular investigation of piezophilic bacterial adaptation to
the deep-sea high-pressure environment. They will investigate the biosynthesis
of fatty acids and pyospholipids in piezophilic bacteria in response to high
pressures. Specific objectives include: 1) determine the source (de novo
synthesis vs. dietary uptake) of the membrane fatty acids in different
piezophilic bacteria; 2) elucidate the extent of coupling between fatty acid and
phospholipid synthesis and determine if molecular retailoring (acylation-
reacylation) is utilized by piezophilic bacteria in regulating membrane lipid
composition; 3) determine the variation of the ratios of different classes of
phospholipids associated with growth under selected temperatures and pressures;
and 4) conduct molecular cloning and sequencing of EPA and DHA biosynthetic
pathways in piezophilic bacteria and analyze molecular mechanisms of the gene
expression and regulation of fatty acid and phospholipid synthesis in
piezophiles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the
efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
capabilities. Dr. Fang's expertise is in lipid biochemistry and instrumental
analysis and Dr. Kato's expertise is in isolation and cultivation of piezophilic
bacteria as well as in molecular genetic analysis. Results of the project will
broaden our understanding on the mechanisms of lipid biosynthesis in different
types of piezophilic bacteria in response to pressures and answer if microbial
synthesis of polyunsaturated fatty acids is a widely occurring phenomenon in the
marine environment. In addition, the research will increase our understanding of
the environmental contexts conductive to the maintenance of life on Earth or
extraterrestrial planets. The project will also provide a unique opportunity for
multidisciplinary exposure to an undergraduate student. Throughout the project,
results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scholarly
conferences and meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;