* 0202171
* The Central New York to Puerto Rico-Mayaguez (CNY-PR) Alliance for Graduate Education
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Howard Johnson, Syracuse University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,550,000.00

2. Project Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this age of accelerated
technological advances, increasing career specialization and extremely
competitive job opportunities, society has a vested interest in promoting
graduate and professional education as never before. The need for specialized
knowledge and the acquisition of professional credentials place increasingly
high demands on all college graduates, yet documented evidence shows that there
exists a disparity in the opportunities for certain populations to gain access
to programs conferring advanced degrees in science, mathematics and engineering
(SME). Member institutions in the alliance spearheaded by Syracuse University
with the collaboration of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Cornell University,
and Puerto Rico-Mayaguez called the Central New York to Puerto Rico-Mayagilez
(CNY-PR) are prepared to confront the challenge of making graduate study more
available to reportedly underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CNY-PR alliance is based on mutual commitment to research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students, faculty development programs in an
environment where recruitment, retention and mentoring are essential. The CNY-PR
alliance brings valuable experience and resources for the enhancement of
minority graduate education that will contribute to the diversification of the
professoriate. The CNY-PR alliance goal is to use holistic approaches to
substantially increase minority SME Ph.D. degree recipients entering academic
positions. The CNY-PR alliance proposes the following objectives to achieve its
goals:&lt;br/&gt;0 Provide inter-institutional engaging research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students&lt;br/&gt;0 Review and recommend innovative
measures and guidelines for graduate admission criteria 0 Aggressively recruit
and retain excellent minority students to ' the alliance
institutions&lt;br/&gt;Provide multi-year funding package for accepted minority
graduate students&lt;br/&gt;Expand professoriate and mentor training programs to
alliance institutions&lt;br/&gt;Develop and implement continuous assessment
tools to evaluate the alliance's objectives&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each component
of the program builds on the previous, creating a corridor the student moves
through that motivates, guides, and supports from K-12 to Ph.D. to a successful
career in academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The alliance institutions
are excited about this program, and have begun laying the groundwork. External
funding from industry is already being sought to ensure the continuous
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;