* 0202113
* Coexisting Bose & Fermi Superfluids and Fermi Liquid Transport in the Presence of Disorder
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Jeevak Parpia, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2006
* USD 390,000.00

This low temperature physics project will investigate the behavior of 3He, and
phase-separated mixtures of 3He and 4He, in Aerogel. Aerogel, a dilute glass
that occupies between 0.1% and 3% of the volume is the only means by which a
structural "disorder" can be introduced to the 3He. One project will examine
flow and the onset of dissipation (the breakdown of superfluidity) in this
disordered superfluid. Magnetic resonance will be used to characterize the
superfluidity of isolated "bubbles" of superfluid 3He trapped in the isotope
mixtures. This will establish dimensional constraints that may limit
superfluidity. These demanding experiments, which involve cutting edge
instrumentation and development of new techniques, provide a challenging
environment where graduate students and post-doctoral researchers acquire skills
and analytic tools to prepare them for careers in the Nation's scientific and
technological infrastructure.

Liquid 3He, available only near "absolute zero" is one of the purest materials
that can be prepared by any means. Impurities simply freeze out during the
arduous cooling and liquefaction procedures required to obtain the liquid. Like
its more abundant sister isotope 4He, 3He can be obtained in a "superfluid"
state. But the superfluid is complicated by the magnetism of the 3He atoms, each
of which acts like a tiny compass needle. The atoms themselves undergo mutual
orbital motion, and their compass needles pair up in various ways depending on
the orbital motion of the atoms. Because of its complex magnetic character, the
superfluid properties of 3He are of fundamental interest, and in some
circumstances can be related to more common phenomena like the flow of electrons
in a wire. One project under this award will study how the ultra pure superfluid
3He changes when it is diluted and 'disordered' by the addition of Aerogel, a
dilute glass that occupies less than 2% of the total volume of the container.
The disorder introduced into the helium changes the orbital motions of 'paired'
atoms, and in some conditions of temperature and pressure can destroy
superfluidity altogether. The research will also look for changes in the pairing
when the helium is confined to small "bubbles", which approximate a so-called
zero-dimensional superfluid "dot". Finally the effects of fluid flow on the
disordered superfluid will be examined with the objective of detecting energy
dissipation, analogous to heating of a wire by current flow. This is signaled by
loss of superfluidity. Besides adding to the understanding of quantum systems
and superfluid flow, this research provides a demanding experimental environment
that educates and trains graduate students and post-doctoral researchers for
successful careers in the Nation's scientific and technological infrastructure.

