* 0202508
* Differential Geometry by way of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Peter Li, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2005
* USD 224,999.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0202508.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first proposed project is to
understand the topology of complete manifolds &lt;br/&gt;whose Ricci curvature
is bounded from below by a negative multiple of the bottom &lt;br/&gt;of the
spectrum of the Laplace operator. In this case, the bottom of the spectrum
&lt;br/&gt;is assumed to be positive. The second project of the Principal
Investigator is to &lt;br/&gt;investigate the size of the space of harmonic
functions with polynomial growth on &lt;br/&gt;complete manifolds with non-
negative sectional curvature. In particular, &lt;br/&gt;the primary goal is to
prove that the dimension of the space of harmonic functions &lt;br/&gt;of
polynomial growth with degree at most d is bounded by the dimension of an
&lt;br/&gt;analogous space in Euclidean space of the same dimension. The third
project is &lt;br/&gt;to understand the geometry of stable minimal hypersurfaces
of Euclidean space. &lt;br/&gt;More generally, he would like to study minimal
hypersurfaces with have finite index. &lt;br/&gt;The PI also proposes to support
a postdoc, Dr. Xiaofeng Sun, in his research projects. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sun
proposes to study the regularity theory of harmonic maps into a metric space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These proposed projects have the unified theme
of using analytical techniques in &lt;br/&gt;studying the underlining geometric
spaces. In many instances, topological and &lt;br/&gt;geometrical conclusions
can be drawn by detail analysis of solutions of some &lt;br/&gt;appropriate
partial differential equations defined on the space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;