* 0202687
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Climate Implications of Interbasin Exchange Along Black Sea-Mediterranean Corridor
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Candace Major, Major                   Candace        O
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 02/29/2004
* USD 97,278.00

0202687 Major

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Candace O.
Major to work with Dr. Laurent Labeyrie at the Laboratoire des Sciences du
Climat et de l'Environnement in Gif/Yvette, France.

For this project, Dr. Major will use paleoceanographic proxies, including
isotopes of strontium, oxygen, and carbon, and trace elements such as strontium,
magnesium, and barium, in material from giant piston cores with the goal of
determining the evolution of the Mediterranean-Black Sea corridor. Such data
will provide valuable paleoclimatic information. Knowledge of the effects of
past climate change on the continents is crucial to our understanding of how
future climate change will impact our environment. Inland basins, such as the
Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara, are at the interface between continents and
oceans, and are unique windows into the terrestrial climate record. Recently, a
joint French-Turkish research expedition recovered a suite of long sediment
cores from the Sea of Marmara. Examination of these cores (which are archived in
Turkey) will allow for the first time a high-resolution study of the last
several glacial cycles in this corridor.

In addition to collaborating with Dr. Labeyrie, Dr. Major will work with Dr.
Namik Cagatay at Istanbul Technical University in Turkey. Dr. Labeyrie is
Chairman of the International Marine Global Change Study program, which is an
international effort to get paleoceanographers from over 25 countries to combine
efforts in retrieving and studying giant sediment cores. Their goal is to better
understand the role of the oceans and ice in rapid climate changes.