* 0202487
* Rugged, Compact, Modular OEIC Co-Processor
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Cardinal Warde, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2007
* USD 470,993.00

The objective of this research program is to develop algorithms and
architectures, and fabricate and demonstrate a rugged, compact, modular,
versatile, opt electronic, integrated-circuit (OEIC) neural network and fuzzy
logic coprocessor system that would work in conjunction with the standard PC
microprocessor. This OEIC co-processor will perform sophisticated parallel
and/or fuzzy processing operations more efficiently than the standard PC
microprocessor. The proposed OElC co-processor will be about the size of a CD-
ROM drive, and thus would fit easily inside the case of a conventional personal
computer. Another important goal of the program is that this compact OEIC co-
processor be amenable to mass manufacturing.

To demonstrate the feasibility of the co-processor, the proposed hardware
development tasks include: (I) design, fabrication and characterization of novel
2-D arrays of GaAs-SOS (silicon-on sapphire) OEIC cascadable smart pixels with a
detector, integrated-circuit logic and a light source in each pixel (resonant
cavity light-emitting diodes (RCLEDs) in the first two years of the program, and
vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) replacing the RCLEDs in the
third year), (2) design, fabrication and characterization of novel
reconfigurable optical interconnection elements based on arrays of Bragg-
holographic phase gratings, (3) aligning (with the help of a mask aligner) and
gluing all the components of the co-processor (OEICs. interconnection elements,
and output photodetector array) together into a rugged, compact, modular multi-
layer sandwich configuration so as to permanently solve any micro-optics
alignment problems, and (4) characterizing the resulting high-speed, multilayer
optoelectronic co-processor. The early focus of the program will be on neural
network configurations. So in addition to the above-mentioned fabrication tasks,
the PI will also carry' out the following theoretical, modeling and simulation
tasks: (a) develop algorithms, especially those suitable for programmable
nearest-neighbor interconnections (e.g. pulse-coupled networks) to solve a large
class of multi-dimensional information processing problems, and (b) explore the
application of these novel co-processors to three different types of problems:
(i) associative-memory-based pattern recognition, (ii) medical image
segmentation and (iii) fusion of a set of low-contrast spectro-polarimetric
infrared images into a single high-contrast image.