* 0202093
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Territorial Economy and the Politics of Agro-Industry in California's North Coast Wine District
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Richard Walker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 08/31/2003
* USD 8,827.00

Previous research on industrial districts has shown that interaction,
cooperation, and collaboration are crucial elements to innovation and regional
industrial success. However, this previous research has focused primarily on the
regional organization and operation of craft and manufacturing industries; it
has not examined how social power and strategy are fundamental to regional
industries or investigated how the institutions and practices of industrial
districts might operate in an agro-industrial context. This doctoral
dissertation research project will contribute to this field by investigating the
contemporary policies, politics and operation of agro-industry in California. It
will focus on the North Coast Wine District, in particular, Napa and Sonoma
counties. The project will determine the character and extent of cooperation,
learning and interaction often identified in the research literature with craft
industries. It seeks to understand the more complex interaction of industrial
districts. The research will highlight how social power derived from economic
performance underpins the operation of the industry. It will also delineate how
political action, self-organization, community participation, governance,
leadership and cooperation are necessary for industrial preservation in a
rapidly changing production region like the North Coast Wine District, a region
under significant and increasing development pressure and experiencing related
development and land-use conflicts. Data will be collected through a survey and
interviews with winery owners, grape growers, and vineyard managers. Additional
interviews will be conducted with other industry representatives, government
officials, and activists. This information will be combined with material
collected from archival sources (government documents, library collections, and
other records), and with statistical analysis of regional and industrial
indicators. A commodity chain approach will be used to map the regional supply,
production and distribution networks of a random sample of wine firms to
determine their geographic extent. In addition, an ethnographic approach will be
used to trace the professional histories of winery entrepreneurs, grape growers
and vineyard managers to measure the extent of their interaction, learning by
doing, formal industry participation, and understand the industry's power
relations. Comparative case studies will round out the analysis by exploring how
industry participants and other regional centers of power, such as new rural
residents, tourists, developers, and other farmers, conflict in some cases, and
collaborate in other cases involving industry-related policy development and
land use in the two counties.

The project is expected to provide new knowledge of the North Coast wine
industry, its regional context, and its social basis. It will contribute to on-
going theoretical debates and understandings of the process of regional agro-
industrial development and change in rural areas. It will inform and assist
rural policy makers by examining what kinds of practices and policies generate
competitive industry, innovation and regional learning, and what sorts of
processes are capable of negotiating conflicting development objectives among
diverse interests. More generally it will provide new information on how rural
regions and industries respond to broader forces like globalization and
urbanization. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.