* 0202231
* SGER:  The Impact of the September 11, 2001,  Terrorist Attacks on American Metropolitan Household Decisions to Stay in the Same Residence, to Remodel, or to Move
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2003
* Elena Irwin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2003
* USD 39,396.00

Under normal conditions, American metropolitan areas are subject to constant
change. These changes are the product of a complex set of cause-effect
interactions among different systems, with each contributing factors acting to
differing degrees in different settings. All of these factors have contributed
to the expansion of areal metropolitan areas. Among the dynamic processes
occurring in metropolitan areas are the myriad decisions of households regarding
whether to stay in their current residence or to move. One conceptualization of
this kind of household decision posits that a threshold exists beyond which
households find the strains of remaining in their current housing unit to be too
great, thereby leading them to decide to move to a different unit. Changes in
lifestyles and in the perceived characteristics of neighborhoods also have been
found to affect household mobility decisions significantly. One of the strongest
influences on mobility is the perceived safety of a neighborhood. Extant notions
regarding safety and security received a profound shock on September 11, 2001,
however, when terrorists destroyed the World Trade Center in New York City and
attacked the Pentagon near Washington DC. These events directly affected
thousands of people, but millions watched in horror as events unfolded again and
again. Follow-up reports on television, on radio, in newspapers, and via other
media kept the events constantly in mind. Almost no one in the U.S. remained
untouched. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support a post-
September 11 study of household attitudes to determine the degree to which
householder perceptions of the safety and security may have altered their
locational decision making. The project will consist of a new survey of nearly
2,000 households in the Columbus, Ohio, metropolitan area. The survey will build
on a mail survey of a random sample of Franklin County homeowners conducted
during the Summer of 2001. That survey asked questions about housing and
neighborhood satisfaction and desires, mobility and remodeling plans, and
household demographic characteristics. The responses from the survey were
combined with county auditor records, so that the resulting data set contained
physical information about the housing unit as well as the survey answers from
the nearly 50 percent of the randomly drawn sample that responded. The original
research plan called for using these data to study the influence of household
and neighborhood-level characteristics on normal urban processes of growth and
change. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research support a follow-up inquiry
that will proposal requests funds to add eight to ten questions to the original
survey and immediately send it to a new random sample of Franklin County
homeowner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on residential mobility responses to
hazards has shown that the standard demographic predictors of mobility have it
stronger influence on movement patterns than perceptions or attitudes about the
hazard. The events of September 11 were unique in the nation's history, however.
Nearly all U.S. households experienced the events through the media and may now
view their own cities as hazards -- as places where terrorists may attack. This
project will examine what effect these events have had on households' attitudes
towards their home, neighborhood, and likelihood of moving by collecting
additional survey data on homeowners' attitudes and comparing these responses to
data gathered via the same survey of homeowners just prior to September 11th.
This pre- and post-event information provides a unique opportunity to examine
the impact that this kind of event may have on the decisions that households
make about their housing and will shed light on whether such events could shape
the spatial structure of American cities and regions in the future.&lt;br/&gt;