* 0202675
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Surface Forces Between Two Oil Drops in Aqueous Solutions:  Measurements and Interpretation Using Atomic Force Microscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Raymond Dagastine, Dagastine               Raymond        R
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 08/31/2004
* USD 103,956.00

0202675 Dagastine

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Raymond
R. Dagastine to work with Dr. Franz Grieser at the Particulate Fluids Processing
Center at the University of Melbourne in Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The goal of this project is to quantitatively study forces between two oil drops
in the presence of a variety of different types of emulsifiers and surface-
active additives. The PI will develop an experimental approach to measure these
forces directly using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and a theoretical framework
for interpretation of these measurements. The approach builds on his work on the
interpretation of measurements between a single oil drop interacting with a
rigid probe. The additives and emulsifiers that are common in industrial
processes are commonly amphiphilic molecules, which partition themselves in the
oil-water interface. Adsorption to the interface can be competitive or
cooperative and the increased mobility of these absorbed species can provide
different force behavior than that of the same species absorbed at solid-liquid
interfaces. This work will provide correlation between additives and emulsifiers
in oil-water emulsions and the interparticle between drops, leading to insight
in formulation, emulsion stability, and processing. Understanding of the
interaction forces between liquid-liquid interfaces, where attraction between
droplets can lead to coalesce and phase separation in emulsions, is vital to
predict and model emulsion stability in processing and storage situations.

The Particulate Fluids Processing Center is part of the world-leading program in
colloidal and interfacial science research that has been established at the
University of Melbourne for more than twenty years. Dr. Grieser is a leader in
making AFM measurements at liquid-liquid interfaces.