* 0202848
* The Development of Three New Five-Year BA/MA Programs in Secondary Science Teaching Emphasizing Inquiry Learning and Integration of Pedagogy and Science Content
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Stephen DeMeo, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2007
* USD 794,346.00

Hunter College is addressing the need for effective secondary teachers of
science with the creation of three new five-year BA/MA teacher-training programs
in biology, chemistry, and physics. The new BA/MA programs include six central
courses designed to substantially integrate discipline and pedagogy content. The
development of these courses draws on the considerable experience of the science
and education faculty with integration and inquiry gained during the
construction of the 23-credit, integrated chemistry/physics/mathematics course
for entering freshmen. The six central courses of the BA/MA programs are being
designed by collaborative teams of faculty from the School of Education, faculty
from the science departments, and high school teachers. A central theme in the
new programs is training the future teachers to think and act like scientists
through the use of inquiry. The preservice students experience inquiry in their
early science courses, continue to gain practice with inquiry in many of their
teacher training courses, and are required to use inquiry in their student
teaching experiences. Recruitment is a significant component of the program.
Early opportunities for students to participate in teaching experiences are
provided and mechanisms are established to alter the climate in the science
departments, broadening the focus to include careers in education. Support for
newly graduated teachers in their classroom environment include a mentoring
program and an outreach to Assistant Principals to build a community that can
function as local support for the use of inquiry in the classroom. Approximately
fifty new teachers are expected to graduate from this program in the fourth year
of the funding period. These science teachers will be fully prepared to use
inquiry pedagogy in their class-rooms, and will be supported locally at their
high school and by Hunter College faculty mentors so that they can successfully
translate their learning into classroom practice.