* 0202834
* Boundary-Value Problems for New Classes of Nonlinearly Elastic Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Cornelius Horgan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 270,538.00

Proposal: DMS-0202834&lt;br/&gt;PI: Cornelius O. Horgan&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;Title: Boundary-value problems for new classes
of nonlinearly elastic materials
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will study
mathematical boundary-value problems in continuum mechanics for new classes of
nonlinear elastic constitutive models describing the mechanical behavior of
rubber-like materials undergoing large strains. The material models exhibit
strain hardening at large strains, in contrast to the classic models used in the
literature. In the molecular theory of elasticity, the models to be investigated
are called non-Gaussian, because they involve a distribution function for the
end-to-end distance of the polymer chain composing the material that is non-
Gaussian. From the phenomenological point of view, the models can be divided
into two classes: models with limiting chain extensibility and power-law models.
The former have the feature that a stress singularity occurs at the limiting
strain and thus offer new mathematical challenges. It is proposed to use
theories of nonlinear continuum mechanics to analyze some fundamental mechanical
problems for these materials. These challenging problems will be formulated as
boundary-value problems for nonlinear ordinary and partial differential
equations, the latter involving second-order quasilinear elliptic partial
differential equations and coupled systems of such equations. Since the stress
response of nonlinearly elastic material models with limiting chain
extensibility is significantly different from that of classical models currently
used in science and engineering practice, the proposed research should have
important practical implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here is
relevant to the mechanical behavior of rubber and rubber-like materials (of
critical importance to the automotive, aerospace and defense industries) as well
as to the behavior of biological soft tissues including both natural and tissue
derived engineered biomaterials. In industrial practice, finite-element based
large-scale commercial computer codes are based primarily on classical material
models and their predictions for rubber-like materials at large strains warrant
reassessment. In particular, fracture of rubber leading to automobile and
aircraft tire degradation is an important current technological problem to which
the proposed work will contribute. Applications to biological materials include
the study of arterial wall mechanics with emphasis on the role of strain
hardening in the development of cardiovascular disease. The work is
interdisciplinary involving modern methods of engineering mechanics, applied
mathematics and physics. Fundamental mathematical studies of the type proposed
here are necessary to ensure the safe reliable utilization of rubber-like
materials in modern technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;