* 0202851
* Topics in Stochastic Control, Portfolio Optimization and Credit Risk Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Lidia Filus, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 85,000.00

0202851&lt;br/&gt;Bielecki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be
organized into two principal &lt;br/&gt;research areas: 1) Development of
mathematical theory for risk &lt;br/&gt;adjusted portfolio optimization and
fixed income investment &lt;br/&gt;management, incorporating factor modeling of
security returns, &lt;br/&gt;and 2) Development of mathematical theory for
credit risk &lt;br/&gt;valuation and hedging. There are three fundamental
aspects of the &lt;br/&gt;first research area: 1A) The concept of risk adjusted
control &lt;br/&gt;(optimization) criteria for investment problems with finite
and &lt;br/&gt;infinite planning horizons. More specifically, we shall continue
to &lt;br/&gt;develop theory and applications for mean-variance stochastic
&lt;br/&gt;control. This kind of control problems is appealing to financial
&lt;br/&gt;industry as it extends to more realistic dynamic framework the
&lt;br/&gt;classical approach of Harry Markowitz (1990 Nobel Prize in
&lt;br/&gt;Economics). 1B) Development of control methodologies for the
&lt;br/&gt;fixed income investment problems with finite planning horizon
&lt;br/&gt;coinciding with the maturity of the underlying bond. We shall
&lt;br/&gt;attempt to overcome certain singularity problems arising in this
&lt;br/&gt;context, which will lead to derivation of applicable fixed income
&lt;br/&gt;investment strategies. 1C) Explicit consideration given to
statistical &lt;br/&gt;estimation issues. Optimal control methodologies are
rarely used in &lt;br/&gt;the financial industry, largely because of statistical
difficulties &lt;br/&gt;associated with the estimation of constant drift
coefficients in &lt;br/&gt;diffusion process models of individual securities.
Practitioners &lt;br/&gt;typically channel their energies into forecasting
security returns &lt;br/&gt;based upon exogenous factors such as interest rates
and firm-&lt;br/&gt;specific accounting measures. The proposed research will
serve to &lt;br/&gt;reduce the gap between theory and practice by developing
&lt;br/&gt;optimization models, which explicitly incorporate exogenous
&lt;br/&gt;factors. By explicitly modeling the dependence of the assets on
&lt;br/&gt;factors, it will be possible to obtain more realistic models, to
better &lt;br/&gt;understand the statistical estimation difficulties, and to be
in a &lt;br/&gt;position to apply adaptive control methods. The fundamental
&lt;br/&gt;aspects of the second research area are: 2A) Explicit consideration
&lt;br/&gt;given to possibility of credit migrations of defaultable contingent
&lt;br/&gt;claims. This will be done in the context of conditionally Markov
&lt;br/&gt;chains both with regard to a single defaultable claim as well as
&lt;br/&gt;with regard to several such claims. The latter situation is very
&lt;br/&gt;important for applications to basket credit derivatives. 2B)
&lt;br/&gt;Development of mathematical theory for hedging of certain classes
&lt;br/&gt;of credit derivatives that are vital for financial industry. This
will &lt;br/&gt;be done in the context of martingale representations associated
&lt;br/&gt;with conditionally Markov chains. 2C) Development of analytical
&lt;br/&gt;tools for computation of certain class of functionals of conditional
&lt;br/&gt;Markov processes. This will build upon the classical Feynman-Kac
&lt;br/&gt;characterizations, and will find applications for valuation and
&lt;br/&gt;hedging of some fundamental (basket) credit derivatives such as
&lt;br/&gt;default swaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the proposed research
will require fundamental advances &lt;br/&gt;within the areas of applied
mathematics, probability, and financial &lt;br/&gt;economics, it is anticipated
that the proposed research will lead to &lt;br/&gt;new and practical tools that
eventually become widely used in the &lt;br/&gt;financial industry, and possibly
in the insurance industry as well. &lt;br/&gt;The main reason for this
expectation is that the proposed research &lt;br/&gt;addresses the need of the
two industries for quantitative &lt;br/&gt;methodologies that would enable
financial and insurance decision &lt;br/&gt;makers to properly manage certain
categories of risks. The major &lt;br/&gt;implication of incidence of risks in
financial/insurance decision-&lt;br/&gt;making is the possibility of financial
losses. In general, neither the &lt;br/&gt;possibility of financial losses, nor
their occasional severity, can be &lt;br/&gt;completely eliminated. However,
workable tools, such as pricing &lt;br/&gt;and hedging strategies, are sought
for controlling some of the risks &lt;br/&gt;underlying financial and insurance
industries, so that both the &lt;br/&gt;possibility and severity of losses are
kept to minimum. The &lt;br/&gt;proposed research will provide mathematical
basis for &lt;br/&gt;development of such tools.&lt;br/&gt;