* 0202398
* SpaceTEC National Center of Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Patricia Cunniff, Eastern Florida State College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2006
* USD 2,984,902.00

&lt;br/&gt;A nation's success in any economic sector is directly related to the
strength of its educational system, and the aerospace industry is no exception.
To address the need for skilled technicians and to spur student interest and
motivation to study, Community Colleges for Innovative Technology Transfer
(CCITT) is establishing SpaceTEC, a national Aerospace Science Technical
Education Center of Excellence under the NSF's ATE Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of SpaceTEC is to be the focal point for
technical education resources featuring aerospace, providing motivation for
academic studies and professional development services for faculty, students,
and aerospace employees. The mission of SpaceTEC is to create and implement an
industry-driven, government-endorsed, technical education process for aerospace
technicians that can be shared with other educational venues. The goals of
SpaceTEC are to foster interest in science, mathematics, and technology
education in the U.S., and to provide education for the technical workforce
using a national alliance of representatives from business and industry,
government, and academic institutions. The strategy is to formalize aerospace
technician education nationally, establish a skills-based standards program that
has industry-wide support, and infuse aerospace themes into other areas of
study. Methods include regional and national advisory committees, national
articulation among K-12 and post-secondary institutions, a national professional
development organization, a formal certification process, innovative faculty
development, resources for national dissemination, and coordinated curriculum
development. Instructional materials with aerospace themes are being shared with
non-aerospace disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nine CCITT member colleges
participating in this initiative are affiliated with a NASA center or Department
of Defense location. Together they enroll over 400,000 students annually. United
Space Alliance is an industry partner providing a co-principal investigator.
CCITT colleges are each leading one or more of the elements of the national
program, and Brevard Community College is serving serve as the fiscal agent and
Center manager. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal reviews are being provided by a
National Aerospace Technology Advisory Committee, with representatives from
advisory committees affiliated with CCITT colleges. External review is by
representatives from the Air Force Academy, the Air Force Institute of
Technology, and a National Visiting Committee (NVC). The NVC includes members of
industry, academia, and government groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
several major benefits from a national Center. Program graduates receive
nationally recognized competencies for employability. Participating academic
institutions receive funding for their roles, access to relevant curriculum,
program articulation, faculty development, and recognition for industry-endorsed
programs for critical workforce needs. Business and industry are provided with a
dependable source of well-educated entry-level technicians and a means of
sustaining workforce development. Government is provided an improved educational
capability and qualified technicians for a key economic sector. Educators have
new space-related curricular themes to enrich their courses in many disciplines.
SpaceTEC is serving as a national resource to strengthen our country's technical
education base and motivate interest in academics.