* 0202839
* An Alternative Program for Recruiting, Certifying and Retaining Science and Mathematics Teachers from Underrepresented Populations in Teaching Science and Mathematics (RECRUIT)
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Frank Meyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2008
* USD 866,015.00

RECRUIT is an experimental alternative science and mathematics teacher
certification program that aims to increase the number of secondary science and
mathematics teachers from underrepresented populations in the profession and
simultaneously enhance the quality of their preparation. RECRUIT emphasizes two
central themes: quality and innovation in science and mathematics teacher
preparation. Specifically, the program: 1) creates a venue to recruit and
prepare qualified secondary science and mathematics teachers from populations
that are underrepresented in the teaching profession. These populations comprise
recent and advanced science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
graduates, and mid-career scientists, mathematicians, and industry personnel
contemplating a shift into pre-college teaching, 2) develops an exemplary
science and mathematics teacher preparation program that is consistent with
recommendations and goals put forth in recent national reform documents in
teacher preparation. Toward achieving this end, the program features: a)
extensive long-term collaboration between education faculty, STEM faculty, and
school personnel toward the preparation of reform-minded reflective teachers; b)
a support community comprising prospective teachers, veteran mentor teachers,
and education and STEM faculty, that aims to provide a seamless transition from
teacher preparation into teaching; c) an extended induction, support, and
professional development period that extends beyond initial coursework and
training, that aims to develop participants' pedagogical content knowledge and
increase their retention rate in the profession; and d) advanced coursework in
both content and pedagogy pursued after participants have spent time teaching in
collaborating districts, with the aim of helping participants address advanced
instructional outcomes, such as higher order and critical thinking skills,
inquiry, and nature of science and mathematics, and 3) contributes through an
intensive research component to our knowledge base on: a) developing science and
mathematics teachers' cognition, and subject matter, pedagogical, and
pedagogical content knowledge; b) creating and sustaining communities to support
and facilitate the professional growth of teachers; and c) developing effective
models for collaboration between education faculty, STEM faculty, and school
personnel through investigating the disciplinary and professional commitments
and barriers that often impede such desirable collaboration.