* 0202707
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Combining Population Genetics and Genomics to Study Threatened Populations
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2002,02/29/2004
* David Tallmon, Tallmon                 David          A
* Fellowship Award
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 02/29/2004
* USD 67,892.00

0202707&lt;br/&gt;Tallmon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twelve month research
fellowship by Dr. David A. Tallmon to work with Dr. Gordon Luikart at Joseph
Fourier University's Lab of Alpine Population Biology in Grenoble, France and
Dr. Mark Beaumont at Reading University in the UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their
project involves the evaluation of the power, bias and precision of new methods
to detect cryptic population barriers, low levels of current gene flow among
populations, and natural selection in threatened populations. The PI and his
collaborators will use available shareware programs to generate genetic data
from simulated populations with known demographic and evolutionary histories.
They will analyze this data with other existing statistical programs to do the
evaluation. The results will be published to aid those working on the
conservation of natural populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Beaumont is a
world leader in the application of Bayesian and maximum likelihood approaches to
conservation genetics problems. The Laboratory of Alpine Population Biology is
internationally known for its pioneering research in the application of
molecular techniques to population genetics. &lt;br/&gt;