* 0202132
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Deformation Quantization and Analysis on Lie Groups
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Alexander Dvorsky, Dvorsky                 Alexander      L
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2003
* USD 31,908.00

0202132 Dvorsky

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eight month research fellowship by Dr. Alexander L.
Dvorsky to work with Dr. Daniel Sternheimer at the University de Bourgogne in
Dijon, France. Co-funding for this project comes from the Math and Physical
Science Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.

Quantization is the process of forming a quantum-mechanical system starting
from a classical one. There exist different methods of quantization, and Dr.
Dvorsky is interested in deformation quantization. Intuitively a deformation of
a mathematical object is a family of the same kind of objects depending on some
parameter. An example is deforming a cummutative algebra of functions (with the
ordinary product) leads to the non-commutative "star-products" suitable for
quantum mechanics. This project addresses the applications of deformation
quantization to the central questions of analysis on Lie groups (mathematical
objects which encode the symmetries of various classical-and quantum-mechanical
constructions) and Lie supergroups.

The host and his laboratory at the Universite de Bourgogne have strong
connections with leading research performed in France and other countries of the
European Union.

