* 0202444
* The Teaching Factory: A Multifaceted Project for Advanced Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Edgar Peters, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 06/30/2006
* USD 599,077.00

This project is creating a model for integrated regional workforce development
for students majoring in semiconductor technology at the A.A.S. and B.S. degree
levels. The multifaceted project comprises curriculum and materials development,
faculty development, and technical experiences for students. The goal is to
educate more and better-prepared technologists to answer the persistent
workforce needs of the region's semiconductor industry. The strategy the project
is using is to consolidate in a single world-class facility known as the
Teaching Factory the hands-on laboratory instruction for all semiconductor
students from multiple campuses throughout the region. Located on the campus of
Arizona State University East (ASUE), the Teaching Factory is a 15,000-square-
foot teaching model of a semiconductor cleanroom. Intel, Motorola, Microchip,
and Amkor Technology have donated a full complement of the major semiconductor
process tools, and today the Teaching Factory is capable of producing fully
functioning integrated microchips. Partners in the project include three
community colleges (Central Arizona College, Chandler-Gilbert, and Mesa
Community College); the NSF's Center of Excellence in Semiconductor
Manufacturing, the Maricopa Advanced Technology Education Center; and Intel,
Motorola, Inc., Microchip, and Atomika Instruments. In this regional model,
A.A.S. and B.S. degree seeking students are continuing to learn semiconductor
principles on their home campuses via distance and classroom delivery, but all
students in the region travel to the Teaching Factory for practical lab
instruction and practice.&lt;br/&gt;