* 0202100
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Networks Affecting the Distribution of Bison in Modern America
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Stuart Aitken, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 11/30/2003
* USD 6,526.00

Since the beginning of the twentieth Century, diverse social groups, including
early conservationists, bison producers, and regional planners, redefined (with
greater or lesser success) the position of bison within the modern American
landscape. Through their actions, networks were established that facilitated the
transportation, redistribution, and privatization of bison within the United
States. This research project will examine these social networks affecting the
geographical distribution of bison in America. The research has four primary
objectives. First, it will define the practical goals and personal motivations
of early conservationists who worked to conserve bison. Second, it will quantify
the interconnections between public and private bison herds, in particular
specifying the role the former has played in the growth of the modern bison
industry. Third, it will delineate the social, material, and informational
networks that comprise the emerging bison industry. Fourth, it will examine
perspectives on the privatization and commodification of bison, emphasizing
their potential impact on material relations with bison and the degree to which
these processes affect symbolic aspects of the species. To achieve these goals,
the project will employ three research methods: mail surveys, interviews, and
analysis of archival materials, government documents, and popular literature.
Mail surveys will be sent to bison producers, representatives of bison
associations, and managers of public bison herds. Individuals selected for
interview include bison producers, bison association representatives, bison meat
distributors, and other individuals with alternative perspectives on bison.
Quantitative data will be analyzed using basic statistical techniques to
identify population and regional growth patterns, trends within the emerging
bison industry, and distinctive subgroups with the bison industry. Qualitative
data will be coded and analyzed using computer software to examine the diversity
of opinions concerning bison and bison management practices. By utilizing these
methods, this research will provide an accurate description of human relations
with bison during the last century.

This project will generate information with which to evaluate the current status
of bison, and enable a re-examination of several larger themes in geographic and
environmental theory. At the most basic level, this project will fill a gap in
academic research that has resulted from the narrow focus on the near-
extermination of bison and the commensurate lack of consideration given to the
species' recent demographic resurgence. More generally, this research will
determine whether economic, cultural, or environmental factors have played a
dominant role in facilitating the species' re-population of the American
landscape. Due to the relative youth of the emerging bison industry, research on
modern bison also provides an ideal opportunity to investigate the methods by
which a given agricultural product/practice is diffused throughout a region.
Although diffusion and agriculture are traditional topics of interest within the
discipline of geography, rarely do circumstances permit an empirical examination
of the diffusion of agricultural practices at an early stage of their growth.
The spread of most agricultural products predates modern geographic theory on
the subject. While bison production certainly exhibits distinct attributes, some
of the general findings revealed by this research may provide valuable insight
into the growth and diffusion of other agricultural products. Looking toward the
future, the data contained in this project will provide a baseline of
information for other researchers that may wish to revisit this topic in
subsequent decades. Lastly, this research will provide an indication of the
factors that enable and constrain modern society's ability to coexist with other
species. Such information will likely become increasingly important in the
future. Recognizing the various options available, as well as the diverse
benefits and drawbacks of each approach, will assist in forming a sustainable,
yet ethical, relation between society and nature. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.