* 0202468
* Nanostructured Surfaces for Investigation of Friction at the Molecular Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Steven S. C. Chuang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 02/29/2004
* USD 50,000.00

0202468&lt;br/&gt;Chuang&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of molecular
interactions/alignment and their relations to friction between two contacting,
moving surfaces are becoming important as the scale of mechanical engineering
devices continues to shrink to microscopic and eventually nanoscopic scales. A
lack of in situ techniques to monitor molecular interactions/alignment not only
presents a challenge to understand the molecular origin of friction but also
hinders the development of novel lubrication systems to minimize friction and
wear. This exploratory research project proposes the development of an in situ
infrared spectroscopic technique to characterize molecular
interactions/alignment between two contacting, moving surfaces under working
conditions with simultaneous friction measurement. The contacting surfaces will
be grafted with organic molecules containing with CF3, phosphate, alkyl, aryl,
ether and COOH groups. These various types of molecular surfaces allow
investigation of the role of van der Walls forces, hydrophobic/hydrophilic
interactions, polar functional groups, and electrostatic interactions in
friction. Changes in intra- and intermolecular interactions, molecular
conformation, packing, and alignment during friction measurement will be
determined by the shift in molecular vibrational frequencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is expected to develop a fundamental
understanding of ghe friction on the moving surfaces with the well-defined
molecular arrangement. This understanding coupled with the molecular grafting
approach will provide a technical basis for the development of permanent, ultra
low-friction coatings for moving surfaces. This type of liquid-free lubrication
will provide a contaminant-free environment and eliminate the need for oil
(i.e., lubricant) change. The results of this proposed study could have a far-
reaching impact on the design of nanostructured surfaces for controlling
friction for meso-, micro-, and macroscopic moving devices ranging from MEMS
devices, artificial joints, bearings, to
gears.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;