* 0202276
* Advancing Careers in Information Science and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Joseph Chase, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Burley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 297,576.00

In the Appalachian region of southwest Virginia, geographic barriers often
prohibit travel to educational centers, thus limiting the region's ability to
assist in meeting the growing need for information technology workers. Further
complicating the ability to train qualified IT workers has been the traditional
difficulty of transferring AAS credits from a community college to institutions
granting baccalaureate degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project joins 11
community colleges from the Appalachian region of southwest Virginia with
Radford University to form a Regional Technology Education Consortium (RTEC).
RTEC is designed to (1) provide a clear path for AAS students to attain a
Baccalaureate degree in computer science or information systems; (2) develop
curriculum to meet the technology competency requirements of the information
technology industry; (3) insure that articulated programs meet industry
certification standards and recommended guidelines from professional
associations and ; and (4) institutionalize procedures and organizational
structures to guarantee continued congruence between the community college and
4-year university curricula in information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
further enhance success, RTEC is expanding business and industry partnerships to
improve the congruence between needs of employers and the institutions preparing
future IT workers. Radford University's Business and Industry Council has a
committee assigned to advise the College of Information Science and Technology.
Business and Industry Council members, including representatives from SunTrust
Bank, First Union National Bank, EDS Corporation, Science Applications
International Corporation (SAIC), First Virtual Corporation, Polycom Network
Systems, Verizon Communications, and SAP provide significant input from an
employer's perspective. The dynamic partnership of RTEC combined with the
collaborative efforts of the information technology industry is energizing and
broadening the technology-based learning experiences available to AAS graduates
in the Appalachian communities throughout southwestern Virginia. The demand for
the next generation of information technology professionals is being met by
incorporating industry needs with academic preparation.