* 0202397
* The Case Files
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* James Johnson, Nashville State Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2006
* USD 949,988.00

The vision of the Case Files project is to be a catalyst for reform of the
learning experience for students in engineering and information technology
program throughout the nation. This vision is being realized through the
creation of a national community of educators who are skilled and experienced in
the delivery of case-based learning. The secondary objective is to develop a
systematic process that will capture case "ideas," develop a forum for sharing
case concepts with other faculty, and to publish and distribute these materials.
"The Case Files" follows up the work currently being concluded by the South East
Advanced Technological Education Consortium (SEATEC) that has developed model
case studies for technological education and evaluated their effectiveness.
SEATEC's work has revealed evidence that using cases improves learning and
creates a learning centered environment for students. Interest in using the case
method has grown among technological educators in the past 3-5 years. Currently,
no resource exists for those educators who wish to use the case study method.
Three major goals of the project are: improve knowledge and understanding of
case studies among technological educators in Tennessee and across the nation;
create an on-line clearinghouse for case "ideas" and cases developed by faculty;
and disseminate case "ideas" and fully developed published cases to a national
audience. Experienced faculty are mentoring those new to using cases. Partners
in the project are Nashville State Technical Institute, the LITEE Center at
Auburn University, and the Learning Technology Center at Vanderbilt University.