* 0202174
* AGEP: Iowa Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2011
* Rollin Richmond, University of Iowa
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,672,861.00

Iowa Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Iowa
Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate, a group consisting of
faculty in Science, Mathematics and Engineering and Technology (SMET) fields and
administrators from all three Iowa State Regents Universities, requests five
years of NSF funding under the Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate program in partial support of a coordinated series of activities
designed to recruit, retain and graduate a substantial number of
underrepresented US minority graduate students in SME fields, as well as to
change the culture at all three universities in order to guarantee real and
permanent access to, through and from Alliance universities and
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Support is requested for five major program
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Buildingpartnerships with minority-serving
institutions&lt;br/&gt;o An Alliance Summer Research Experience Program for
Minority Undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;o An Alliance Graduate Teaching Fellowship
Program&lt;br/&gt;o An Alliance Graduate Student Summer Workshop&lt;br/&gt;o An
Alliance Campus Awareness Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partnerships with
minority-serving institutions will be built and maintained by a series of yearly
conferences in each of three regions in which Alliance universities have been
active in recruiting. Undergraduate students from minority-serving institutions
will be introduced to the programs and culture of the Alliance universities
through anAlliance Summer Research program.&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State University and
the University of Iowa will each provide support for five.41liance,Teaching
Fellows during each year of the program. These five-year Teaching Fellowships
will be made permanent at the end of the grant period. The University of
Northern Iowa will provide support for two one-year Alliance Teaching Fellows
through its teaching assistantship program. NSF will be asked to supplement
these positions with an initial one-year traineeship. UNI Teaching Fellows will
be encouraged to transfer to one of the other Alliance universities to complete
work on the doctorate. A key role in all of this will be played by the Alliance
Student Development Coordinator who, together with supporting student
development staff at each of the three Alliance universities, will have primary
responsibility for faculty and staff training; the development of programs and
activities in and out of the classroom to enhance retention and the quest for
excellence among students; and the development and administration of a system to
assess the progress of the student development aspects of the program. The
Director, together with faculty mentors and staff, will design and implement an
introductory two-week Summer Workshop for incoming Teaching Fellows as well as
academic-year programs designed to promote campus awareness, build community and
ensure access. Career counseling and placement assistance will be provided for
Fellows as they near the completion of the doctorate.&lt;br/&gt;Through these
programs and in cooperation with other Alliance University programs and other
AGEP Alliance and AMP programs, a substantial number of minority students will
complete the doctorate in SME fields at Alliance universities beginning at the
end of year five of this project and continuing in subsequent years.&lt;br/&gt;