* 0202297
* U.S.-Canadian Workshop on Cross-Border and Multi-Center Wildlife Studies, November 15 -16, 2001, Vancouver, British Columbia
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2002
* John VandeBerg, Texas Biomedical Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 10/31/2002
* USD 0.00

This award supports participation by the principal investigator and three other
US scientists in two consecutive day-long workshops concerned with regulations
affecting research on wild animals. The workshops will be held at the University
of British Columbia (UBC) in Vancouver, Canada. All four scientists will speak
during one or both of the workshops. The first of the two is an Animal Care
Regional Workshop convened by the Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC), the
Canadian group responsible for establishing Animal Care Committees, the Canadian
equivalent of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUCs) at US
institutions. The second is a Workshop on Cross-Border and Multi-Center Wildlife
Studies. Previous US workshops have underscored the need for additional and
ongoing discussion of how the animal welfare act, the endangered species act,
and other relevant regulations affect the conduct of field research with
vertebrates. The Vancouver workshops will address, among other issues,
transportation of wildlife, projects involving migration and endangered species,
multi-center project approval, and wildlife management relative to basic
research. The impact of newly revised Canadian wildlife guidelines will also be
discussed. Approximately 150 attendees are anticipated. Because the NSF, like
the NIH, delegates most responsibility for enforcement of all pertinent animal
care and use regulations to grantee institutions, there is a significant need
for ongoing discussion and education efforts in this area; participation of
these four speakers will enhance the value of the workshops. Additional support
will be provided by the CCAC, by the Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare of the
NIH, and by the host institution where the workshops will be held.