* 0202260
* Instructional Multimedia: Curriculum, Professional, and Educational Materials Development for Science, Mathematics, and Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Kathleen Harmeyer, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 434,978.00

This project is enabling secondary school teachers and college faculty in
Baltimore County and the surrounding region to effectively integrate computer
technology into their classrooms. Activities include:

(1) expanding the current NSF-funded Information and Multimedia Technology
(IMMT) program (NSF Award No. 9950056) to include a new Instructional Multimedia
curriculum with a certificate option for educators interested in becoming
proficient in using multimedia technology to create effective interactive
learning materials for their classrooms;

(2) providing two-week intensive experiences in classroom multimedia technology
applications to develop the technological currency of in-service secondary
school teachers and college faculty in science, mathematics, and technology
fields, and to prepare in-service technology teachers to teach articulated
multimedia technology courses at secondary schools; and

(3) creating a new digital audio/video computer production laboratory at CCBC
Essex to support the new Instructional Multimedia certificate option and to
enable project participants to develop Multimedia Learning Activities (MLAs)
(small computer- or Web-based animations and interactive applications) for their
classrooms. The developed materials incorporate national science, mathematics,
technology, and industry standards in education.

Science, mathematics, and technology faculty from CCBC Essex are developing
instructional design and technology courses in collaboration with teachers and
administrators from the Baltimore County Public Schools, professionals from
businesses that use multimedia in the workplace (including Apropos Media,
BreakAway Games, and System Source), and faculty from the College of Notre Dame
of Maryland. At least four new credit courses are being developed for both
traditional and online delivery: Ethical Responsibilities in the Computer Age,
Managing Learning with Technology, Educational Technology Process, and Online
Course Management.