* 0202410
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Synthesis and Activity of Amphotericin B Derivatives
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Nicholas Wurtz, Wurtz                   Nicholas       R
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2004
* USD 114,725.00

0202410 Wurtz

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Nicholas
R. Wurtz to work with Dr. Erick M. Carreira at Eidgenossische Technische
Hochschule (ETH) in Zurich, Switzerland. This project will be co-supported by
the Math and Physical Sciences Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.

A study of the molecule, Amphotericin B (AmB), will be carried out with Dr.
Erick M. Carreira. AmB remains one of the most important and effective
antifungal drugs with a broad range of activity. While it is generally accepted
that the mode of action of AmB is the creation of lethal pores in fungal cell
membranes, little is known about the exact mechanism of pore formation or what
structural aspect allows for selectivity of fungal over mammalian cells.
Synthesis of AmB derivatives for mechanistic studies has been limited since
published routes do not allow synthesis of sufficient quantities for assays. An
improved efficient modular synthesis of AmB and subsequent analogues is
proposed. The synthesis will combine the best aspects of published syntheses
with methodology recently developed in Dr. Carreira's group. The analogues will
be assayed for their propensity to form pores using liposomes designed to mimic
mammalian and fungal cell membranes. The proposed synthesis and characterization
of AmB analogues will provide insight about pore architecture and potentially
the discovery of structural features that allow the design of less toxic
derivatives that retain potent the antifungal activity of AmB.

Dr. Carreira's program at ETH is at the forefront of asymmetric synthesis of
biologically active, stereochemically complex, natural products.