* 0202612
* International Research Fellowship Program:  East African Paleoclimate from Ancient Lake Clays:  Linking Ecosystem Change with Hominid Evolution
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Daniel Deocampo, Deocampo                Daniel         M
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 10/31/2003
* USD 81,990.00

0202612 Deocampo

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a thirteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Daniel M.
Deocampo to work with Dr. William Dubbin at the Natural History Museum in
London, United Kingdom.

This project will test current hypotheses linking climate change, paleoecology,
and hominid evolution by reconstructing regional paleoclimate in East Africa
during selected intervals over the past 2 million years. This will be
accomplished by laboratory analysis of ultrafine paleolake clays from the
Olorgesailie (Kenya) and Olduvai (Tanzania) basins to provide evidence of
ancient environmental conditions, and laboratory analysis of water-mineral
interactions under experimental and modern environmental conditions to guide the
interpretation of ancient clays. The hydrologically-closed basins on East Africa
are sensitive to climate change and may provide relevant sedimentary records of
environmental change. From this work, will come a partial chronology of
Olorgesailie and Olduvai paleolake salinity/alkalinity fluctuations before and
after the cyclicity shift 900,000 years ago. Good correlation with marine
records would be among the first African land-sea paleoclimate correlations and
poor correlation would prompt further exploration of the role of orbital
cyclicity in African environmental change. This application of clay mineralogy
and geochemistry will play an important role in understanding East African
ecosystems and early hominids.

The research team led by Dr. Dubbin is uniquely suited to collaborate on this
project, with expertise in studying mineral transformations, biological effects
on mineral processes, clays, and experimental approaches.