* 0202272
* SC ATE Center of Excellence Focal Point for Expanding Excellence in Engineering Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Elaine Craft, Florence-Darlington Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2007
* USD 900,000.00

Florence-Darlington Technical College and Piedmont Technical College are
collaboratively serving as a national Resource Center for dissemination of
educational materials, curricula, pedagogical practice, and recruitment
strategies resulting from the highly successful South Carolina Advanced
Technological Education Center of Excellence (SC ATE). As a national Resource
Center for Excellence in engineering technology education, this partnership
serves as a highly visible resource for ideas, materials, contacts, and
mentoring focused on recruiting, nurturing, and teaching students at the
beginning of the engineering technology educational pipeline where most
attrition occurs. The institutions involved were an integral part of the SC ATE
Center of Excellence work for the past six years, and the envisioned systemic
reform has "taken root." They have the largest number of SC ATE-prepared,
reform-ready faculty and the most experience in implementing the SC ATE
curricula and fostering numerous other improvements in the teaching/learning
environment. These two colleges are carrying this significant statewide work
from a base of experience and success in South Carolina to the next level to
benefit the greater two-year technical and community college engineering
technology (ET) community. The vision of the project is to serve as a national
model and clearinghouse to increase the quantity, quality and diversity of
engineering technology graduates from two-year ET degree programs.

The goals of the project are to: (a) Serve as a national focal point for
improvement in ET education; (b) Refine and share successful SC ATE recruitment
strategies (e.g., ATE Scholars) and share new recruitment strategies; (c) Refine
and share the SC ATE Technology Gateway (pre-engineering technology) curriculum
(three courses) and the SC ATE Engineering Technology Core curriculum, "ET
Core"; (d) Develop multiple course and curriculum scheduling options to increase
use of the SC ATE curricula; (e) Introduce a pilot electronic version of
Technology Gateway to facilitate greater access to ET programs for students for
whom a full-time or an uninterrupted course of study is not possible; (f) Share
insights into organizational change issues that can support or hinder lasting
improvement in the teaching/learning environment for engineering technology
students; (g) Deliver a pilot version of ATE Teaching Team Training via an
interactive web-based workshop; (h) Leverage the experience of SC ATE's
principal investigators, college administrators, and faculty by providing
mentoring for others as they adapt and implement SC ATE models or otherwise
address the special needs of beginning engineering technology students; and, (i)
Demonstrate how the processes of project evaluation, program evaluation, and
accreditation can be linked to implement total quality improvement in the
preparation of students for successful careers in engineering technology and
beyond.