* 0202646
* Conference: Modeling Complexity Across Levels: Social Insect Societies As Multilevel Integrated Systems to be held at the Santa Fe Institute, on May 22-26, 2002.
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Robert Page, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 03/31/2003
* USD 10,500.00

"Modeling complexity across levels: social insect societies as multilevel
integrated systems."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social insect colonies provide a
"model system" for understanding biological complexity. They are exemplars of
multi-component, multi-level causal structures. All levels of organization are
involved in the production, maintenance and modulation of behavior in a colony
of ants, bees, wasps or termites from genetic effects on neurological process
and behavior to selection effects at the group and individual levels The recent
explosion of research on complex systems in general has produced a variety of
new theoretical, mathematical and computational tools with which to model
spatial and temporal dynamical processes. Models of self-organization,
evolutionary computation, functional genomics, data mining, multi-agent
simulations, etc. can clearly aid in the understanding of complex social insect
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will bring together graduate students,
postdocs and junior faculty members who study processes at different levels of
organization of social insects with those developing some of the current array
of modeling methods. The purpose of this workshop is to educate the next
generation of researchers about multilevel approaches to behavior science, and
to tighten the connection between empirical studies and abstract modeling
efforts. The workshop will be held at the Santa Fe Institute, and is structured
as a tutorial. That is, it will be highly interactive with hands-on applications
of the models to current research questions and data. The PIs expect that new
collaborations will arise from this workshop, that generalizations about
integrating models will be discovered, and that these results will be relevant
to a wider scientific community investigating complexity. &lt;br/&gt;