* 0202232
* Concave Finite Element Shape Functions
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Gautam Dasgupta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 08/31/2007
* USD 280,104.00

Geometrical concavity in finite elements does not permit the displacement-based
shape functions that are restricted to algebraic polynomials. Functions with
singularity and rational polynomials (numerator polynomials divided by
denominator polynomials), which alleviate the limitation of Taylor polynomials,
will be constructed to yield shape functions to guarantee a preassigned degree
of continuity within a concave finite element. The application of exact
integration (not conventional numerical quadrature schemes) based on the
divergence theorem will be employed to integrate the energy density functions
leading to element mass and stiffness matrices. In stress-based (hybrid) finite
elements, concavity does not pose any additional problems. Theprocedures
available for convex polygonal elements will be utilized with appropriate
modifications to account for concavity. These novel finite elements are
essential in high quality models that necessitate minimum number of
tessellations. In addition to domain discretized procedures, three-dimensional
boundary element models will utilize the proposed elements to cover boundaries
where reentrant corners exist. As an outgrowth of this research, a limited
number of curved boundaries, will be pursued to augment the element library.
Conventional convex elements with limited forms of geometrical shapes, where
isoparametric transformations are routinely employed, will be incorporated in
the proposed numerical formulation as special cases.

Fundamental mathematical results of projective and perspective geometrical
considerations will guide the construction of shape functions including the
singular non-classical ones in closed analytical forms. Computer algebra code
will symbolically manipulate singular functions as distributions (generalized
functions). The weak definition of the square root to generate absolute values,
the delta sequences and their formal derivatives to construct Dirac's delta and
Heaviside step functions will be seamlessly accommodated within the element
shape function and integration routines. All integrals will be interpreted in
the distributional sense in a non-classical (weak) formulation.

Object-oriented complied codes will result from the computer algebraic
constructs based on closed-form manipulations of analytical representations of
singularities. This integrated computational environment, which consists of
algebraic, numerical and graphics routines, will be employed to generate shape
functions and system matrices on both convex and concave domains in order to
solve large scale problems where high numerical accuracy cannot be compromised.

Application fields will include geotechnical modeling for blasts, soil-structure
interactions and bioengineering growth analysis of soft and hard tissues. Second
order effects of randomness in constitutive descriptions and boundary geometry
will be studied as benchmark examples. High precision applications in the field
of high technology, e.g., optical determination of constitutive properties in
the micro and lower level material structures, will be explored.