* 0202319
* Promoting Access To Technical Education for Non-traditional Computer Informations Systems Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Thomas Link, Pierce College
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Burley
* 12/31/2005
* USD 493,336.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;A workforce crisis exists in the Information
Technology (IT) industry. Many jobs go unfilled nationally, regionally and
locally because the supply of trained graduates from institutions of higher
education does not meet industry's demand for workers. This urgent need for IT
professionals and technicians requires innovative instructional solutions that
will expand and diversify the IT workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this three-year project is to retain and graduate non-traditional community
college (two-year) IT students who are being lost to the field because they are
alienated, intimidated or excluded by traditional IT teaching methods and
culture. Applying the results of recent research in science and engineering
pedagogy, this project creates and evaluates instructional methods intended to
work for non-traditional IT students, instead of against them. This project
creates educational materials for students and professional development
materials for faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities include:&lt;br/&gt;-
developing and implementing a new program to assess personality and learning
styles of IT students and a program of advising based on that
assessment;&lt;br/&gt;- developing and delivering new curricula incorporating
alternative learning strategies into key introductory IT courses;&lt;br/&gt;-
developing and instituting special workshops and study/support groups aimed at
non-traditional IT students; and&lt;br/&gt;- developing and delivering workshops
to assist IT faculty to learn about and implement alternative teaching
strategies for the target population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes for
nontraditional IT students are: &lt;br/&gt;- improved academic
performance;&lt;br/&gt;- increased retention in IT; &lt;br/&gt;- increased
numbers of IT majors; and &lt;br/&gt;- improved graduation
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes for IT faculty are: &lt;br/&gt;- a
more positive attitude toward a variety of learning styles,&lt;br/&gt;-
increased knowledge about alternative learning styles, and &lt;br/&gt;-
implementation of alternative teaching strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be tested at two additional community college sites in Year 3.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables from this project include:&lt;br/&gt;- the
non-traditional curricula for two introductory IT courses; &lt;br/&gt;- the
student assessment/advising program for non-traditional students; &lt;br/&gt;-
the non-traditional student success workshops; and &lt;br/&gt;- the workshops to
assist faculty in developing teaching strategies for non-traditional students.