* 0202018
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing Cultural Landscape of Commemoration in China: The Case of Revolutionary Memorials in Jiangxi
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Timothy Oakes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 02/29/2004
* USD 11,761.00

This doctoral dissertation research on the revolutionary memorials in China will
extend China Studies scholarship on the political and cultural implications of
economic development and reform since the late 1970s, and Cultural Geography
scholarship on interpretations of memorial landscapes. It will examine the
effects of economic development (including fiscal decentralization) on the
cultural landscapes of commemoration - evolutionary memorials and shrines - as
an indicator of broader ideological shifts associated with market reforms in
China. It is structured on a provincial scale with three specific revolutionary
memorial sites in Jiangxi: Jinggangshan, Nanchang, and Lushan. The field
research will primarily involve secondary data collection of on-site archival
research and primary data collection based on interviews with managerial staff,
random visitors, and visitors with deeper personal involvement. Secondary data
will serve as the baseline for comparison, indicating whether the sites are
commercialized due to economic reform. Primary data analysis will be based on
the reduced data (transcribed and coded file) for drawing inferences as to how
people interpret the transformation, and how cultural landscapes of
commemoration in China reveal the dynamic nature of Chinese cultural, social,
and political values over time. By examining development in relation to the
changing cultural landscape of commemoration in China in the case of Jiangxi,
the fieldwork will help to investigate what transformation is occurring with the
revolutionary memorials in China and what ideological shift is revealed in this
transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will shed light on the
impacts of economic development on political and cultural phenomena in China,
revealing new insights into the rapidly changing economy and social structures
of China. It will help interpret the relationship between ideology, development,
and landscape in a country where such studies have been rare. It will address
the gap between the geography of regional development and the cultural geography
of China's regions, bridging the study of cultural landscapes of commemoration
in the West and similar landscapes in China since studies on the cultural
landscape of monuments tend to concentrate more on regions such as Europe and
North America. The research will also introduce to the discipline of geography a
rich cross-cultural resource for discerning contested ideologies as a result of
economic development in the changing cultural landscape in China, providing the
China Studies field with a cultural and political perspective in addressing the
greater issue of how Chinese identity adjusts according to the effects of
regional development in the reform era. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;