* 0202063
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  Pervasive Pixels
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* John Kender, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,485,098.00

EIA 02-02063&lt;br/&gt;Schulzrinne, Henning&lt;br/&gt;Feiner, Steven K., Kaiser,
Gail E., Kender, John R., McKeown, Kathleen R. &lt;br/&gt;Boston University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: RI: Pervasive Pixels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projected
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a flexible department-
wide collaborative work infrastructure, "Pervasive Pixels," that will serve as a
testbed for research in collaborative systems, aims to use this collaborative
framework to conduct research and teaching. Pervasive Pixels will capture and
deliver multimedia information across heterogeneous networks and devices. The
system will schedule meetings, manage and prefetch multimedia objects, laying
out material on individual and shared displays. Meetings are facilitated by
locating, tracking and identifying users as they desire and are recorded,
annotated and summarized, with extensive research capabilities. While
improvements in core computation and communication technologies encourage
working and interacting remotely, engaging in interdisciplinary collaborations
that span buildings, cities, and countries, routinely encounters severe
limitations imposed by current collaboration support systems. Pervasive Pixels
is created to address these problems and should make possible &lt;br/&gt;
Capturing and delivering multimedia information (including video), through
heterogeneous networks, clients, and devices;&lt;br/&gt; Scheduling meetings,
managing and prefetching work documents and multimedia objects, and laying out
materials of individual and shared displays, based on models of workflow needs
and models of temporal, spatial, and semantic interrelationships;&lt;br/&gt;
Facilitating meetings by locating, tracking, and identifying users, and
understanding their gestures, in live and captured video and audio;&lt;br/&gt;
Recording, annotating, summarizing, and searching meeting content, from multiple
physical perspectives and via multiple types of database queries, thus
maximizing the effects of temporal differences.&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure
emphasizes&lt;br/&gt; Large, instrumented, multi-display workspaces in a variety
of locations, to accommodate group interactions.&lt;br/&gt; Networked mobile
devices of various capacities, used individually and in the context of larger
workspaces.&lt;br/&gt; Transparent and automatic adaptability to changes of
place, platform, or group composition, allowing mobile users to interact as they
move about, without having to account for these changes manually.&lt;br/&gt;
Support a wide range of hardware and software, beginning with commercial off-
the-shelf commodity components, whose capabilities are retained while the system
evolves, ultimately leading to new standards for meeting
environments.&lt;br/&gt;