* 0202424
* Scientific and Technological Education in Photonics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Fred Seeber, CORD
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2006
* USD 867,028.00

The critical shortage of photonics technicians in U.S. industry can be remedied,
in part, through effective associate degree programs. The knowledge and skills
needed to succeed as a photonics technician are obtainable via associate
degrees, and companies often prefer graduates of two-year colleges. But, to meet
the challenge of producing qualified photonics technicians, community and
technical colleges need more up-to-date educational materials and well-trained
faculty. They also need a larger pool of high school graduates who have good
academic skills and who, through exposure to photonics via articulation, are
inclined and prepared to enter two-year programs in photonics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Scientific and Technological Education in Photonics
(STEP II) project is enhancing the ability of community and technical colleges
to produce larger numbers of qualified photonics technicians. The project is
addressing that goal through (1) development of up-to-date photonics curriculum
materials (including both new materials and an updated version of the materials
produced through the NSF-funded STEP I project, Fundamentals of Photonics; (2)
promotion, dissemination, and facilitation of the use of project materials at
community and technical colleges; and (3) demonstration of how articulated
technical curricula, beginning in the ninth grade and continuing through the
baccalaureate degree, enhance the value of associate degrees in photonics by
making the transition from high school to two-year colleges seamless and by
providing options for education beyond the associate degree level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to curriculum materials, the project is
producing a number of supporting items, including an updated and reconfigured
version of the National Photonics Skills Standard for Technicians (1995), which
serves as a guide for future curriculum and assessment development; new or
updated clustered curriculum frameworks; online supplements; a math remediation
guide for two-year post-secondary photonics students; and a curriculum planning
guide describing the logistical steps necessary to implement a two-
year&lt;br/&gt;post-secondary photonics program or to infuse photonics courses
into existing technical programs. The project is disseminating and facilitating
the use of project materials at two-year colleges and technical schools and
providing professional development (some delivered via the web) for new faculty
members. It is anticipated that, as a result of the project's dissemination
efforts, 20 to 30 community and technical colleges will be using STEP materials
as of the 2003/2004 school year.