* 0202624
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A View from Afar:  Elite Residences, Teotihuacan Interaction, and the Early Classic Period in the Lower Rio Verde Valley, Oaxaca
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 11,964.00

This project will explore how ancient elites in the lower Rio Verde valley,
Oaxaca, Mexico, interacted with the Central Mexican state of Teotihuacan during
the Early Classic Period (AD 250 to 500) . Archaeological research by Dr. Arthur
Joyce has shown that, by the Terminal Formative Period (100 BC to AD 250), a
state polity had developed in the lower Rio Verde valley (LRVV). The polity's
center lay at the 200 hectare (500 acre) city of Rio Viejo. The Rio Viejo city-
state suddenly declined in the Early Classic Period, as evidenced by disuse of
public spaces such as temples, a decrease in the population and size of the
city, and the development of communities in defensible locations. Concomitant
with these events, lower Rio Verde valley residents began using imported
volcanic glass (obsidian) from mines at Pachuca, located over 400 miles away,
just beyond the massive ancient city of Teotihuacan. Other objects with clear
stylistic or manufacture connections to Teotihuacan, such as ceramic funerary
vessels, also appear in the lower Rio Verde valley's Early Classic
archaeological record. These changes in Early Classic Period lower Rio Verde
valley material remains clearly indicate new political and economic ties between
the Oaxaca coast and the bourgeoning Teotihuacan polity. The character of these
ties, however, remains difficult to ascertain given currently available data. It
is the objective of this research project to fill the existing data gap on this
time period in the Rio Verde valley and allow for a more complete understanding
of the relationship between the two regions.&lt;br/&gt;Exploration of the
relationship between the LRVV and Teotihuacan will be done through
archaeological excavation of elite residences, an often overlooked source of
information on ancient political and economic exchange practices. I will then
compare the archaeological data against four models that predict how material
culture might have changed at elite residences with the establishment of
interaction between the LRVV and Teotihuacan. Using a suite of seven material
culture categories-such as ceramic serving vessels and burial style-I have
attempted to determine how different types of relationship with Teotihuacan
would have impacted elite residences. After excavation, I will compare patterns
in excavated materials with patterns predicted in the models. The closest "fit"
between excavated materials and one of the four models should serve to identify
what type of relationship existed between Teotihuacan and the lower Rio Verde
valley. This project will offer key data on ancient political and economic
relations, especially in relation to the Teotihuacan, as well as developing a
methodological approach distinct from that used in most research on this topic.
It will also assist in training a promising young
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;