* 0202485
* A Model for Combustion in Strongly Stratified Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Alvin Bayliss, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 274,426.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0202485&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bayliss,
Alvin&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern University &lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Model for Combustion in Strongly
Stratified Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We develop and solve numerically a
low Mach number model for deflagrations in stellar envelopes. For many stellar
environments the Mach number, the ratio of flame or convection speed to the
sound speed, is very small (order .01 or less) so that for explicit computations
based on full hydrodynamics timesteps are limited by the acoustic speeds, thus
requiring excessive computation time to simulate the relatively long timescales
associated with the deflagrations and associated convection flows. Our model
filters out the sound waves while accounting for strong vertical pressure
stratification (of the order of ten orders of magnitude). The model is based on
initially pre-computing a strongly stratified hydrostatic solution by solving a
boundary value problem in the vertical coordinate. The hydrodynamic equations
are then expanded about this solution. The resulting system for the velocities
and the non-hydrostatic pressure is then expanded in Mach number, effectively
filtering out sound waves and yielding a system where timesteps are restricted
by fluid and flame speeds rather than the sound speed. The new model will be
applied to the study of convection in the envelope of an accreting white dwarf
during a nova outburst. The model will allow simulation over convective
timescales and thus allow a theoretical description of the multi-dimensional
nuclear burning development of novae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
simulate the hydrodynamics of nuclear fluids in a stellar envelope in which
sound waves are filtered out. It is typical of such environments that energy is
released via nuclear reactions in a manner similar to terrestrial combustion
(nuclear combustion). In many such configurations the flame speed and associated
fluid speeds are much smaller than the sound speed. This limits the length of
time for which these models can be solved and effectively precludes a simulation
of phenomena associated with the burning and convection. For example, a
simulation of burning in a neutron star envelope required approximately 30,000
hours net processor time, i.e., the time for all processors on a parallel
Silicon Graphics computer, for approximately 200 milliseconds of simulated time.
For this problem, the burning and convection timescales were of the order of
minutes, e.g., about 5 minutes. Thus, a simulation and computer analysis of such
phenomena would be prohibitive using current models. We anticipate that such
analyses would be feasible with the proposed new model, because acoustic effects
would be eliminated. The model will be used to study the nature of white dwarf
novae, and in particular to resolve competing theories regarding the role of
mixing of different species in promoting nova outbursts. The numerical solution
of the model will employ parallel algorithms and computers and thus the project
will entail the use of high performance computing to explain observed
astrophysical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: June 21, 2002&lt;br/&gt;