* 0202581
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Archaeological Research and Development at the Ancient Maya City of Pusilha, Belize
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Geoffrey Braswell, Braswell, Geoffrey E
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/2005
* USD 88,915.00

0202581 Braswell

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-one month research fellowship by Dr. Geoffrey
E. Braswell to work with Dr. Jaime Awe at the Department of Archaeology at the
Ministry of Tourism in Belmopan, Belize.

This project will involve the gathering of data to test two contrasting
hypotheses about weakly and strongly integrated Classic Mayan states. The Pis
will work on a program of archaeological investigation, preservation, and
consolidation at the ancient Maya city of Pusilha, Belize in Central America.
Pusilha is a mid-size population and political center located in the extreme
southwest of Belize. The site is known for its many carved monuments dating to
AD 573-751 and for a unique engineering feature: an ancient triple-span bridge
over the Pusilha (Machaca) River and two artificial diversion canals. Dr. Awe is
the Archaeological Coordinator of the Ministry of Tourism's Development Project.
As a fellow under Dr. Awe, Dr. Braswell will learn the archaeological and
engineering techniques used to consolidate ancient monuments. They will test
specific centralist and decentralist hypotheses regarding the horizontal and
hierarchical integration of ancient Maya economy against a historical-political
framework derived from monumental texts of Pusilha. Their research will
contribute new and refine existing models of organization, stability, and change
in Maya society, and - by extension - will be of relevance to the study of
archaic states throughout the world.