* 0202318
* Denver Metro Teacher Preparation Partnership
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* John Lanning, Red Rocks Community College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2006
* USD 297,364.00

The Colorado Commission on Higher Education and the Colorado Community College
System has encouraged the development of an articulated model of teacher
preparation to be replicated statewide. Red Rocks Community College, the
Jefferson County School District and the University of Colorado at Denver have
created an alliance known as the Denver Metro Teacher Preparation Partnership
(DMTPP) for the purpose of increasing the number of certified teachers with
degree credentials in mathematics, and the sciences, and demonstrable
competencies in the integration of technological tools in classroom instruction.
The project includes recruitment of prospective teachers, teacher educator
development, and pre-teaching experiences. An integrated advising network
comprised of advisors from each partner institution supports the degree planning
and efficient transfer from high school Teacher Cadet programs to the community
college and on to the university. High school and community college students
interested in teaching are participating in an intensive summer camp program
hosted by the University of Colorado at Denver to introduce the teaching
profession and life as an undergraduate teacher candidate. The project includes
strategies for recruiting paraprofessionals into the preservice program. As
instructors of prospective teachers, science and mathematics secondary and
postsecondary faculty receive professional support from faculty trainers from
the Rocky Mountain Teacher Collaborative in the integration of inquiry-driven
learning. A Technology of Teaching Certificate is facilitating cohort teams
comprised of prospective teachers and classroom teachers in the development of
interactive standards based curriculum using technological adaptations to
increase student achievement. Mediated internships in secondary classrooms
mentored by master classroom teachers from Professional Development Schools
(PDS), tutoring of secondary students and co-leading special science and
technology projects sponsored by professional societies and museums with
secondary students from high risk populations are strategies of the DMTPP that
support the pre service preparation of prospective secondary teachers.