* 0202565
* Variational and PDE Models, and their Computation for Image Inpainting
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jianhong Shen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 121,322.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0202565&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shen,
Jianhong&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota, Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager:
Catherine Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Variational and Partial
Differential Equation Models, and their Computation for Image
Inpainting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is intended to discover and develop
the most fundamental and crucial mathematical principles and frameworks for
highly diversified applications of digital inpainting. These frameworks will
allow us to further construct many universally applicable inpainting models, and
design their efficient and robust computational algorithms. Our proposed
approach is to employ several high level mathematical tools for the modeling and
computation of inpainting, which include the Bayesian decision theory, nonlinear
partial differential equations (e.g. mean curvature motions, nonlinear transport
and diffusion), variational methods in the space of Bounded Variations and for
free boundary problems, a variety of state-of-the-art tools from harmonics
analysis such as wavelets and multiresolution analysis, and many efficient
schemes in numerical analysis and computational partial differential equations.
The project is also highlighted by the fact that we are proposing for the first
time to integrate visually important curve, surface, and image geometry into the
traditionally statistical models and dynamic processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital inpainting is to develop an automatic process to
intelligently recover and complete the missing, unavailable, or purposely
disguised image information. Such loss of information occurs ubiquitously in a
variety of important fields including computer vision, network (especially
wireless) communication, robust image coding and transmission (from the Hubble
Space Telescope for example), three-dimensional volumetric organ reconstruction
from two-dimensional medical images, disguise of enemy weapons and personnel in
the battlefields, and the digital restoration of cracked ancient paintings in
digitized fine art museums. This project will develop a mathematical framework
for image inpainting. Besides the broad impact on the numerous important fields
mentioned above, the project will also strengthen the integration of high level
pure mathematics into the contemporary digital, computer, and artificial
intelligence technology, and in return, create numerous opportunities for
mathematical modeling, analysis, and computation. It will also help the
principal investigator develop new curricula and train new graduate students in
this booming fresh field of applied mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: May
22, 2002&lt;br/&gt;