* 0202263
* Technical Education Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* John Sperling, Red Rocks Community College
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 06/30/2006
* USD 367,997.00

The Construction Technology Center of Red Rocks Community College has joined
with secondary education representatives and industry leaders throughout
Colorado to develop a model in the recruitment and preparation of prospective
technicians. The Technical Education Pathways (TEP) produces skilled technicians
with improved skill adaptability as a result of integrated classroom and
internship experiences reinforcing real world application of science, and
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through adaptation of promising approaches in
the marketing of technical career education developed by other National Science
Foundation grantees, career awareness activities with high school students
includes job shadowing and real opportunities to interact in the technical
workplace. A college level course offered for high school students introduces
the application of science and mathematics and effective communication in the
workplace as students are prepared for matriculation as college freshmen with
improved academic competencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty development joins
secondary faculty of mathematics and the sciences with the postsecondary
technical faculty in collegial exchanges improves the integration of the core
academic subjects with the application that occurs in the technical work place.
Faculty are engaged in developing an instructional approach that facilitates
learning by encouraging active inquiry-based exploration that coaches learners
in the multiple applications of the theoretical knowledge in the sciences and
mathematics. The postsecondary classrooms and laboratories replicate the
technology in the manipulation of the tools and the equipment found in the
actual technical workplace as college freshmen are prepared in a series of paid
internships and apprenticeships. Professional practicing technicians are
prepared through training provided by the TEP as workplace mentors in the
guidance of the prospective technician student in the integration of the new
knowledge gained in the classroom with real work using the principles of
contextual learning. Students are engaged in project-based learning in the
workplace, using mathematic and scientific concepts to solve problems and honing
reasoning skills useful in diagnosing and resolving problems yet to be
encountered. At the completion of the applied associate of science program, the
new technician has multiple career options as well as opportunities to continue
his or her undergraduate studies with universities offering articulation for the
graduating technician. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;