* 0202645
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Using Empirical Data to Test Population and Metapopulation Models for the Evolution of Mating Systems in the Annual Plant M. Annua
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Sarah Eppley, Eppley                  Sarah          M
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2005
* USD 184,488.00

0202645&lt;br/&gt;Eppley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
research fellowship by Dr. Sarah M. Eppley to work with Dr. John R. Pannell at
the University of Oxford in the United Kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Eppley
and her host will test population and metapopulation models for the evolution of
mating systems in Mercurialis annual. This annual plant is an excellent species
for empirical studies designed to test theoretical models such as this because
it is a short-lived annual that can be grown to sexual maturity within weeks. It
also offers an exceptional opportunity to determine the relationship between
various mating-system parameters and breeding systems. Ongoing research has
established baseline information and techniques for this species, including
development of molecular markers that lend themselves to the study of specific
questions regarding mating-system evolution. This study is the first of its kind
to compare the rates of gene flow between inbreeding and outbreeding populations
in the context of combines versus separate sexes. The project will also provide
information on the consequences for gene flow of contrasting sex allocation
strategies in a wind-pollinated plant species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Oxford's faculty has been actively investigating plant
evolutionary processes, with cross-disciplinary interactions between plant
ecologists, geneticists, physiologists, and molecular biologists. Dr. Pannell
has been working with M. annua for seven years and is an authority on the
genetics of plant mating systems and on the construction and interpretation of
theoretical models exploring mating-system evolution.&lt;br/&gt;