* 0203466
* UMEB: Introducing Students to Conservation Genetics &amp; Environmental Science: A Collaboration Among St. Francis College, Medgar Evers College, &amp; American Museum of Natural H
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Carolle Nicolas-Bolnet, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2007
* USD 110,526.00

0203466&lt;br/&gt;Nicolas-Bolnet&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This UMEB project seeks to
increase the participation of students from under-represented groups at two New
York City colleges by engaging them in hands-on research projects in
conservation genetics and environmental science in collaboration with scientists
at their colleges and at the American Museum of Natural History. In order to
accomplish this, each year a cohort of 4-6 students from each college will be
recruited and the students will conduct research projects over a two year
period. During the academic year, the research will be done on the home
campuses. Over the winter breaks and summers, research will be conducted at the
American Museum of Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These students will
serve as a nucleus to get other students involved in environmental projects
throughout the metropolitan area. This UMEB project will involve students in
workshops in molecular biology techniques, seminars in population biology, and
workshops that provide graduate school and career guidance. The students will be
closely mentored and their progress monitored and assessed in order to help them
become our future scientists in environmental biology and in order to develop
additional programs capable of broadening participation in careers in
environmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;