* 0203980
* E-infinity Algebras and Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Mandell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2004
* USD 88,466.00

DMS-0203980&lt;br/&gt;Michael Mandell A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
proposes to use E-infinity differential &lt;br/&gt;graded algebras to study the
homotopy theory of spaces &lt;br/&gt;and proposes to study the homotopy theory
of E-infinity &lt;br/&gt;differential graded algebras and E-infinity ring
spectra. &lt;br/&gt;The concept of E-infinity differential graded algebra
&lt;br/&gt;is a generalization of the concept of commutative
&lt;br/&gt;differential graded algebra; commutativity holds only &lt;br/&gt;up
to homotopy, and E-infinity differential graded algebras &lt;br/&gt;admit
Steenrod operations on their cohomology, which &lt;br/&gt;measure to some extent
the deviation from actual &lt;br/&gt;commutativity. E-infinity ring spectra are
a stable &lt;br/&gt;homotopy theory generalization of E-infinity differential
&lt;br/&gt;graded algebras. Most commonly studied generalized
&lt;br/&gt;cohomology theories that have commutative ring structures
&lt;br/&gt;are represented by E-infinity ring spectra. This
extra&lt;br/&gt;structure yields important calculational information about
&lt;br/&gt;the theory and is useful for various constructions of
&lt;br/&gt;related theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic topology tries to
reduce topological or geometric&lt;br/&gt;classification problems into algebra.
Because the algebra &lt;br/&gt;is usually discrete, it is typically invariant
under changes &lt;br/&gt;by continuous deformations, or ``homotopies.'' Because
of &lt;br/&gt;this, fundamental problems in algebraic topology are often
&lt;br/&gt;phrased in terms of understanding the homotopy equivalence
&lt;br/&gt;classes of spaces or in terms of computing the number (or
&lt;br/&gt;more often the ``group'' or ``module'') of homotopy classes
&lt;br/&gt;of maps between spaces. Quite generally this kind of question
&lt;br/&gt;can be reformulated as an equivalent question in
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to develop tools to study
&lt;br/&gt;the sort of algebra that arises in this context.&lt;br/&gt;