* 0203835
* Magnetization Manipulation in Nanostructures by Spin Currents
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Joachim Stohr, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2005
* USD 400,000.00

This individual investigator award supports a project that will investigate the
ultra-fast manipulation of the magnetization in nanostructures by spin currents.
In particular, the work explores novel opportunities to manipulate the
magnetization on the nanometer length scale and picosecond time scale, based on
utilization of the strong, short range quantum mechanical exchange interaction.
The project involves sample preparation, sample characterization, and direct
imaging of the time dependent magnetization by photoemission electron microscopy
(PEEM) measurements. Magnetic images will be recorded by pump-probe techniques
using magnetic excitations triggered by picosecond spin current pulses produced
by an optical switch and 50 ps x-ray probe pulses from the Advanced Light Source
in Berkeley. Such measurements promise scientific breakthroughs in this
scientifically and technologically exciting area. The ability to manipulate the
magnetization on these time and length scales will have a strong impact in the
field of high density magnetic storage and in the emerging area of spintronics.
Both are areas of importance for future growth in information technology. The
research will be carried out mainly by a Stanford graduate student and
postdoctoral research associate. It involves work at Stanford University and at
the near-by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the IBM Almaden Research
Center. The interactive character of the work involving a University, a National
Laboratory and an industrial laboratory will be of great educational value for
the young scientists involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, all magnetic devices
ranging from "low tech" transformers to "high tech" magnetic storage devices are
switched by long-range magnetic fields that surround wires or coils through
which a current is passed. This individual investigator award supports a project
that investigates a completely new approach that is superior for the smaller and
faster magnetic devices that underlie tomorrow's technology of storing or
processing information in computers. The new idea is to switch a small magnetic
area or "bit" by an injected spin current, relying on the strong, short range
quantum mechanical exchange interaction. The goal of the work is to directly
image, through ultrafast snapshots, how the magnetization of a small magnetic
area is switched by the injected spin current. These images will be recorded
with synchrotron x-ray pulses at the Advanced Light Source in Berkeley and they
may lead to improved methods of storing and processing information. Because the
work requires sophisticated sample preparation and measurements it utilizes
facilities at Stanford University, the near-by Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory and the IBM Almaden Research Center. The interactive character of the
work involving a University, a National Laboratory and an industrial laboratory
will be of great educational value for the young scientists involved.
&lt;br/&gt;