* 0203224
* Workshops on Topics in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Ileana Streinu, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 05/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

0203224&lt;br/&gt;Ileana Streinu&lt;br/&gt;Smith
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops on Topics in Computational
Geometry&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to support a series of annual problem-posing
and problem-solving&lt;br/&gt;workshops on emerging new topics in Computational
Geometry, with applications in Graphics, Robotics, CAD, BioComputing, etc. The
requested funds will support students, post-docs and some invited participants.
The workshop is aiming at fostering collaborations between disciplines
(mathematics, computer science, engineering), identifying new directions and
problems to work on, and engaging representatives from under-represented groups
in collaborative research opportunities (we anticipate about half of the
participants to be female researchers or students). A new topic will be chosen
each year by the organizer. A web page will be prepared for each workshop, which
will include links to resulting publications. There will be no registration fee.
The chosen location (Bellairs Research Institute of McGill University in
Barbados, West Indies) already has a long tradition within our community (McGill
researchers have very successfully organized such workshops on various topics
for over 15 years, and the institute's facilities have been used by other
academic institutions in the US and Canada). It allows for informal and very
productive interaction, it has inexpensive lodging and is accessible via major
US carriers at&lt;br/&gt;reasonably priced airfare. &lt;br/&gt;