* 0203592
* ALGORITHMS:  Adaptive Stochastic Scheduling for Bulk Synchronous Computations and Its Application in Molecular Dynamics Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Chengzhong Xu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 04/30/2007
* USD 238,270.00

This research investigates the parallel efficiency of an important class of bulk
synchronous applications, as exemplified by computational molecular dynamics, in
clusters of workstations. Bulk synchronous applications are often characteristic
of non-deterministic computational requirements over time. In a multiprogramming
environment, the nodal capacities allocated to an application may also change as
other jobs join and leave. With respect to the dynamics of the computation and
uncertainties of the cluster resources, this research aims at developing
stochastic scheduling strategies in support of high performance computing in the
clusters. It constructs a framework for modeling and analyses of adaptive
scheduling algorithms by characterizing scheduling factors as random variables.
It develops efficient application-level remapping policies by taking into
account the dynamic systems of workload evolution and capacity change. The
scheduling strategies are evaluated in the application of molecular dynamics
computer simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will blend formal
modeling/analyses, experimentation, and evaluation of stochastic scheduling
algorithms. Success of this research will help increase the industrial
acceptance of high performance cluster computing and advance computational
molecular dynamics to simulations of large, multi-atom systems in a timely
manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;