* 0203288
* Capacity Building for Global Change
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2002,05/31/2007
* A. F. Spilhaus, Jr., American Geophysical Union
* Continuing Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 05/31/2007
* USD 2,563,980.00

The Global Change SysTem for Analysis, Research and Training (START), as the
major international outreach program of three of the major international global
change research programs - the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), the
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), and the International Human
Dimensions (of Global Environmental Change) Program (IHDP) - will undertake
efforts to develop scientific capabilities in global change research in
developing countries of Asia, the Pacific, and Africa. START will also promote
collaboration in global change research and related scientific activities among
scientists from the countries of these regions and between scientists from these
countries and scientists from the United States and other countries with
advanced capabilities in global change research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;START will
focus on six scientific areas of high priority for the international programs
and for U.S. research on global change. These areas are: (1) regional climate
variability and change; (2) changes in the composition of the atmosphere and its
effects; (3) land use/land cover change, especially its biophysical and
biogeochemical aspects; (4) interaction between global change and terrestrial
ecosystems and their biodiversity; (5) interaction between global change and
oceans, coastal zones, and inland waters and their biodiversity; and (6)
scientific problems that cut across these areas, e.g., interactions between
global change and food systems and between global change and water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These activities are expected to lead to
improved understanding of global change and its particular characteristics and
consequences in Asia, the Pacific, and Africa; improved and expanded input from
the scientists of these regions to global efforts, especially to global
modeling; and improved scientific capabilities in these regions to contribute to
and participate in global change research at local, regional and global levels.
In Asia and the Pacific, START will collaborate closely with the Asia-Pacific
Network for Global Change Research (APN). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;START will
extend the monitoring system for extreme events it has developed in northern
Africa to other parts of the continent and will convene a workshop on the
relationship of global change to freshwater resources, with a special focus on
the arid and semi-arid regions of Africa. START will work closely with the Third
World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) to assure full and active participation by
African scientists in these activities. Two other areas of emphasis in Africa
will be (1) the interactions between global change and food systems and (2) land
use/land change/ecosystem variability, both areas of exceptionally high priority
for African countries. START will also extend efforts to assess the impacts of
and adaptation to climate change in southern Africa, particularly by promoting
development of a network for this process and development of analytical tools
for such an assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;START will also address polar
coastal zones and change in these zones by convening a "synthesis and futures
meeting" to bring together scientists active in the Russian Arctic to review
past research on changes in coastal zones in the Arctic and their relationship
to global change and then to consider how best to plan future research in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;