* 0203720
* Probabilistic Analysis of Random Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Joseph Yukich, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2006
* USD 162,164.00

0203720 Yukich This proposal focuses on the rigorous probabilistic analysis of
random structures in Euclidean space. Building on previous research, we focus on
the stochastic analysis of (i) random packing, random growing interfaces, and
loose sphere packing, all in two or more dimensions, and (ii) functionals of
Boolean models and random Euclidean point sets in computational geometry and
combinatorial optimization. The aim in (i) is to establish thermodynamic limits,
Gaussian fluctuations, and functional central limit theorems for functionals
associated with packing models, interface models, as well as for random
Euclidean point sets in general. All of these models exhibit finite range
interactions and long-range dependence. Part (ii) focuses on the probabilistic
analysis of functionals of random point sets in Euclidean space. The proposed
work in (ii) will further our understanding of solutions to Euclidean
optimization problems, random graphs in computational geometry, and the
statistical analysis of random data. One of the central problems in physical,
chemical, and biological processes involves understanding the growth of random
interfaces. Such interfaces arise naturally in understanding chemical
deposition, the morphology of vascular networks, growth patterns in fracture
analysis, and the porosity of media. Dynamic random interfaces, ones which
change with time, are useful in understanding and modeling crystal growth as
well as understanding patterns in nature which change with time. This includes
diverse phenomena such as the spread of disease in a population, the growth
patterns in a forest fire, as well as the fracture analysis of metals such as
those found in aircraft. Much of our understanding of random interfaces is only
experimental. This proposal seeks to put our understanding of random interfaces
on a solid theoretical foundation. Understanding the behavior of random
interfaces currently forms a central part of the principal investigator's
collaboration with scientists from the Lehigh University engineering school as
well as with scientists from Lucent Technologies.