* 0203104
* Lax Pairs and the Riemann-Hilbert Method for Solving Diffraction and Scattering Problems in Geophysics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Elizabeth Its, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 51,870.00

The research project is focused on application of the Lax Pair&lt;br/&gt;and the
Riemann-Hilbert Method to the solution of scattering &lt;br/&gt;problems in
inhomogeneous geomaterials. This approach is based on &lt;br/&gt;a new version
of the Inverse Scattering Transform suggested recently by &lt;br/&gt;A. Fokas
for studying boundary problems for linear and integrable&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear
PDEs. Topics of investigation include: (i) analysis of&lt;br/&gt;the Riemann-
Hilbert problem on the elliptic curve related to the &lt;br/&gt;vector Lax pair
of the elastodynamic equation; (ii) explicit evaluation &lt;br/&gt;of scattering
coefficients of Raylegh wave in a quarter-space and &lt;br/&gt;a corner; (iii)
the Riemann-Hilbert approach to scattering of elastic&lt;br/&gt;surface wave at
a vertical interface of two homogeneous quarter-spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
analysis of seismic waves is the major source of information&lt;br/&gt;about the
Earth internal structure and its sesmicity. The elastodynamic
&lt;br/&gt;equation serves as a basic mathematical model for studing diffraction
and &lt;br/&gt;scattering of seismic waves on deep fault zone areas and other
inhomogeneities&lt;br/&gt;in the Earth Crust and Upper Mantle. The research
program indicated above&lt;br/&gt;would allow to make a considerable progress in
solving some of the longstanding &lt;br/&gt;problems related to realistic
geometry of seismic zones. Moreover, the&lt;br/&gt;important nature of the
method developed in the project is that it can be also applied&lt;br/&gt;to
various nonlinear versions of the elastodynamic equation. During
the&lt;br/&gt;last decades it has been discovered that nonlinearity of the Earth
materials&lt;br/&gt;may be responsible for some peculiar characteristics of the
wavefield, hence&lt;br/&gt;the research project would provide an analytic tool
for studing&lt;br/&gt;these completely new kind of seismic phenemena as well.