* 0203237
* Surface Diffusion and Ordering Processes Exploited for Directed Self-Assembly Using Amorphous Semiconductors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* John Abelson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2005
* USD 258,000.00

This Nanotechnology research project seeks to develop a science base connected
with surface diffusion and surface ordering of amorphous materials, with the
ultimate goal of developing a new method for directed surface self-assembly on
the nanoscale using amorphous semiconducting materials. Diffusion over amorphous
and other energetically heterogeneous surfaces plays a role in sintering of
ceramics and in reflow processes and memory device fabrication in
microelectronics. There presently exists virtually no literature for diffusion
on amorphous surfaces, and very little that specifically addresses continuously
distributed energetic heterogeneity on highly defected crystalline surfaces.
Such heterogeneity should lead to values of the diffusivity D that differ
significantly from those measured for well-defined crystalline surfaces,
however. For amorphous materials, fabrication processes can be devised based
upon promoting or inhibiting surface ordering driven by surface diffusion.
Example applications include fabrication of memory device electrodes, efficient
solar cells, and amorphous ceramics. The rates of ordering cannot be followed
experimentally by conventional techniques, rendering creation of process models
difficult.

The first goal of this project is to develop a science base for surface
diffusion and ordering on amorphous and other energetically heterogeneous
surfaces, using the combined expertise of the two laboratories. An experimental
method will be developed to quantify the distribution function describing
surface diffusion on energetically heterogeneous surfaces, using amorphous
silicon and the ceramic titanium dioxide as paradigm cases. Experiments will
also confirm that optical illumination can be used to drive surface diffusion
non-thermally. With respect to surface ordering, fluctuation microscopy will be
adapted to the study of near-surface regions by implementation on a scanning
transmission electron microscope, with spatial resolution as small as 0.8 nm.
Furthermore, the method will be extended to the study of binary compounds like
titanium dioxide; up to now application has been restricted to single-element
systems.

The second goal of this project is to develop a new surface self-assembly method
at the 10-200 nm length scale using amorphous semiconducting materials
containing controlled amounts and size distributions of subcritical nuclei.
Patterned optical or electron beam exposure should yield a spatially varying
surface mass flux that, when performed at an annealing temperature just at the
cusp of crystallization, provides the extra nudge to crystallize subcritical
nuclei in regions dictated by the light flux. The full-fledged crystallites
should then grow by surface diffusion and Ostwald ripening until the desired
fraction of the film has accreted onto the original nuclei. Demonstrations will
focus on amorphous silicon and titanium dioxide. Some computational aspects of
the proposed work will be incorporated into a new interdisciplinary laboratory
course for undergraduates focusing on nano-materials synthesis.

The core goals of elucidating diffusion phenomena on amorphous surfaces,
extending the capabilities of fluctuation microscopy, and demonstrating a
version of the self-assembly method will remain in place.

The downward revision in budget will impact the proposed work in several ways
involving the scope of the individual tasks outlined.

1. Reduce the accuracy with which we can determine the locus of conditions
giving optimal medium range order in amorphous silicon.

2. Limit the scope of studies for controlling medium range order via variations
in hydrogen addition, ion energy and flux, and related parameters.

3. Limit the implementation of the directed self-assembly method to optical
means, rather than including an electron-beam.

4. Limit the accuracy with which distribution functions describing surface
diffusion can be obtained. (The distribution functions are more accurate with
more data.)