* 0203823
* Rate of Convergence of Diffusion Processes--Application to Statistical Inference for Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Weian Zheng, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/2005
* USD 107,999.00

0203823&lt;br/&gt;Zheng&lt;br/&gt; Let [x(t), 0&lt; t&lt; T] be a realized path
of a diffusion process with an unknown multi-dimensional parameter u in its
coefficients. The Principle Investigator and his students are interested in
estimating the real value of u. They discovered that they can define a Maximum
Likelihood Estimator U of the unknown u even if u appeared in the diffusion
coefficient. They are going to find the rate of convergence of U to the true
parameter u under reasonable assumptions when the observation time is relatively
long enough. Since in the real applications, x(t) can be only recorded at
discrete time spots, they are particularly interested in the problems of error
estimates related to discretizations of their models. &lt;br/&gt; The Principle
Investigator and his students' research has its interests in the real
applications. There are many examples of parameter estimates of diffusion
processes in the applications. For example, it may be related to the trace of a
military missile, or the price of a stock. All those models contain some unknown
parameters. Moreover, any observation of the real path contains errors. Assuming
that the observation error can be only bounded by a constant c, then no matter
how one increases the computation steps in the time discretization method, the
error of the estimate can not be significantly reduced beyond some number. In
other words, the Principle Investigator and his students will find out the
minimum steps needed for a computer to get enough accurate result when an
observation error is recognized. This study has its potential military and
financial applications. &lt;br/&gt;