* 0203785
* GOALI:  Nanocrystalline Oxides For Integrated, Soft Magnetic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2007
* David Clarke, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2007
* USD 480,000.00

The scientific goal of the program is to learn how to manipulate the magnetic
coupling between nanocrystalline particles to create soft magnetic materials in
which the bulk magnetic properties, such as permeability in field, magnetization
and coercive losses can be independently varied. In monolithic materials these
properties are not independent. The approach being taken is to synthesize
nanocrystalline magnetic oxide particles and manipulate their packing into a
bulk material to alter, through composition, particle size, shape and volume
fraction, the inter-particle magnetic coupling. Initially, nano-particles of
ferrites and rare-earth oxides are being synthesized using inverse micelle
processes and their spacing and packing varied through the choice of surfactants
and solvents to form bulk material compatible with use in electrical power
converters and related devices. The materials are characterized at different
stages to determine how the bulk magnetic properties are related to the
properties of the nanocrystalline particles and their magnetic
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall justification of the program is to
assess the potential for nanocrystalline-based materials in replacing existing
magnetic materials in dc-dc electrical power converters by enhancing their
performance and decreasing their physical size. Power converters are used
throughout the electronics industry to provide a stable, low voltage power
supply to almost all-digital electronics and microprocessors. Increasing demands
for smaller, higher power, higher frequency dc-dc converters can only be
realized with the development of magnetic materials having improved permeability
and lower magnetic losses. The challenge being addressed is how to create new
magnetic materials, using nanocrystalline particles, which can be fabricated
into an integrated and functional power-converter whilst preserving their novel
combination of magnetic properties. The collaboration with Rockwell Scientific
Company provides students with experience in the design of the magnetic
components of power devices as well as the opportunity to test their candidate
materials as they are being developed.&lt;br/&gt;