* 0203537
* Propagation of Waves and Fronts in Complex Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Leonid Ryzhik, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 76,482.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0203537&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ryzhik,
Leonid&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Propagation of Waves and Fronts in Complex
Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is concerned with the mathematical study of
propagation of waves and fronts in heterogeneous media. Ryzhik plans to
concentrate on two areas of research: refocusing of time-reversed pulses in
random media and the effect of flow motion on combustion and chemical reaction
processes. Time reversal of acoustic waves is a recent experimental technique
that refocuses a signal that arrived from a localized source at its original
location even if it has been recorded at a very long distance from the source.
This method has been successfully applied in a number of applications, that
range from medicine, where it was used for destruction of kidney stones, to long
distance propagation of acoustic waves in the ocean, cellular communications,
and imaging in noisy environments. Remarkably, refocusing of the time-reversed
and re-propagated signal is very robust, and is greatly improved in a highly
heterogeneous random medium as compared to a uniform domain. Ryzhik intends to
build on his previous work on wave propagation in random and other complex media
to advance the mathematical understanding of this important
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second major component of the proposed
research is the mathematical analysis of the combustion processes in fluids, and
the effect of fluid motion on combustion. It is well known that stirring by a
fluid flow may both speed up chemical reactions and stop them, depending on the
nature of a particular problem. These phenomena have been intensively studied by
physicists, engineers and mathematicians alike. Nevertheless, there are few
quantitative rigorous mathematical results in the area. Ryzhik intends to
continue his work in this field, concentrating on mathematical studies of models
that take into account both the affect of the flow on the chemical reaction via
improved mixing, and the effect of combustion on the fluid, through changes in
temperature and density of the fluid. The potential impact of this research is
development of our understanding of combustion processes in turbulent flows in
various settings. The mathematical tools that are necessary to address the above
problems include homogenization, averaging of equations with random
coefficients, maximum principles and estimates on solutions of partial
differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: April 25,
2002&lt;br/&gt;