* 0203296
* Collaborative Research: Processes Controlling Depositional Signals of Environmental Change in the Fly River Sediment Dispersal system: Rates and Mechanisms of Floodplain Deposition
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Gary Parker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 111,877.00

EAR-0203296 Gary Parker This project focuses on two fundamental questions: 1)
How does flow and sediment routing through a lowland floodplain system moderate
short and longer-term variations in sediment delivery towards offshore
depositional environments? and 2) What controls the proportion of a river's
sediment load that is deposited on its floodplain? It is hypothesized that net
sediment loss to the floodplains was highest during Holocene sea-level rise and,
after near stabilization of sea level, the proportion of the sediment load
deposited in the floodplain has progressively
declined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These two basic question are being addressed by
comparing the flow and sediment routing processes, and the proportion of
sediment lost to floodplains on the middle Fly and lower Strickland Rivers.
Historically, the Strickland carried about 7 times the load of the Fly and it is
hypothesize that this larger load has led to greater channel dynamics, steeper
slopes, coarser bed, more elevated floodplain and possibly a lower trapping
efficiency than the Fly. A numerical model is being developed that is
sufficiently mechanistic that it can address the questions of damping and
trapping efficiency on the event and seasonal scale, yet simplified enough that
it can also model the co-evolving bed grain size, channel slope and floodplain
topography, a crucial capability for understanding the time evolution of
trapping efficiency. Though ambitious, many parts of the model have been
assembled in previous research. The hydrodynamic model accounts for the effects
of floodplain morphology and hydrology. The sediment routing includes effects of
channel migration and accounts for the deposition and erosion of sediment by
grain size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A field program is being conducted to document
the flood wave damping rates, the sediment trapping efficiency of the Strickland
and Fly Rivers, and to parameterize the numerical model. Quantification of
floodplain morphology is being done through topographic surveys and analysis of
remote sensing imagery. Intensive surveys of the velocity and suspended sediment
fields are used to motivate and parameterize the hydraulics and sediment
transport model. Short and longer-term (less than 100 years) rate of floodplain
deposition is being documented from shallow cores. Extensive flow and sediment
monitoring data are being provided by Ok Tedi Mining, Ltd. on the Middle Fly and
by Porgera Joint Venture on the Strickland. Previous research on the Fly River
enables the research focus to be on the Strickland River.