* 0203164
* Some Problems in Curvature and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Xiaochun Rong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2005
* USD 159,990.00

ABSTRACT: DMS 0203164.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have been studying problems in
Riemannian geometry that &lt;br/&gt;concern with interplays between curvature
and topology, and &lt;br/&gt;the major part of our work are about the controlled
topology of &lt;br/&gt;collapsed manifolds with sectional curvature bounded in
absolute value and &lt;br/&gt;applications to the global Riemannian geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;For the past three years, we have made substantial
progresses&lt;br/&gt;in this field pioneered by Cheeger-Gromov-Fukaya: we
&lt;br/&gt;established the isomorphism finiteness result for the higher homotopy
groups, &lt;br/&gt;the diffeomorphism finiteness result for a certain class of
manifolds, and the &lt;br/&gt;convergence of collapsing sequences in this class.
We have &lt;br/&gt;made a progress on investigating some rigidity phenomena
&lt;br/&gt;for the class of closed manifolds of non-positive sectional
&lt;br/&gt;which are not locally symmetric spaces. We have made a progress
&lt;br/&gt;in the homeomorphism classification of positively curved manifolds
&lt;br/&gt;whose isometry group contains a torus of large rank, and extend
&lt;br/&gt;this result to the larger class of manifolds which only admit
&lt;br/&gt;isometric discrete abelian group actions. We will continue our
&lt;br/&gt;programs in these fields in the near future that
&lt;br/&gt;represents a continuation of the work proposed three years
&lt;br/&gt;ago for NSF Grant DMS 9971360. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most
important developments in Riemannian geometry &lt;br/&gt;in the last two decades
is our understanding of the Riemannian &lt;br/&gt;manifolds which appear to be
smaller than &lt;br/&gt;their actual dimension (i.e collapsed). For instance,
the surface &lt;br/&gt;of a very thin donuts looks like a circle while whose
curvature and diameter are &lt;br/&gt;bounded. Our progress is amplified by the
amazing fact that &lt;br/&gt;among the manifolds whose curvature and diameter
are bounded, all &lt;br/&gt;but finitely many appear to be smaller than their
actual dimension. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;