* 0203705
* Contact Geometry, Complex Analysis and Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Charles Epstein, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 245,193.00

Abstract for "Contact geometry, complex analysis and imaging" DMS- 0203705

Dr. Epstein's research proposal contains projects in four distinct areas: (1)
Invariants of contact structures, (2) Problems in CR-geometry, (3) Multi-
parameter perturbation theory, (4) Magnetic resonance imaging. The proposed work
in (1) will likely be done in collaboration with Richard Melrose. They intend to
use their prior work on the Heisenberg calculus to find invariants of contact
manifolds. A problem of particular interest is to use spectral flow invariants
of Toeplitz operators to distinguish contact structures with homotopic
hyperplane fields. The work in (2) is part of Dr. Epstein's ongoing project on
embeddability of CR-manifolds, he proposes to consider CR-structures in
dimensions greater than 3 to understand why some CR-functions are unstable and
why some are stable under deformation of the underlying CR-structure. The
project described in (3) concerns the problem of analytically parameterizing the
eigenvalues and eigenspaces of a "self adjoint" analytic family of matrices. In
broad terms Dr. Epstein would like to see what the modern theory of functions of
several complex variables has to say about multi-parameter perturbation
problems. Preliminary investigations show that real progress is now possible in
this field. His main goal is to find reasonably simple and explicit analytic
spaces on which the eigenvalues and eigenspaces of a self adjoint family are
analytically parametrized. Finally (4) is an entirely new direction for Dr.
Epstein's research. He plans to study the feasibility of magnetic resonance
imaging using inhomogeneous background fields.

Dr. Epstein's work is in the application of analysis and algebra to problems in
geometry. A principal focus of his research is the geometry and analysis of
contact manifolds. These arise is many contexts from several complex variables
to differential geometry to topology to partial differential equations. Using
the tools developed in collaboration with Richard Melrose, Dr. Epstein hopes to
elucidate the analysis and geometry of these ubiquitous spaces. Dr. Epstein also
plans to investigate the feasibility of magnetic resonance imaging using
inhomogeneous background fields. This is largely beyond the capabilities of
present day technology. If it proves feasible it would allow many new
applications of MR imaging and should also lead to less expensive equipment.
This is a multifaceted problem with significant mathematical and engineering
aspects.