* 0203240
* Characterization of Scattering Media Using Vector Speckle and High-Order Speckle Correlations
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 12/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopy makes optical sensing and imaging a powerful tool
relative to other modalities. However, a large number of domains of interest
have significant degrees of scatter, thereby precluding direct interpretation of
optical measurements using standard holographic or spectroscopic techniques. For
instance, using light it may be possible to detect tumors at an early stage and
to determine blood chemistry using safe and inexpensive instruments, with
correct interpretation of the influence of scatter. Environmental sensing
applications include measurements of or within aerosols, turbid water, sea ice,
and snow. There has also been significant recent interest in random media with
optical gain, which may find application in displays and for inexpensive lasers.
Coherent light in all these situations can produce speckle. While efforts have
been made in some applications to reduce the confounding impact of speckle, such
as in optical coherence tomography, speckle has the potential to determine
important properties of the scattering medium. They have used frequency
correlations of laser speckle to characterize diffusely scattering material.
This characterization involves determining impulse response or scattering
parameters that can be used to form spatial images and to extract quantitative
spectroscopic data. Of particular note, the PIs recently showed that it is
possible to use third order speckle intensity correlations to directly determine
the impulse response of a scattering medium, independent of a model, extending
the second order intensity interferometer concept of Hanbury-Brown and
Twiss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the study of fundamental
aspects of speckle, with a view toward several applications. The PIs will extend
their single linearly polarized speckle measurement to a set of input/output
polarizations, and couple this data to a polarized transport model that will be
developed. This should allow treatment of varying degrees of scatter and also
characterization of the scatterers. They will also investigate source
correlation concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;