* 0203070
* Spectral Theory of Riemannian Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Harold Donnelly, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 108,001.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0203070.

The principal investigator plans to study three separate topics: i) Eigenvalue
estimates for the Laplacian on Hermitian holomorphic line bundles, ii) Quantum
Unique Ergodicity, and iii) Behavior of eigenfunctions near the ideal boundary
of hyperbolic space. Consider the tensor powers of a Hermitian holomorphic line
bundle, over a compact complex manifold. If the curvature form of the line
bundle is strictly positive, then the first non--zero eigenvalue, of the
Laplacian, acting on sections of the $k$th power, is bounded below uniformly in
$k$. The proposal is to prove that the first non--zero eigenvalue is uniformly
bounded below when the curvature is semipositive everywhere and positive for at
least one point. The problem can be reformulated in terms of CR geometry.
Microlocal analysis will be applied to the reformulated problem. The problem of
quantum unique ergodicity concerns concentration of eigenfunctions on manifolds
with ergodic geodesic flow. We propose to construct examples where sequences of
eigenfunctions concentrate along isolated closed geodesics or on one parameter
families of closed geodesics. The first step is to find quasimodes (approximate
eigenfunctions). Next one must show that these quasimodes correspond to
individual eigenfunctions rather than sums of several eigenfunctions. The
hyperbolic space has essential spectrum which is a proper subset of the positive
real line. There do exist eigenfunctions, defined on the complements of compact
sets, whose eigenvalue lies below the start of the essential spectrum. The
behavior of these eigenfunctions will be studied near the ideal boundary at
infinity. The goal is to understand the nodal set by means of a perturbation
expansion. It appears that the case of surfaces is much more tractable than the
higher dimensional cases.

To develop our understanding of the quantum phenomena, mathematicians are often
inspired by the analogy with classical mechanics. The passage from the classical
to the quantum level is called the semiclassical limit. If the classical motion
is chaotic, one expects the probability distribution of the quantum particle to
be dispersed. Exceptions to this pattern, where the particle concentrates, are
of particular interest. Similarly, if an energy estimate holds under strict
positivity conditions of a classical curvature form, one naturally investigates
the borderline case where the curvature form is non--negative. One hopes that
regularity properties will persevere in the more general situation. This type of
question is interesting because non--negative objects often occur as the limits
of positive objects. The nodal set of a quantum particle is the stationary set
for the associated wave motion. Its distribution and shape are of fundamental
interest, but poorly understood, especially in dimensions larger than two.

