* 0203528
* CRCD: Expanding Engineering Thinking: Interactive Visualization of Numerical Models
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Mark Warschauer, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 459,200.00

0203528&lt;br/&gt;Tara Hutchinson&lt;br/&gt;University of California
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;"Expanding Engineering Thinking: Interactive Visualization of
Numerical Models"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the development and
application of a new interactive learning tool and the use of visualization
techniques, enabled by the tool, in teaching engineering. The overall goal of
this project is to contribute to a redesigned engineering curriculum that better
matches the practice of engineering in the 21st century. The curriculum focuses
on (1) visualization and hands-on manipulation, (2) computer-assisted design and
virtual reality, (3) interactive learning, (4) critical thinking, (5) creative
problem solving, and (6) problem-based learning. These objectives are achieved
through the redesign of existing courses and through the creation of a new
interdisciplinary course. The project directly addresses the connection of
engineering with the changing needs of industry and society in merging
technology areas by educating future engineers in the 'office of the future'
environment. This instructional environment (VizClass) includes tele-
conferencing capabilities, interactive whiteboards, spatial tracking and semi-
immersive visualization operating within a completely wireless environment. The
VizClass system uses readily deployable, cost effective components, such that
other academic institutions may easily replicate it. The hardware configuration
leverages existing technology where possible and introduces system components
for the real-time control and the middleware required for fusing numerical
solvers with visualization tools and hardware components. Components of the
environment include a series of interactive projection display boards (white
boards) and a semi-immersive projection table or wall display controlled by a
dedicated visualization server. Digital whiteboards, with touch sensitive input
surfaces, enable more accurate tracking of user input. Active white board
screens providing either an input or output workspace are linked via a high-
speed (large storage capacity) server. This in turn is connected to a numerical
solver. The solver receives feedback from the input or 'working' screen in the
form chosen by the user. If the input-mode is of type equation, the solver
manipulates the equations and outputs the solution as either a 2- or
3-dimensional visual object to the selected output device in either mono- or
stereoscopic form, respectively. Visual output can be a distorted or contoured
mesh (with, for example stresses, strains or heat distribution), or figures
annotating important engineering parameters. The advantage of teaching in this
environment is the near-real time visual feedback articulating results of the
solved equations utilizing the finite element method approach as applied to
structural engineering, mechanics or electronics problems. The VizClass is
equipped with a wireless network, giving collaborators and students instant
access to all available on-line resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;