* 0203902
* Subdivision Rules and 3-Manifold Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* William Floyd, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 89,016.00

DMS-0203902&lt;br/&gt;William J. Floyd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an
attempt to resolve the hyperbolic case of&lt;br/&gt;Thurston's Geometrization
Conjecture. Specifically, the goal is to&lt;br/&gt;resolve the conjecture that a
Gromov-hyperbolic group with space at&lt;br/&gt;infinity a 2-sphere has a
cocompact, properly discontinuous action on&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic 3-space. The
investigator and his collaborators are&lt;br/&gt;approaching the conjecture from
the point of view of proving&lt;br/&gt;conformality of certain recursive
sequences of tilings on the space&lt;br/&gt;at infinity of a Gromov-hyperbolic
group. Previous work has indicated&lt;br/&gt;that conformality of a recursive
sequence of tilings might follow&lt;br/&gt;from finding an invariant conformal
structure for a branched surface&lt;br/&gt;associated to the recursive
structure. This possibility arose from a&lt;br/&gt;connection between the
recursive structures and rational maps, and&lt;br/&gt;Thurston's classification
theorem for critically finite branched maps&lt;br/&gt;of the 2-sphere gives
insight into how the theory might develop.&lt;br/&gt;Multiple approaches are
planned for finding an invariant conformal&lt;br/&gt;structure. Further work is
also planned on twisted face-pairing&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds. Much of the basic
theory of twisted face pairings has&lt;br/&gt;been completed, but some questions
remain which are central to&lt;br/&gt;further developments of the theory.
Significant progress here could&lt;br/&gt;help the main part of the project,
since twisted face pairings are a&lt;br/&gt;good source of test examples for the
conjecture stated above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate focus of this
proposal is on sequences of planar&lt;br/&gt;tilings. Given an initial tiling
and a combinatorial rule for&lt;br/&gt;subdivision, one recursively obtains a
sequence of subdivisions of&lt;br/&gt;the initial tiling. The goal is to
understand when these combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;subdivisions can be realized
geometrically so that the tiles stay&lt;br/&gt;"almost round" at all stages of
the sequence. This problem is&lt;br/&gt;interesting in its own right, but it is
being studied here as part of&lt;br/&gt;a deeper problem. It is a key feature of
a program of the&lt;br/&gt;investigator and his collaborators to resolve the
hyperbolic case of&lt;br/&gt;William P. Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture.
The Geometrization&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture, which is the central outstanding
problem in&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional topology (it includes the Poincare
conjecture as a&lt;br/&gt;special case), states that every compact 3-manifold
can be naturally&lt;br/&gt;subdivided into geometric pieces. The techniques
being developed for&lt;br/&gt;approaching this have potential applications in
other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;