* 0203747
* Research in Model Theory: Generic Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Kitty Holland, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 82,017.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0203747&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Kitty L. Holland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Holland's proposed work
centers on applying the Hrushovski-style&lt;br/&gt;amalgamation technique to
produce novel examples of omega-stable&lt;br/&gt;structures. Together with
Baldwin, Holland is engaged in an&lt;br/&gt;attempt to use this technique to
produce a bad field. Holland's&lt;br/&gt;work toward this end has produced
algebro-geometric results of&lt;br/&gt;independent interest on the relationship
between transcendence&lt;br/&gt;degree and multiplicative group rank in
characteristic zero&lt;br/&gt;fields. Holland proposes to exploit this work to
complete the&lt;br/&gt;bad field project with Baldwin and to extend
the&lt;br/&gt;algebro-geometric results. She further proposes to
settle&lt;br/&gt;stability questions for certain structures produced by
the&lt;br/&gt;technique; to analyze the geometries of structures produced
by&lt;br/&gt;the technique and to extend her joint work with Baldwin toward
an&lt;br/&gt;abstract model theoretic analysis of the technique and
its&lt;br/&gt;products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its introduction in the early
90s, Hrushovski's&lt;br/&gt;amalgamation technique has been applied with great
success to&lt;br/&gt;settle a variety of old existence conjectures central
to&lt;br/&gt;algebraic model theory. Holland's ambition, embodied in
this&lt;br/&gt;proposal, is threefold: To continue breaking new ground
in&lt;br/&gt;application of the technique, to explore the limitations of
the&lt;br/&gt;technique by characterizing common properties of its
products,&lt;br/&gt;and to make the technique more widely and efficiently
applicable&lt;br/&gt;by extracting common difficulties arising in its
implementation&lt;br/&gt;and dealing with them uniformly on an abstract
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Holland's proposed work centers on
applying the Hrushovski-style&lt;br/&gt;amalgamation technique to produce novel
examples of omega-stable&lt;br/&gt;structures. Together with Baldwin, Holland is
engaged in an&lt;br/&gt;attempt to use this technique to produce a bad field.
Holland's&lt;br/&gt;work toward this end has produced algebro-geometric results
of&lt;br/&gt;independent interest on the relationship between
transcendence&lt;br/&gt;degree and multiplicative group rank in characteristic
zero&lt;br/&gt;fields. Holland proposes to exploit this work to complete
the&lt;br/&gt;bad field project with Baldwin and to extend
the&lt;br/&gt;algebro-geometric results. She further proposes to
settle&lt;br/&gt;stability questions for certain structures produced by
the&lt;br/&gt;technique; to analyze the geometries of structures produced
by&lt;br/&gt;the technique and to extend her joint work with Baldwin toward
an&lt;br/&gt;abstract model theoretic analysis of the technique and
its&lt;br/&gt;products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its introduction in the early
90s, Hrushovski's&lt;br/&gt;amalgamation technique has been applied with great
success to&lt;br/&gt;settle a variety of old existence conjectures central
to&lt;br/&gt;algebraic model theory. Holland's ambition, embodied in
this&lt;br/&gt;proposal, is threefold: To continue breaking new ground
in&lt;br/&gt;application of the technique, to explore the limitations of
the&lt;br/&gt;technique by characterizing common properties of its
products,&lt;br/&gt;and to make the technique more widely and efficiently
applicable&lt;br/&gt;by extracting common difficulties arising in its
implementation&lt;br/&gt;and dealing with them uniformly on an abstract level.