* 0203387
* Global Control of Nonlinear Systems with Uncontrollable Unstable Linearization: A Non-Smooth Feedback Framework
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Wei Lin, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 184,761.00

0203387 Lin

This program will systematically develop a nonsmooth feedback design methodology
for the control of genuinely nonlinear systems that may not be dealt with, even
locally, by any smooth feedback. Nonsmooth feedback designs offer the potential
to overcome some topological obstructions of the system that cannot be addressed
by smooth controls, for example, to globally stabilize a nonlinear system that
is not stabilizable by any linear or smooth state feedback. The research will
address some of the most critical and challenging issues in the field of
nonlinear control, including global strong stabilization, practical output
tracking and adaptive control for nonlinearly parameterized systems with
uncontrollable unstable linearization. A unique thread in our development is the
explicit construction of homogeneous-like Lyapunov functions and non-Lipschitz
continuous controllers, based on a synthesis of methods drawn from differential
geometric control theory, homogeneous systems theory, as well as the development
of feedback domination design techniques for the control of nonlinear systems
whose Jacobian linearization contains uncontrollable modes associated with
eigenvalues on the right-half plane. This work will also include a geometric
characterization and a higher- order normal form for a significant class of
nonlinear systems.

Many control systems of practical importance (e.g. internet network,
manufacturing systems, biomimetic actuator systems, electrically stimulated
muscles, underwater or aerospace vehicles and so on) have genuinely nonlinear
characteristics that cannot be dealt with by existing feedback design methods;
most of them are smooth in nature. In fact, a goal of active research has been
to transform a physical dynamic system into a linear one for which the well-
developed modern control techniques (linear systems theory) are readily
applicable. These "linearizing" techniques have serious limitations due to
canceling the system nonlinearity by feedback or neglecting the complexity of
dynamic systems. Consequently, these design methods have not found wide
applications in a number of new real-world problems, such as control of complex
network (e.g. internet or power systems network) or controlling the position and
speed in sophisticated weapons (e.g. missiles and advanced combat aircraft). The
purpose of this research is to find ways to take advantage of the potentially
dramatic, though nonintuitive, effects caused by the inherent nonlinearity or
complex interactions of physical forces with physical systems. The main outcome
of the proposed research will be new, nonsmooth feedback design methodologies
for the control of dynamic systems. It is expected that the benefits to a
systematic approach towards using nonsmooth control will be becoming widely
appreciated, particularly in industries (e.g. manufacturing, aerospace, power
and biomedical engineering) where many applications of nonsmooth control can be
found.