* 0203396
* CRCD: From Sequence to Expression and Structure: An Innovative Research-Oriented Course
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Marek Kimmel, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2007
* USD 410,002.00

0203396 Marek Kimmel William Marsh Rice University "Bioinformatics: From
Sequence to Expression and Structure. An Inovative Research-Oriented Course"

The primary goal of this project is to teach advanced students how to
investigate cutting-edge problems in computational biology. The project involves
developing and disseminating an innovative course based directly upon leading
multidisciplinary research. Graduates who know how to identify and work on
solving leading research problems gain the significant benefit of being able to
apply bio-informatics to a broad range of problems. In addition to being
immersed in a burgeoning research sector, graduates of this program, who have
free access to the newest knowledge and skills in the field as it evolves, may
enjoy a competitive advantage in the workforce. To produce students capable of
leading independent research, the project focuses on three educational outcomes:
1. Students develop meta-cognitive knowledge of scientific and mathematical
problem solving in this field, 2. They acquire an integrated knowledge base of
leading bio-informatics models and research methods for genomic and post-genomic
research, and finally, 3. Students improve at working both as individuals and in
multidisciplinary teams. To reach these objectives, the project presents a
course in bio-informatics, on a senior undergraduate or graduate level, which
integrates cutting-edge research-related content with novel and unique means of
teaching, evaluation and dissemination. The long-term goal of the course is
related to prospective professional careers of students. The cutting-edge bio-
informatics research in industry and academia already is shifting from the DNA
sequence level to exploration of gene expression and interaction and bio-
molecular interactions. Students enrolled in the proposed course will develop a
high level understanding of bio-informatics research and computational biology.