* 0203215
* Bayesian Nonlinear Regression with Multivariate Linear Splines
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Bani Mallick, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 159,095.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0203215&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bani Mallick&lt;br/&gt;Title: Bayesian
nonlinear regression with multivariate linear splines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator and his colleagues consider novel, nonparametric modeling of
univariate and multivariate non-Gaussian response data. The usual generalized
linear models are extended to generalized nonlinear models by modeling the mean
function in a flexible way. Data adaptive multivariate smoothing splines are
employed to do this, where the number and location of the knot points are
treated as random. The posterior model space is explored using a reversible jump
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampler. Computational difficulties are partly
alleviated by introducing a residual effect in the model that leaves many of the
posterior distributions of the model parameters in standard form. The use of the
latent residual effect provides a convenient vehicle for modeling correlation in
multivariate response data and as such the method can be seen to generalize the
seemingly unrelated regression model to non-Gaussian data. In the next part of
the project the investigator and his colleagues develop semiparametric Bayesian
methods for generalized non-linear models where a predictor is measured with
either classical or Berkson error. In the presence of covariate measurement
error, estimating usual regression function nonparametrically is extremely
difficult, the problem being related to&lt;br/&gt;deconvolution. In the case of
generalized linear model it is more difficult. Again combinations of spline
regression and MCMC techniques are used to handle the
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Function estimation is an important statistical
tool that tries to understand accurately the functional relationships between
variables based on data and it has applications in many disciplines for
successfully addressing scientific questions. Most of the flexible, nonlinear
regression problems are developed when the response is a continuous variable. In
important applied problems the response may be count or indicator variable and
flexible function estimation is much more harder in these situations. In this
proposal the investigator intend to develop the methods that adaptively estimate
the functional relationships in these more complicated situations. The area of
biotechnology is an especially application for these methods. Scientists now
have techniques for measuring gene expression levels for thousands of genes at
the same time, allowing the exciting possibility of determining which human
genes are involved in a disease such as cancer and heart disease. These methods
will be useful to explore nonlinear relationship between gene expression levels
and the chance of the disease. Other possible applications are to model
correlated multivariate disease or accident counts data where the methods being
developed here will improve modeling disease or accidents maps (with
uncertainties) which will be useful for disease or transportation risk
assessments.&lt;br/&gt;