* 0203883
* Geometric Group Theory and the Topology of 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* G. Peter Scott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 228,527.00

DMS-0203883&lt;br/&gt;G. Peter Scott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric Group Theory
and the Topology of 3-Manifolds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer plans to
continue his joint work with Gadde Swarup on&lt;br/&gt;connections between
geometric group theory and the topology of&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds. In the 1970's,
the theory of the characteristic &lt;br/&gt;submanifold of a compact 3-manifold
was completed. Starting in the&lt;br/&gt;mid 1980's, it began to be apparent
that there were analogues of &lt;br/&gt;this topological result in the purely
algebraic setting. Several &lt;br/&gt;authors have worked on this in the last 15
years, but so far none &lt;br/&gt;of the results have been truly analogous to
the topological &lt;br/&gt;results except in very special cases. Now the
proposer and Swarup&lt;br/&gt;have produced the first true algebraic analogues
of the &lt;br/&gt;topological results and they plan to continue their
investigations&lt;br/&gt;in order to see how far their results can be carried.
Their &lt;br/&gt;arguments and results have already given new insights into the
&lt;br/&gt;topology of 3-manifolds and led to new results in geometric
group&lt;br/&gt;theory. The proposer expects that further work in this area
will&lt;br/&gt;have a significant impact on geometric group
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer plans to continue his joint work with
Gadde Swarup on&lt;br/&gt;connections between group theory and the theory of
3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. About 40 years ago, some remarkable, and
entirely &lt;br/&gt;unexpected, work of Stallings first demonstrated the depth
of &lt;br/&gt;these connections. More recently, work of several authors
&lt;br/&gt;continued this theme by showing that groups can be decomposed in
a&lt;br/&gt;fashion closely analogous to the way in which 3-dimensional
&lt;br/&gt;manifolds can be decomposed. The proposer and Swarup have given a
&lt;br/&gt;new approach to this area and they plan to continue their
&lt;br/&gt;investigations in order to see how far their results can be
&lt;br/&gt;carried. Their arguments and results have already given new
&lt;br/&gt;insights into the theory of 3-dimensional manifolds and led to
new&lt;br/&gt;results in group theory. The proposer expects that further work
in&lt;br/&gt;this area will have a significant impact on group
theory.&lt;br/&gt;