* 0203063
* Power Control and Call Admission Policies for Multiclass Traffic in SIR-Based Power-Controlled DS-CDMA Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Derong Liu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2005
* USD 305,656.00

This project aims at studying problems fundamental in cellular networks and
specifically related to the call admission control schemes. Efficient call
admission control schemes provide the users with access to wireless networks and
at the same time are crucial for network operators in guaranteeing services and
operating efficiently. In this three-year project, the following research
activities will be particularly pursued. First, a novel call admission control
algorithms for signal-to-interference ratio (SIR) based power-controlled direct
sequence code division multiple access (DS-CDMA) cellular networks that provide
multiple classes of services will be developed. When a new call (or a handoff
call) arriving at a base station requesting for admission, the new, desired,
power level for that new call as well as the power levels for all existing calls
will be calculated. These calculations are based on the interference received at
the base station and the desired quality of service target (i.e., the desired
SIR) for each call. In the case of a higher priority calls, e.g. handoff calls,
different thresholds for new calls and handoff calls can be allowed. The
research within this project will particularly focus on the admission control
decision based on a computationally tractable calculation of the target power
level, which would avoid the iterative process of power control for
determination of the required power levels for all users. Finally, power control
algorithms with vigorous theoretical results regarding stability, convergence,
and feasibility of solutions will also be studied for the best applicability in
future cellular networks. This project will include graduate and undergraduate
students in research and will be conducted as means of creating awareness and
interest among students on the issues surrounding wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;