* 0203978
* Photoinitiated Reactions in Ultracold Helium Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2007
* Curt Wittig, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2007
* USD 639,090.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Wittig will investigate photoinitiated processes that
involve polyatomic molecules embedded in helium droplets, He(n). This work
stands at the forefront of contemporary physical chemistry and its goal is to
obtain quantitative understanding of relaxation and reactive processes that take
place in an exceptionally well-characterized bath of liquid helium. Broad
knowledge developed for gas phase photochemistry will be used in the modeling of
processes in the condensed medium. New chemical systems, almost unperturbed by
surroundings, but difficult in being formed and studied in jet expansions, will
be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research deals with the properties of
molecules trapped in and on the surfaces of ultracold droplets of liquid helium.
Such embedded, or attached, molecules can rotate freely, but with a rotational
parameter that is different from the one that characterizes the rotation of
molecules in a dilute gas. Molecular systems that are very difficult to prepare
by conventional methods due to their high reactivity can thereby be made
accessible to study. Such highly reactive species play an important role in
chemical reactions and the proposed research will provide information not
otherwise available or very difficult to obtain. The research will be conducted
with the assistance of graduate and undergraduate students, and postdoctoral
research associates. These collaborators will acquire skills and knowledge in a
forefront area of physical chemistry that prepares them for advanced studies or
employment in industry, government research laboratories, or academia.
&lt;br/&gt;