* 0203707
* Stimuli-Sensitive Core/Shell Microgels
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Louis Lyon, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2006
* USD 282,000.00

This research is aimed at the development of a new class of stimuli-sensitive
polymers based on low polydispersity, poly-N-isopropylacrylamide homo- and co-
polymer core-shell hydrogel particles (microgels). These nanostructures will
allow for a high degree of control over the microgel porosity, deswelling
magnitude, sharpness of the volume phase transition (VPT), position of the VPT,
responsivity to stimuli other than temperature, number of transitions to a
specific stimulus, and kinetics of deswelling. Accordingly, the proposed
research is aimed at a systematic investigation of these parameters and their
relationship with microgel structure. A suite of techniques including dynamic
light scattering, fluorescence resonance nonradiative energy transfer,
differential scanning calorimetry, and electron microscopy will be used to
investigate the morphology (core compression, core-shell interpenetration, and
phase separation) of various core-shell morphologies. The relationship between
these structural characteristics and the thermodynamics and kinetics of the
volume phase transition will then be investigated in order to establish a
rational basis for the construction of complex microgel materials. These studies
will then lead to the synthesis of complex multifunctional microgels for two
specific applications: (1) fluorescent core-shell particles with ionochromic
behavior for applications in metal ion sensing, and (2) hollow shells (via
controlled core degradation) for encapsulation and controlled release
applications. Taken together, this effort will provide fundamental groundwork
for the fabrication of nanostructured hydrogel
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this work relates both to
its fundamental scientific and societal impact. Scientifically, it will expand
our knowledge concerning the chemistry and physics of nanostructured colloidal
hydrogels. With respect to broader societal impact, these materials should have
tremendous utility in numerous applications such as drug delivery, chemical
sensing, chemical/biological separations, photonic materials, artificial
muscles, micro-fluidics valves, and cell culture/tissue growth substrates, where
advances in chemical sensing and drug delivery will be the focus of this
work.&lt;br/&gt;