* 0203061
* International Research Experiences for Undergraduates (Switzerland): Solar Thermal Production of Zinc from Zinc Oxide and Carbon (Solid)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2002,08/31/2005
* Robert Palumbo, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2005
* USD 74,959.00

0203061&lt;br/&gt;Palumbo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award involves
researchers and undergraduate engineering students in a multinational,
interdisciplinary, high temperature, solar thermal chemistry project led by
Robert D. Palumbo of Valparaiso University and Alexander Wokaun of the Paul
Scherrer Institute (PSI) and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in
Zurich. During each of three summers, two Valparaiso students will spend 10
weeks at PSI with scientists and engineers from ETH, the Weizmann Institute of
Science (Israel), the French National Center for Scientific Research, and
industries, chemTEK in Germany and ScanArc in Sweden. The researchers
participate in a European Union funded project called SOLZINC. The goals of the
project are: (1) to develop technology for the long-term storage of solar energy
in the form of chemical energy and (2) to develop means for reducing industrial
CO2 using solar energy as the source of process heat for industrial production
of Zn (Zinc). Students will participate in reactor design, experiments using a
solar furnace, and interpretation of experimental data. Some student projects
include mathematical modeling to predict the performance of a solar reactor
effecting the ZnO (Zinc Oxide) carbothermic reaction; and studies of biomass as
a potential carbon source for thermal reduction of ZnO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes advantage of complementary expertise of
US, Swiss, Israeli, and European academic and industrial engineers and of
excellent facilities at PSI, in particular, a high flux solar furnace that
delivers 40kW of solar power. The project will be used to evaluate the potential
of a solar thermal reactor for long-term storage of solar energy in the form of
chemical energy and the potential of reducing CO2 emissions in the metals
production industry by using a solar process. Students will be trained in
international research and establish international connections for future work
as researchers and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;