* 0203045
* Research in Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Mladen Bestvina, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 471,781.00

DMS-0203045&lt;br/&gt;Mladen Bestvina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
encompasses different aspects of geometry, &lt;br/&gt;topology, and geometric
group theory. The unifying theme &lt;br/&gt;is the geometric and topological
study of spaces with large &lt;br/&gt;symmetry groups. Sometimes it is the group
that arises first, &lt;br/&gt;for example as a symmetry group of an algebraic
object, and &lt;br/&gt;then a space is constructed with symmetries reflecting
this &lt;br/&gt;group. This allows for geometric/topological methods
to&lt;br/&gt;be used in algebra. Another aspect of the project involves
&lt;br/&gt;finding hyperbolic structures on 3-dimensional manifolds.
&lt;br/&gt;The possibility that all (compact) spaces that locally look
&lt;br/&gt;like our ordinary 3-dimensional space are in fact geometric
&lt;br/&gt;objects was first conceived by W.P. Thurston and verified
&lt;br/&gt;in many cases. Yet another aspect involves
Diophantine&lt;br/&gt;geometry over groups. This is about a study of logical
&lt;br/&gt;statements that hold for a particular class of groups.
&lt;br/&gt;Surprisingly, as shown by the work of Z. Sela, topology
&lt;br/&gt;enters this study; for example, surfaces appear naturally
&lt;br/&gt;when one considers free groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the topics of the project are: Singularities &lt;br/&gt;of
character varieties and topological dynamics on character&lt;br/&gt;varieties,
Explicit bounds in the compactness theorems for &lt;br/&gt;spaces of discrete
and faithful representations, Weak &lt;br/&gt;hyperbolization conjecture and
immersed surface laminations &lt;br/&gt;in 3-manifolds, Constructions of Kaehler
groups of low &lt;br/&gt;cohomological dimension, Diophantine geometry over
groups,&lt;br/&gt;Finiteness properties of the Torelli group, Rigidity theorems
&lt;br/&gt;for Coxeter, Artin, and related groups.&lt;br/&gt;