* 0203754
* Self-Assembly of Novel Mesoscopic Structures using DNA-programmed Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* John Crocker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2005
* USD 306,855.00

This project will develop techniques to engineer suspensions of DNA-labeled
microspheres that will spontaneously self-assemble into novel, 3-dimensional
colloidal crystal structures. The self-assembly of the spheres will be driven by
a short-ranged, reversible attractive interaction induced by large numbers of
very weakly associating single-stranded DNA molecules bound to their surface.
Importantly, this interaction is determined by the sequence of the DNA molecules
--enabling the creation of binary and ternary colloidal mixtures where the
interactions between the different sphere populations are independently
programmable in magnitude and sign, attractive or repulsive. This flexibility
will permit the creation of previously unobserved alloy phases, such as BCC, SC
and diamond-like phases, which are of interest both as model systems for atomic
crystals and phase transitions as well as 3D templates for photonic bandgap
crystals. Over the long-term, the goal is to produce and disseminate automated
design tools for generating DNA recipes yielding a desired crystal structure. In
addition, this work will provide chemical engineering students outstanding
opportunities to pursue basic materials research, as well as master techniques
ranging from microscopy to computational genomics.

A major outstanding topic in Condensed Matter Physics concerns how crystals form
and grow, and what determines their atomic structure. Many experiments use
microspheres floating in water to model atomic processes--like atoms they will
spontaneously crystallize into ordered 3D arrays, but unlike atoms, the process
is visible under a simple microscope. The proposed research will develop new
methods for sticking these spheres together into new types of crystal structures
by using DNA molecules attached to their surfaces. When two spheres come
together bearing complementary halves of the double helix, the molecules will
zip up pulling the spheres together. Besides being of fundamental interest,
these new alloy-like crystals will be technologically useful as templates for
so-called photonic bandgap materials, which some researchers believe will lead
to more efficient lasers as well as faster computers and telecommunication
systems. In addition, this work will provide chemical engineering students
outstanding opportunities to pursue basic materials research, as well as master
techniques ranging from microscopy to computational genomics.