* 0203363
* ALGORITHMS:  Hierarchical Computational-space Decomposition:  A Framework for Scalable Scientific Computing Beyond Teraflop
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2002,10/31/2002
* Aiichiro Nakano, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 10/31/2002
* USD 204,951.00

This project will develop a scalable parallel computing framework for high-end
computational research, which will achieve scalability beyond tightly coupled
Teraflop architectures, i.e., for distributed supercomputing on multiple
Teraflop computers as well as on future Petaflop computers with deep memory
hierarchy. To accomplish this goal, the PI will conduct the following research
tasks: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology-preserving computational-space
decomposition to minimize the number of messages using a structured message-
passing scheme; &lt;br/&gt;Wavelet-based adaptive load balancing in dynamic,
heterogeneous metacomputing environment using simulated annealing to minimize
load imbalance and message sizes; &lt;br/&gt;Recursive and reconfigurable
grouping of processors with message renormalization and
computation/communication overlapping to hide latency at each grouping level;
&lt;br/&gt;Spacefilling-curve-based adaptive data compression --- in situ
processing of interoperable compressed data to reduce message sizes with user-
controlled error bound. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A suite of scalable scientific
programs developed within the new framework will be disseminated as a
computational-scientist's toolkit through a Web portal to have significant
impacts on high-end computational research, including the design of quantum-dot
architectures for future quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;