* 0203115
* Publication of an Earth Scientist's Periodic Table of the Elements and their Ions
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* L. Bruce Railsback, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2004
* USD 4,344.00

Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the publication of an
Earth Scientist's Periodic Table of the Elements and Their Ions (ESPTEI). The
ESPTEI is a ground-breaking change in the way geochemistry is being taught and
understood. The ESPTEI is a large format (14" x 36") color document that can be
seen on the World-Wide Web at http://www.gly.uga.edu/railsback/PT.html. Unlike
the traditional periodic table where elements are organized according to the
nature and behavior of elemental (uncharged) forms of matter, the ESPTEI is
organized by charged forms (for example, Si4+ and S2-). The table also shows
some elements multiple times to account for their multiple naturally occurring
valence states. This is done because earth scientists study matter in both
oxidizing and reducing conditions. Another feature of this table is the
placement of contours of equal ionic potential or charge density. Finally, the
ESPTEI has symbols showing the abundances of ions or charged forms in soils and
in natural waters, their roles as nutrients, and their occurrences in minerals,
igneous rocks, and deep-sea nodules. Those symbols largely follow the contours
of ionic potential over this newly-reorganized table, allowing many trends in
mineralogy, aqueous geochemistry, igneous petrology, soil geochemistry,
sedimentary geochemistry, nutrient chemistry, and even atmospheric chemistry to
become apparent.