* 0203806
* Competing Ground States and Disorder in Correlated Electron Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Stuart Brown, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2005
* USD 303,821.00

This project involves the application of solid state magnetic resonance
techniques to address current questions related to competing ground states in
selected correlated electron systems. The approach is based on the examination
of several materials where antiferromagnetism competes with a paramagnetic Fermi
Liquid phase (and possibly superconductivity) or a Spin-Peierls phase. The
materials under study are from two families: heavy fermion and organic
superconductors. They are characterized by very different microscopic physics.
The goal of the project is to identify common trends in the physical properties
of these materials, as well as to explore the physical properties of novel
phases. Particular attention is paid to the vicinity of discontinuous and
continuous quantum phase transitions, where the qualitative and quantitative
effects resulting from varying the amount of disorder is examined. Pressure is
the predominate means used to tune the ground state of the systems in question.
The project trains two graduate students in the course of measurement design and
execution. A course in magnetic resonance for the graduate level is planned for
the 2002-2003 academic year. Smaller technical projects, both specific to
particular experiments and for general laboratory improvements, are assigned to
undergraduates.

In a number of materials of current interest, the electrons behave in a
correlated manner. The electrical behavior, or state, of the material depends
upon which interaction involving the electrons dominates. Some of the materials
in this class have properties related to these interactions that are
technologically useful, i.e. no electrical resistance at relatively high
temperatures or a large response in the electrical resistance to magnetic
fields. Typically, the state that is stabilized is controlled by external
parameters such as charge doping, high pressure, high magnetic fields, and so
on. In this project, a combination of experimental techniques, though primarily
solid state magnetic resonance, are used to gain an increased understanding of
the competing states in correlated electron systems. The emphasis is on the
physical properties of novel phases, and the effects of disorder on these
materials. The systems investigated fall into two classes: organic
superconductors and heavy fermion materials. Tuning is achieved with pressure
and magnetic field; disorder is introduced through chemical substitution. The
goal is to use controlled disorder in the efforts to classify transitions, and
also to understand the qualitative, and sometimes dramatic, changes in the
physical properties induced by the disorder. The project trains two graduate
students in the course of measurement design and execution. A course in magnetic
resonance for the graduate level is planned for the 2002-2003 academic year.
Smaller technical projects, both specific to particular experiments and for
general laboratory improvements, are assigned to undergraduates.