* 0203961
* Reflecting Brownian Motion in Convex Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Mihai Pascu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2004
* USD 53,367.00

0203961 Pascu The PI will study several connected problems related to reflecting
Brownian motion in convex domains. Motivated originally by the interest of the
proposer in solving the hot spots conjecture, the first problem concerns the
construction of couplings of reflecting Brownian motion in convex domains. The
author introduced a new type of coupling of reflecting Brownian motions, which
led him to a partial resolution of the hot spots conjecture; the author will try
to develop these coupling arguments, with the hope of solving this long-standing
conjecture with roots in mathematical physics. In connection to this problem is
the more general conjecture of the diagonal monotonicity of the Neumann heat
kernel of convex domains with one axis of symmetry (which implies the hot spots
conjecture). A related open problem which the PI intends to study is Chavel's
conjecture on the domain monotonicity of Neumann heat kernel. In the view of the
PI, coupling techniques can be used here to obtain classes of domains for which
Chavel's conjecture holds true. Finally, in connection to all above-mentioned
problems is the more general problem of finding a precise dependence of the
Neumann heat kernels of two convex planar domains. Reflecting Brownian motion
has been observed and studied for more than one century, since it was first
observed by the English botanist Robert Brown in 1827. Its most recent
spectacular application is probably the famous work of Black-Scholes, which
changed forever the guessing game of the price of a stock option in a
mathematical sense by tying it to the random behavior of a Brownian motion. This
led to the award of a the Nobel prize for Economics in 1997. Other applications
of reflecting Brownian motion are in potential theory, partial differential
equations, mathematical physics and mathematical finance. The present research
aims to develop and study certain properties of reflecting Brownian motion
(monotonicity properties and domain dependence of the transition density), which
will give a deeper understanding of this fundamental stochastic process. In
turn, this gives as applications properties of functions arising from real-life
situations, whenever a connection to this process can be established (for
example the extremum properties of the temperature of a thermally insulated
body).