* 0203412
* Integral Embedded Capacitor Component from Ultra-High Dielectric Constant Polymer-Conductive Filler Nano-Composite
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* C. Wong, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2006
* USD 240,000.00

Integral passives are considered to potentially provide alternatives to current
discrete passive components with benefits on system cost, size, functionality
and reliability. For embedded capacitor applications, polymer-ceramic nano-
composite has been previously investigated as high dielectric constant (K)
materials. However, there are some technical barriers to the use of polymer-
ceramic composite in organic substrate, e.g., limited dielectric constant value
(<150) achieved and poor adhesion towards the substrates.

The proposer has discovered a novel dielectric material, which is based on
polymer-conductive filler composite. The preliminary results have shown an
effective dielectric constant as high as over 2000, and nearly the same adhesion
as the neat polymer matrix. In order to successfully apply such ultra-high K
material to integral capacitor application in next-generation advanced
electronic packaging, the proposed project will perform fundamental studies on
the following issues:

Ultra-high K polymer-conductive filler composite formulation optimization:
Continued efforts will be devoted to optimize the formulation for potentially
even higher material performance.

Modeling of integral capacitor component: This could aid the design and process
of integral capacitor components by providing quantitative estimates of the
critical material and process parameters.

Processability of integral capacitor component using the developed ultra-high K
polymer-conductive filler composite: Prototyping of integral capacitor will be
constructed from liquid or film composite material. Both rigid and flexible
substrates will be used for capacitor development.

Reliability performance of the integral capacitors fabricated from the proposed
processes: stability/degradation of electrical properties such as dielectric
constant as well as adhesion strength, etc. will be monitored against 850C185%RH
aging, temperature, humidity and bias (THB) aging, liquid-liquid thermal shock
(LLTC), and air-air thermal cycle (AATC), etc.

Expected results from the proposed research will enrich the fundamental
understanding about the integral capacitor component based on ultra-high K
dielectric materials, which will be essential for the realization of integral
capacitor application in next-generation micro-electronic packaging.