* 0203661
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Analysis of the Pathways of Control of Dimorphism in Ustilago Maydis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Scott Gold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2007
* USD 65,491.00

0203661 &lt;br/&gt;Gold&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will support
a collaborative project between Dr. Scott Gold, of the University of Georgia, in
Athens, Georgia, in collaboration with Dr. Jose Ruiz-Herrera of the Centro de
Investigaciones y de Estudios Avanzados (Cinvestav) in Irapuato, Mexico. The
researchers aim to study corn smut fungi, a plant disease of cultivated maize,
whose close relatives are important pathogens of many grain crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smut fungi grow in two morphologies, one form is a budding
yeast while the second is typical of most fungi and is made up of long tubular
cells of filaments. In corn smut, yeast cells cannot attack the plant but
filaments can. These two forms are also common in animal and human fungal
pathogens and, again, morphology is often correlated with the ability to cause
disease. The researchers have discovered mutations in genes that control the
ability of the fungus to alternate between these two forms. The mutations thus
far characterized dramatically affect smut disease progression. However, the
morphogenetic stimuli used by the two research groups differ, the U.S side
studying the signal transduction pathways and the Mexican side studying the
effects of pH variations, with both groups observing similar phenotypic results
in their studies. The work proposed here will continue to determine the
relationship between these morphogenetic pathways by means of various
experimental approaches. The information to be derived from this collaboration
is likely to increase our understanding of fungal growth and diseases in
general. In addition, the involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in
the collaboration will provide them with a significant international research
and cultural experience.&lt;br/&gt;