* 0203269
* UMEB: Environmental Biology at the University of Tulsa
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Harrington Wells, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 404,000.00

The Department of Biological Sciences at the University of Tulsa has created a
program that provides sufficient time, guidance, financial support and
facilities for undergraduates to undertake and complete a substantial research
project in environmental biology. The program provides incentives that make
pursuing a graduate degree a very attractive educational path by creating the
means to integrate undergraduate work with the Department's Master of Science
program, or to prepare for graduate work at some other institution. The heart of
the program is year-round independent research fostered through a one-on-one
mentoring relationship with a faculty member engaged in research, but it also
includes a variety of experiences designed to initiate students into the culture
of science. A sophomore/junior-year colloquium that connects extant freshman and
senior experiences will not only afford students time and guidance to engage in
critical literature review integrated with an invited-speaker series but also
will provide a forum for critical peer review of their work and for practice of
their presentation skills. New course work in environmental ethics and
experimental design will also benefit UMEB students as well as others in the
campus community. Each year will culminate in a research symposium where
students present their work to the campus community and their families. As part
of the research experience, students will attend scientific meetings
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target group for the UMEB program is under-
represented groups in the scientific research community. The University of Tulsa
is positioned in a metropolitan area with the second highest concentration of
urban Native Americans in the country. Although Oklahoma is known for its Native
populations, it also has a large number of Historically Black Towns, and more
recently Oklahoma has seen a significant rise in its Hispanic population. The
Faculty of Biology will also use the UMEB program to improve its mentoring of
students, particularly in helping minorities since many do not have established
role models in the scientific community. The core of this endeavor involves
engaging in a dialogue to improve the faculty's collective mentoring skills
based on readings and presentations of consultants from other faculties and the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be evaluated yearly to discern
whether its goals are being met and how the program is impacting participating
students. That evaluation process will include not only course and overall
program evaluation by students but also evaluation of the program by the PIs
through review of each participant's progress and the type of students
participating in the program. Those results will be shared at national meetings.