* 0203003
* Electronic Effects in Quantum Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Tai Chiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

Geometric confinement of electrons in quantum structures including films, nano
wires, and nano dots leads to quantization and the formation of discrete states
or subbands. As a result, electronic properties including the total energy,
electronic charge distribution, and density of states can exhibit quantum
variations as a function of system size and boundary conditions. The structure
and dynamic properties may also be affected due to electron-lattice and
electron-phonon coupling. This project aims at a fundamental understanding of
these quantum effects and phenomena. The proposed work will include
photoemission at the Synchrotron Radiation Center in Stoughton, Wisconsin, and
x-ray scattering and diffraction at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National
Laboratory. Besides the quest for fundamental knowledge, an important mission of
this project is the education and training of students and postdoctoral research
associates. The rigorous training provided by this project involving national
synchrotron radiation facilities, state-of-the-art instruments, and detailed
theoretical modeling matches well with the highly technical personnel needs of
universities, industry, and national laboratories.

Nanoscale features prepared on solid surfaces in the form of thin films, narrow
wires, and small dots offer opportunities for creating novel properties. Namely,
electrons in the system, confined by the geometry, can exhibit modified
electronic structure, and thus the physical properties of the system can be
size-dependent and thereby tunable. This project aims at a fundamental
understanding of these quantum effects and phenomena. The proposed work will
include photoemission measurements of the electronic structure at the
Synchrotron Radiation Center in Stoughton, Wisconsin, and x-ray scattering and
diffraction studies of the lattice structure at the Advanced Photon Source,
Argonne National Laboratory. Besides the quest for fundamental knowledge, an
important mission of this project is the education and training of students and
postdoctoral research associates. The rigorous training provided by this project
involving national synchrotron radiation facilities, state-of-the-art
instruments, and detailed theoretical modeling matches well with the highly
technical personnel needs of universities, industry, and national laboratories