* 0203069
* Isolated and Collective Magnetic Phenomena in Metallic Nanocrystals and Their Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Kannan Krishnan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2006
* USD 351,532.00

The research is directed at the synthesis, characterization and assembly of
passivated,&lt;br/&gt;colloidal nanocrystals of metals into ordered
superlattices with the fundamental goal of&lt;br/&gt;understanding the evolution
of their static and dynamic magnetic behavior as a function&lt;br/&gt;of
nanocrystal size and shape, superlattice dimensionality, organizational symmetry
and&lt;br/&gt;interparticle interactions. The objective of the work is to use
magnetometry methods to get a deeper understanding of the magnetic metrology of
nanoscale structures. The study will provide fundamental mechanisms of magnetic
reversal with emphasis on the role of finite size and interaction effects as
well as the origin of dipolar ferromagnetism, in the absence of interparticle
exchange interactions. The study emphasizes on the entropy-driven self-assembly
and template-assisted crystallization processes for the synthesis of large-area
(mm size) superlattices along with systematic structural and chemical
characterization using electron and photon probes. Newly emerging MEMS based
metrology methods and electron holography on the nanocrystal samples will be
studied through collaborative work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal is
a thorough understanding, prediction and control of
cooperative&lt;br/&gt;magnetic behavior over different length scales and time
signatures in artificially&lt;br/&gt;tailored solids. In addition, the work will
provide solutions to fundamental questions associated with magnetic reversal.
The research has broad technological implications for it will contribute to the
development of the ultimate magnetic recording media, i.e. single-particle per
bit recording as well as in MEMS technology. &lt;br/&gt;