* 0203926
* Analytic and Geometric Aspects of Ricci Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Bennet Chow, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 228,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0203926.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
study analytic and geometric aspects of &lt;br/&gt;Hamilton's Ricci flow of
Riemannian metrics, and related topics. In particular, &lt;br/&gt;the principal
investigator proposes to investigate injectivity radius estimates &lt;br/&gt;for
solutions to the Ricci flow. The PI proposes to study&lt;br/&gt;Li-Yau-Hamilton
(Harnack) inequalities for both the Ricci flow and the &lt;br/&gt;linearized
Ricci flow. The PI also proposes to study collapsing sequences of solutions
&lt;br/&gt;to the Ricci flow and the related compactness theory. Finally, the PI
proposes to &lt;br/&gt;study estimates for the linearized Ricci flow
and&lt;br/&gt;their applications. The PI will focus on dimension 3, where there
are the &lt;br/&gt;most tools available and the problems posed have the most
topological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ricci flow is an
evolution equation which deforms geometric structures &lt;br/&gt;on surfaces and
manifolds both improving and smoothing out the structures. &lt;br/&gt;It has
been at the cutting edge of the recent rapid progress in geometric
&lt;br/&gt;evolution equations and has greatly influenced the study of the mean
curvature&lt;br/&gt;flow and many other geometric evolution equations. The work
on &lt;br/&gt;understanding the singularities which develop under the flow has
led to the development &lt;br/&gt;of new and powerful analytic and geometric
tools, which have found applications in the&lt;br/&gt;study of many geometric
evolution equations. Many phenomena are&lt;br/&gt;modeled by geometric evolution
equations, such as heat transfer, the &lt;br/&gt;evolution of interfaces between
molten and solid metal, and the interfaces between ice &lt;br/&gt;and water.
Geometric evolution equations are also used to smooth out images and
&lt;br/&gt;have applications in computer vision.&lt;br/&gt;