* 0203336
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of Iron Redox Processes on Smectite Crystal Structures and Surface Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Joel Kostka, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2006
* USD 95,984.00

Kostka&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0203336&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Clays, which are ubiquitous
in natural sediments, soils, and other geologic formations, affect the fate of
such chemicals as pesticides, organic contaminants, heavy metals, and plant
nutrients in the environment. This effect is strongly correlated with the
surface chemistry of the clay minerals, which is influenced by the charge or
oxidation state of iron (Fe) in their crystal structures. The long-range goal of
our work is to understand the role of iron on these surface reactions, and the
specific objective of this proposed study is to identify the underlying cause(s)
for the effects of structural Fe oxidation state on clay surface properties, and
to characterize the nature of the resulting interactions with surface species
such as water, metals, and organic compounds. The central hypothesis for the
proposed research is that reduction of structural Fe by either biotic (bacterial
reduction) or abiotic (chemical reduction) means, not only yields a new redox
potential and electrostatic charge at the clay surface, but invokes in situ
changes in crystal site occupancy of structural Fe and introduces structural
defects, which, in turn, further alter the clay surface chemistry.&lt;br/&gt; We
plan to test our central hypothesis and accomplish the overall objective of this
proposed study by pursuing the following four specific aims: (a) Determine the
site occupancy of structural Fe in mixed Al-Fe-Mg dioctahedral smectite clay
minerals before and after Fe reduction; (b) Identify the causal relationship
between changes in Fe oxidation state and surface chemistry; (c) Determine the
reversibility of redox processes; and (d) Characterize the relative effects of
bacteria versus inorganic reducing agents on clay properties.&lt;br/&gt; The
fundamental understanding to be gained during this study will provide a powerful
tool for using redox behavior to predict and control chemical reactions at clay
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;