* 0203854
* Collaborative Research: Absolute and essential instabilities in spatially extended systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Bjorn Sandstede, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 119,916.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0203854&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative
Research: Absolute and essential instabilities in spatially extended
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0203854
Sandstede&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores several
instability mechanisms of coherent states, such as fronts, pulses and spiral
waves, that occur in spatially extended systems far from equilibrium. The common
theme of these mechanisms is that they involve transport phenomena caused by
diffusion and nonlinearities. Examples of such transitions are backfiring
instabilities of fronts, period-doubling bifurcations of spiral waves, and the
effect of inhomogeneities on the dynamics of spiral waves. While transport is
most conveniently modeled and described using an idealized unbounded domain,
boundaries may well enhance or inhibit the instability through partial
reflection or generation of waves. It is the aim of this project to develop
techniques that can help to investigate instability mechanisms simultaneously on
bounded and unbounded domains. One of the expected outcomes will be a
description of instability mechanisms that is robust with respect to typical
boundary conditions in large reactors. Technically, our approach is based on
methods from spatial dynamics that allow us to derive sharp pointwise estimates
which capture explicitly the effects of
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complicated spatio-temporal patterns that arise
due to the interplay of chemical reactions and diffusion have been observed
experimentally in a number of specific reactions (among them the Belousov-
Zhabotinsky reaction and the chlorite-iodide-malonic acid reaction). Similar
phenomena have been observed during fibrillation of cardiac tissue where spiral
waves act as organizing centers for the complex spatio-temporal dynamics. Other
examples where irregular patterns occur are the interaction of pulses in
oscillatory media, backfiring of excitation pulses in catalytic reactions, and
optical bistability in nonlinear photonic gratings. The focus of this project is
to analyze some of these instability mechanisms by analytical means. This will
not only further our understanding of pattern formation in chemical and
biological systems, but will eventually allow for a systematic control of
patterns, for instance, in the catalytic oxidation of carbon-monoxide and in the
propagation of calcium waves in intracellular tissue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;