* 0203782
* ALGORITHMS: Parallel Algorithms and Software for EST Clustering
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 12/31/2004
* USD 160,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop parallel algorithms and a
parallel software system for clustering Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs). ESTs are
derived from fragments of reverse transcribed mRNA isolated experimentally and
thus directly correspond to protein coding genes. The proposed project is aimed
at overcoming the computational limitations of current software systems such as
inability to handle large data sets within reasonable time and memory resources.
This project will provide a strong context for fundamental research in practical
parallel string algorithms, including the development of parallel algorithms for
constructing suffix trees and suffix arrays, applications involving suffix trees
and arrays such as containment and overlap detection. Particular emphasis will
be placed on the design of space-efficient algorithms because space-complexity
often determines whether the use of an algorithm is feasible for large data
sets. The software will be validated using large EST data sets from organisms
with small and known genomes, which will be exploited to derive correct
clustering though alternate methods. The algorithms developed will provide the
basis for other similar projects including protein repertoire comparisons and
testing of biological hypotheses such as exon shuffling and gene duplication.
The human EST collection at the National Institute of Health currently has over
3.8 million ESTs and parallel processing is essential for discovering
biologically useful information from such large EST
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the project, emphasis will be
placed on design of parallel algorithms using realistic models of parallel
computation, rigorous proofs of optimality with respect to best known sequential
algorithms, careful evaluation of the communication complexity and the constants
involved in asymptotic run-time estimates, and development of user-friendly
software. Experimental evaluation of the algorithms will be carried out both on
conventional tightly-coupled parallel computers and clusters. The project will
be carried out by an interdisciplinary team of researchers having the required
expertise in parallel algorithm design, building large parallel software
systems, bioinformatics and life sciences. To further ensure the success of this
project, collaborations have been established with researchers from the
University of Bielefeld and the National Institute of Health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;