* 0203333
* CRCD: Innovative Approaches to Computer-Human Interfaces
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,02/28/2007
* Lori Scarlatos, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 02/28/2007
* USD 423,135.00

0203333&lt;br/&gt;Scarlatos, Lori&lt;br/&gt;CUNY Brooklyn
College&lt;br/&gt;"Innovative Approaches to Computer-Human
Interfaces"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, involving two universities,
addresses the transfer of Human Computer Interfaces (HCI) research into
undergraduate and graduate curricula. The PI and Co-PIs explore alternative
approaches to HCI including immersive interfaces, virtual reality and ubiquitous
computing as well as alternative input modes, such as voice, gesture, and eye
tracking. They have also experimented with using objects in the environment as
input devices (tangible interfaces) and giving those objects intelligence about
where they are in relation to others (smart objects). This proposal describes a
way to address the need to expand the pool of HCI practitioners through
curricular changes integrating the PI's and others' research. This project
involves the development of a sequence of courses for both computer science and
math/science education students that teach them how to 1) utilize new interface
technologies, 2) apply those skills in multidisciplinary teams, and 3) evaluate
their resulting projects in public settings. The computer science and
math/science education students collaborate to develop educational tools
designed to get K-12 students interested in math and science. The new courses
are taught at two public universities, Brooklyn College (CUNY) and Stony Brook
University (SUNY), where they reach students and future/current teachers from
both the suburbs and the inner city. In addition, the PI plan two teacher
workshops at Stony Brook's Center for Excellence in Learning and Teaching, and
the installation of the projects in two museums: the New York Hall of Science,
and the Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science. This combined
research curriculum development effort is expected to yield several benefits.
(1) The work may impact a broad range of people, including a large number of
students in groups that are underrepresented in math and science in college
classrooms, public museums, and public schools, (2) This multidisciplinary
program will facilitate and support collaboration between computer science
students and math/science education students (who are generally practicing
teachers). These undergraduate students will learn about state-of-the-art
research advances in the area of computer-human interfaces, and how those
interfaces can be used to enhance education, apply these technologies to
educational applications in a collaborative effort, and participate in research
evaluating their applications in real-world settings, (3) Student projects,
installed at the Center for Excellence in Learning and Teaching, the New York
Hall of Science, and the Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science, will
provide learning opportunities and inspiration to a wider audience including
both students and educators, (4) Two workshops, held at the Center for
Excellence in Learning and Teaching, will help to further disseminate the
findings of this project among the community of educators (5) A new textbook,
with supplementary materials available online, will enable others to teach these
courses at their institutions. Educational applications utilizing innovative
computer interfaces may then become the tools of an even greater pool of
educators and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;