* 0203593
* Floer Theory, Symplectic Geometry and Mirror Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Yong-Geun Oh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 129,831.00

DMS-0203593 Yong-Geun Oh

Floer homology in symplectic geometry was introduced by Floer in an attempt to
prove the Arnold conjecture. Various results by Chekanov, Oh, Polterovich and
Seidel have proved that the Floer homology is a general powerful tool to
investigate symplectic topology. In this project, Oh proposes to further
investigate structure and applications of the Floer theory for deeper
understanding of the Hamiltonian diffeomorphism group and Lagrangian
submanifolds or more generally symplectic topology. The Floer theory of
Lagrangian submanifolds, via Fukaya's A-infinity category, also provides a
geometric framework for Kontsevich's homological mirror symmetry proposal on
Calabi-Yau manifolds. Oh's recent work with Fukaya, Ohta and Ono provides
several key steps towards a rigorous construction of Fukaya's category by
developing an obstruction theory for defining the Lagrangian intersection Floer
homology. Complete construction will involve study of singular Lagrangian
submanifolds, Lagrangian surgery and their relations to the Floer homology. Oh
proposes to investigate these new aspects of the Floer theory in relation the
mirror symmetry on the Calabi-Yau manifolds.

The Hamiltonian formalism plays important roles not only for solving problems in
classical mechanics but also for quantizing the classical mechanics into quantum
mechanics. The Poisson bracket is the crucial geometric structure that plays a
key role in the classical mechanics and the quantum mechanics through the
quantization process. When one considers mechanics in a constrained system,
i.e., mechanics on a curved space, description of the corresponding phase space
and the geometric structure corresponding to the Poisson bracket requires the
notion of the symplectic structure and symplectic manifolds. Symplectic geometry
and topology is the study of symplectic manifolds. In symplectic geometry, there
are two most important objects of study. One is the study of Hamiltonian
systems, a special type of differential equation, and their periodic orbits.
This is dynamical in nature. The other is the study of geometry and topology of
Lagrangian submanifolds. This is geometric in nature. Understanding the
intersection theory of Lagrangian submanifolds is the core of symplectic
topology. Floer homology introduced by Floer in the end of 80's is a general
machinery to study this intersection theory. The Floer theory also provides a
geometric framework for the mirror symmetry phenomenon that was discovered by
physicists in string theory. Oh's proposed research aims at, on the one hand,
deeper understanding of symplectic topology, and also aims at understanding
inter-relations between the symplectic and the complex geometry via the study of
mirror symmetry.

