* 0203175
* Optimization: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Burke, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 210,398.00

0203175&lt;br/&gt;Burke &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research we develop
theoretical and numerical tools for &lt;br/&gt;understanding and exploiting the
variational behavior of spectral &lt;br/&gt;functions. Briefly, spectral
functions are mappings of the spectrum &lt;br/&gt;of real or complex valued
matrices to the real numbers. Two &lt;br/&gt;examples are the spectral abscissa
(the maximum real part of the &lt;br/&gt;spectrum) and the spectral radius (the
maximum modulus of the &lt;br/&gt;spectrum). The spectral abscissa and the
spectral radius play an &lt;br/&gt;important role in understanding the
asymptotic behavior of &lt;br/&gt;continuous and discrete dynamical systems,
respectively. For this &lt;br/&gt;reason, understanding their variational
behavior will greatly impact &lt;br/&gt;a number of application areas. In
general, spectral functions have a &lt;br/&gt;number of features that make them
difficult to analyze. Foremost &lt;br/&gt;among these is that they are typically
nondifferentiable, indeed &lt;br/&gt;non-Lipschitzian. These functions can be
very poorly behaved &lt;br/&gt;especially in regions of interest for
optimization. Thus, even &lt;br/&gt;though these functions have a classical
history in mathematics, &lt;br/&gt;science, and engineering, intimate knowledge
of their variational &lt;br/&gt;behavior has proven elusive. For this reason,
new tools of analysis &lt;br/&gt;in conjunction with classical techniques are
required. In this &lt;br/&gt;research we bring together the modern techniques of
variational &lt;br/&gt;analysis and classical methods of Puiseux-Newton series,
semi-&lt;br/&gt;algebraic sets, conformal mappings, and the geometry of
&lt;br/&gt;polynomials. These tools have proven to be phenomenally
&lt;br/&gt;successful in shedding new light on this very important class of
&lt;br/&gt;functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In optimization theory and practice
one tries to either minimize or &lt;br/&gt;maximize a performance measure
subject to limitations on how the &lt;br/&gt;performance measure can be
adjusted. Optimization is a &lt;br/&gt;fundamentally interdisciplinary area of
research having a &lt;br/&gt;significant impact on a wide range of academic,
industrial, and &lt;br/&gt;government research activities. Research in
optimization requires &lt;br/&gt;theoretical advances, the development of
numerical solution &lt;br/&gt;methods, and a firm grounding in applications. The
particular &lt;br/&gt;research outlined in this proposal focuses on optimization
&lt;br/&gt;problems that are closely related to the stability properties of
&lt;br/&gt;systems that evolve with time. In particular, it impacts the design
&lt;br/&gt;of structures such as buildings and aircraft that are subject to
&lt;br/&gt;temporal deformations from environmental factors such as an
&lt;br/&gt;earthquake or a wind-shear. The underlying optimization problem
&lt;br/&gt;in this context is to make the structure as stable as possible in a
&lt;br/&gt;potentially hostile environment while satisfying certain design
&lt;br/&gt;limitations on such things as weight, size, and cost. The great
&lt;br/&gt;difficulty in this research is that the performance measures under
&lt;br/&gt;consideration, such as stability, do not vary in a smooth manner as
&lt;br/&gt;the underlying parameters vary. Consequently fundamentally new
&lt;br/&gt;methods of analysis are required to understand the variational
&lt;br/&gt;behavior of these performance measures. Indeed, the mathematical
&lt;br/&gt;tools necessary for this kind of analysis have only very recently
&lt;br/&gt;been developed. In this research we intend to make significant
&lt;br/&gt;inroads into the analysis of these kinds of problems and to develop
&lt;br/&gt;a range of numerical methods that can be used to solve
them.&lt;br/&gt;