* 0203127
* ITWF: Factors Concerning Recruitment and Retention of Women Graduate Students in Computer Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Andrew Bernat, Computing Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 07/31/2008
* USD 513,629.00

EIA-0203127&lt;br/&gt;Cuny, Janice E.&lt;br/&gt;Aspray,
William&lt;br/&gt;Cohoon, Joanne&lt;br/&gt;Jesse, Jolene&lt;br/&gt;Computing
Research Association&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Factors Concerning Recruitment
and Retention of Women Graduate&lt;br/&gt;Students in Computer Science and
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITWF award provides support to the
Computing Research Association&lt;br/&gt;(CRA) to study an important aspect of
the largest under-represented group&lt;br/&gt;in the IT workforce, the graduate
education of women. Using experience&lt;br/&gt;gained in a previous Best
Practice Report (Janice Cuny and William Aspray,&lt;br/&gt;"Recruitment and
Retention of Women Graduate Students in Computer Science&lt;br/&gt;and
Engineering", Computing Research Association, Washington, DC 2001)
on&lt;br/&gt;recruiting and retaining women in computer science and engineering
(CS&amp;E)&lt;br/&gt;graduate school, the project will study U.S. CS&amp;E
graduate programs in&lt;br/&gt;order to identify and quantify links between the
program's recruitment and&lt;br/&gt;retention practices and their
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results expected from the study include a
description and assessment of the&lt;br/&gt;existing recruitment and retention
practices in 50 CS&amp;E departments with&lt;br/&gt;doctoral programs; a measure
of the impact recruitment practices have on&lt;br/&gt;the female proportion of
new students enrolled; a measure of the impact&lt;br/&gt;retention practices
have on the female proportion of students retained&lt;br/&gt;through the
doctorate; a set of materials that departments can use to make&lt;br/&gt;self-
assessments; an evaluation of the effectiveness and
comprehensiveness&lt;br/&gt;of the practices recommended in the Best Practices
Report; and findings&lt;br/&gt;that can be generalized on the link between
recruitment and retention&lt;br/&gt;practices and their outcomes with respect to
female graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;