* 0203378
* Interactions and Assembly in Suspension
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

This experimental condensed matter physics project will explore the fundamental
properties of complex fluids, which include colloidal suspensions, emulsions,
polymer solutions, membranes, and mixtures thereof. These "soft" materials find
applications in the paint, food science, and cosmetic industries, in the
practical control of fluid rheologies, in cell biology, and in high-tech
problems of photonics, lithography, and biochemical sensors and processors. This
work addresses three basic issues in suspension science:(i) Microscopic
interactions, (ii) Assembly, and (iii) New macroscopic model systems.
Experiments are planned to: (1) Measure interactions in suspension produced by
macromolecules, vesicles, and membranes, by subtle hydration effects, by
polymer-induced steric interactions, and by dipolar or anisotropic background
fluids; (2) Study the equilibrium assembly of colloidal crystals with templates
that bias growth towards metastable states; and (3) Study the equilibrium phases
of rods and plates at very high densities, and at very low densities (i.e. in
the low-screening limit). (4) Develop methodologies to assemble colloidal
crystal heterostructures. (5) Synthesize new suspension constituents that offer
us the possibility to create new macroscopic model systems, for example
macroscopic surfactants. Knowledge gained in these studies will improve our
fundamental understanding about interactions and assembly in complex fluids, and
should lead to new techniques for controlling assembly and for studying
microscopic interactions in soft materials. Graduate students involved in the
project receive training in fundamental cutting edge experimental techniques
such as microscopy, optics, applied computation, and suspension science. This
training will prepare students and associates for careers in industry,
government or academe.

This experimental condensed matter physics project investigates the properties
of a range of complex fluids, examples of so-called "soft matter". Complex
fluids include colloidal suspensions, emulsions, polymer solutions, membranes,
liquid crystals and mixtures thereof. The structure and dynamics of soft
materials are strongly influenced by disorder (entropy) and by relatively weak
mechanical forces (as in thixotropy, catsup). These materials provide a
fascinating testing ground for many-body statistical physics, and for
investigations of phase transitions such as melting and solidification. Research
on these substances is technology driven too. They are attractive starting
materials in high-tech applications such as photonics, lithography, ceramics and
biochemical sensing; particle additives also offer a means for practical control
of fluid flow, improving the performances of conventional materials such as
paints, motor oils, foods, and cosmetics. Finally, complex fluids experiments
are increasingly stimulated by analogies from cell biology, in some cases
providing critical insights about mechanisms that arise in crowded cellular
environments. This research focuses on three basic issues: measurement of
microscopic forces in suspension, the study of phase transitions and self-
assembly, and the creation of exotic new macroscopic model systems. Students in
this program receive rigorous training in optics, physics, and materials science
that prepares them for careers in academe, industry, and government.