* 0203225
* Mathematical Cognition and Affect During Non-Routine Problem Solving
* EDU,DGE
* 01/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Shandy Hauk, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of the proposed work is two?fold. At the level of the individual
the objective is to advance understanding of the complexities of cognition and
affect during problem?solving. The other objective is at the level of community:
cognition?and?affect interaction in the context of collegiate mathematics
classroom culture. In pursuing these objectives, the relationships among affect
and cognition during non?routine problem solving should prove particularly
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Proposal incorporates one of the most
effective methods developed to date for research in collegiate mathematics
education: research working groups involving graduate students as well as junior
and senior researchers. The research methodology ensured by the make?up of the
working groups is both broad: quantitative methods (e.g. survey), experimental
methods (e.g. teaching experiment) and deep: qualitative methods (e.g.
interview), experiential methods (e.g. case
study).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the relationships and causalities
among what problem?solvers think of their feelings, attitudes, beliefs, and
selves in mathematics and how those aspects of affect interact with cognitive
efforts during problem solving would, of course, take more than the next year.
What this Proposal provides for is the organizing of research working?groups
around the objectives given above. One result of this cooperation will be the
design, implementation, and completion of at least one pilot study. A second
result will be the creation of a research design for continued work on both
individual and community cognition?and?affect interaction in the various
contexts of mathematics learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the individual?level,
it is well known that significantly reducing the anxiety of a mathematically
anxious student is challenging (at best, and often fails). What does show
promise, however, is meta?affective self?control. Rather than insisting a
student no longer feel anxious, an individuallevel pilot study would investigate
ways to encourage an empowering meta?affect. Most work in this area has been at
the school level. The proposed pilot?study would be at the collegiate level. A
pilot study aimed at the community?level objective could offer a way to
revitalize curricular reforms. Many curricular reforms in mathematics lose
momentum because their "one?size fits all" approach fails to influence enough
instructors. A community?level pilot study could investigate for which
cognition?and?affect profiles an existing reform appears to be effective and
then work through teaching experimentation and research to create several
"sizes," i.e. tailor curricula for classroom and/or distance?learning formats
based on the goals of the original reform efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed avenue of research addresses one of the large issues confronting higher
education today: distance learning. The format of an internet education site
has, implicitly, assumptions about cognition?and?affect; i.e. a
cognition?and?affect profile can be compiled from the forms and processes at a
website. In many distance learning settings, the interaction of teachers and
students does not disappear, but rather is made more complex by the mediation of
the website (or other vehicle). This is especially so as distance learning in
this country is shifting from a concern mainly with procedural knowledge to the
teaching of conceptual knowledge (for example, in non?routine problem solving or
theorem proving). As an area for research and development, this three?way
relationship between students, teachers, and a mediating website has been little
studied (in mathematics education) and is very promising. The proposed work
would contribute to the foundation for future investigations of this
topic.&lt;br/&gt;