* 0203938
* Randomness in Fluids and Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Jared Bronski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 02/28/2006
* USD 107,268.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0203938 Mathematical Sciences: Randomness in Fluids and
Waves

Abstract

0203938 Bronski

Fluid mechanics is an important subject that plays a central role in modern
applied mathematics. Many phenomena in fluids, such as turbulence and
intermittency, are still understood poorly even at the physical level, and as
such provide a rich source of mathematical problems. In this project we will
study mathematically the transport properties of a randomly stirred fluid. In
earlier work, the principal investigator and collaborators were able to deduce a
great deal of information about the transport properties and induced
intermittency in a particular model of fluid flow, using ideas of asymptotic
analysis, semiclassical eigenvalue problems, and probability. In current work we
extend these ideas to more complex flow fields, where exact solution formulae
are not available. In addition to the above techniques, we intend to make use of
the Donsker-Varadhan theory, giving large deviations principles for quantities
defined via Feynman-Kac integrals.

The goal of this project is to bridge the gap between physical understanding and
mathematical proof in the area of fluid transport. At present only a few very
simple models for the transport of a passive quantity, such as a dye, by a
turbulent fluid are understood in a rigorous mathematical sense. By extending
the mathematical understanding to more complex models, we will clarify the
question of what properties these simple models do and do not share with the
more realistic flows of interest to scientists and engineers. We also hope to
expand the physical understanding of transport properties, which is still far
from complete.