* 0203936
* Abstract Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Charles Rezk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2005
* USD 101,793.00

DMS-0203936 Charles W. Rezk

The goal of this project is to apply homotopy theoretic methods to algebraic
problems. There are two threads of ideas involved here. One is the description
of homotopy theory as a kind of topologically enriched category theory, as has
been developed by Dwyer-Kan and many others. Another thread is in the theory of
commutative ring spectra (a homotopy theoretic generalization of commutative
ring theory), and in particular the development of a topological version of the
algebraic de Rham complex of a ring.

Homotopy theory is a branch of topology; it arose as the study of certain
invariant properties of spaces, namely those left unchanged by continuous
deformations. It is a surprising fact that there are deep analogies between the
methods of the homotopy theory of spaces (which would seem to be geometric and
topological) and those of several branches of algebra (such as homological
algebra, sheaf theory, and category theory). For example, there is a close
analogy between the way we can describe an algebraic object (such as a group or
ring) by giving generators and the relations between them, and the way we can
describe a topological space by giving polyhedra and the way they are attached
together to give the space. The goal of this project is to develop certain
homotopy theoretic methods in the context of ring theory and of category theory,
and to allow them to be applied to traditional algebraic problems.