* 0203178
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Breakout of Protostellar Winds from their Natal Cores
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Francis Wilkin, Wilkin                  Francis        P
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 05/31/2004
* USD 45,842.00

0203178 Wilkin

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Francis
P. Wilkin to work with Dr. Susana Lizano at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
Mexico, in Morelia, Mexico. Co-funding for this project comes from the Math and
Physical Science Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.

This project will involve the development of models of both the dynamics and
radiative cooling of molecular out-flows from young stars. They will elucidate
the process of acceleration of ambient material by protostellar winds. The
principal new features will be 1) the inclusion of shear between the shocked
wind and ambient matter, 2) the calculation of the detailed flow in the cloud
core region of interaction, especially the location of the wind shock relative
to the swept-up ambient matter, including the effects of magnetic fields, and 3)
a detailed model of the infrared emission expected to be observed by ISO, SOFIA,
and SIRTF, constructed by assembling planar shock models over the geometry of
the shocks deduced from the dynamical model. The model will also be relevant to
comparison with mm-wave interferometric observations of molecular outflows,
where we will predict kinematics such as position-velocity diagrams that are
directly comparable to the data. The results obtained will be: geometric shape
and location of the protostellar wind shock; the elucidation of the role of
shear in the kinematics of molecular outflows; the kinematics of swept-up
molecular material, which has been limited in the past by unnatural assumptions
of mixing and/or sticking to the shock; the initial conditions for molecular
outflows propagating beyond the cloud core; detailed, testable predictions of
the consequence of the x-wind model of magnetocentrifugal, protostellar winds.

Morelia has a strong group of researchers beyond Dr. Lizano, who are working on
observations and models of the environments of young stars, including Dr. Luis
Rodriguez, Dr. Stanley Kurtz, Dr. Alan Watson, Dra. Paola D'Alessio, Dr. Enrique
Vazquez-Semadeni, and Dr. Javier Ballesteros-Paredes.