* 0203144
* WORKSHOP:  Atmospheric CO2 Inversion Intercomparison Project (TransCom 3+), February 2002 at  CSU, Fort Collins, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2003
* USD 40,891.00

It proposes to convene at Atmospheric CO 2 Inversion Intercomparison Workshop at
the Colorado State University campus in Fort Collins, Colorado in February 2002.
This workshop will focus upon issues central to the IGBP Task force on Global
Analysis, Interpretation and Modelling (GAIM) with strong links to the Carbon
Joint Project (CJP). The workshop will build on the results of a previous
TransCom workshop held in Melbourne, Australia in March 2001. Proposed project
seeks to bring the research community together for the purpose of finalizing
current activities through the analysis and synthesis of several ongoing
activities: 1) Analysis of seasonal, stationary and time-dependent inversions in
an attempt to identify a central, control TM version of each; 2. Data
sensitivity tests (testing inverse results against various spatial and GCM sub-
sampling schemes); 3. Optimization of sampling networks, both selectively and
with a genetic algorithm; 4 Comparison of the seasonality, the phase and
amplitude of the rectifier effects with data; 5. Collaboration with other groups
(SCRIPPS/SIO) on an Atmospheric Potential Oxygen (APO) experiment; and 6)
Development of collaboration with the Biosphere-Atmosphere Stable Isotope
(BASIN) community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop will include 20 participants
representing inverse modeling groups that are currently contributing to TransCom
analyses and syntheses.&lt;br/&gt;