* 0203698
* The Topology and Geometry of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Richard Canary, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2006
* USD 192,986.00

DMS-0203698&lt;br/&gt;Richard Canary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topology and
geometry of hyperbolic 3-manifolds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Canary will
study the space AH(M) of marked hyperbolic &lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds homotopy
equivalent to a fixed compact 3-manifold M. &lt;br/&gt;The interior of this
space is well-understood due to work of &lt;br/&gt;Ahlfors, Bers, Kra, Marden,
Maskit, Sullivan and Thurston. &lt;br/&gt;Roughly, the components of the
interior are enumerated by &lt;br/&gt;topological data and each component is
parameterized by analytical &lt;br/&gt;data. Thurston's Ending Lamination
Conjecture predicts that points &lt;br/&gt;in the entire space AH(M) can be
classified by topological data &lt;br/&gt;(coming from the marked homeomorphism
type of the hyperbolic &lt;br/&gt;3-manifold) and geometric data (which encodes
the asymptotic &lt;br/&gt;geometry of the ends.) Yair Minsky has made
substantial progress &lt;br/&gt;towards the resolution of Thurston's Ending
Lamination Conjecture &lt;br/&gt;in the case that M has incompressible boundary.
Prof. Canary will &lt;br/&gt;collaborate with Jeff Brock and Yair Minsky on a
program to &lt;br/&gt;complete the proof of this conjecture and a number of
related &lt;br/&gt;conjectures. Recent work, by Anderson, Brock, Bromberg,
Canary, &lt;br/&gt;Holt, McCullough and McMullen, has revealed surprising new
&lt;br/&gt;phenomena concerning the global topology of AH(M). Components of
&lt;br/&gt;the interior may bump (i.e. have intersecting closures) and
&lt;br/&gt;individual components may bump themselves. Prof. Canary proposes
&lt;br/&gt;to further study the global topology of AH(M). In particular, the
&lt;br/&gt;techniques used in the attack on the Ending Lamination Conjecture
&lt;br/&gt;will be used to study the continuity of the ending
invariants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of 3-dimensional manifolds employs
tools from geometry, &lt;br/&gt;topology, dynamics and complex analysis. It is
the interplay of &lt;br/&gt;these tools which gives the subject its rich flavor.
A 2-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;manifold or surface is a space which looks locally
like 2-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;Euclidean space; examples are given by the surfaces
of familiar &lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional objects such as doughnuts. Similarly, a
3-manifold &lt;br/&gt;is a space that looks locally like 3-dimensional Euclidean
space. &lt;br/&gt;A Riemannian metric is a way of measuring distances and angles
in &lt;br/&gt;a manifold. For example, the universe we live in is a 3-manifold
&lt;br/&gt;with a Riemannian metric. Surfaces were classified in the 19th
&lt;br/&gt;century, and it was shown that all surfaces admit a beautiful
&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian metric of one of three types: Euclidean, spherical or
&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic. The study of all possible such metrics on a fixed
&lt;br/&gt;surface was begun in the 19th century and has played a key
role&lt;br/&gt;in topology, complex analysis, Riemannian geometry and algebraic
&lt;br/&gt;geometry. Thurston revolutionized the study of 3-manifolds by
&lt;br/&gt;conjecturing, and proving in many cases, that every
3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;may be canonically decomposed into pieces which admit
metrics of&lt;br/&gt;one of 8 geometric types. Hyperbolic metrics are the most
common &lt;br/&gt;and least understood class of such metrics. Prof. Canary will
&lt;br/&gt;study the space of all hyperbolic metrics on a fixed
3-manifold.&lt;br/&gt;