* 0203991
* Free Boundary Problems and Reaction-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Xinfu Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 168,864.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0203991&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chen,
Xinfu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: FREE BOUNDARY PROBLEMS AND REACTION-
DIFFUSION SYSTEMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses interfacial
phenomena that are commonplace in nature. There are two goals in this project.
One is to develop an applicable model describing motion of soluble substances in
a liquid environment. The other is to use existing reaction--diffusion systems
and free boundary models to study certain interfacial phenomena that are
important in industrial applications. When chemical reactions are concerned,
existing models to be used are reaction--diffusion systems such as the activator
--inhibitor, FitzHugh--Nagumo, Belousov-Zhabotinsky, Gray--Scott, and Gierer--
Meinhardt. Most of the focus here will be on slow diffusion--fast reaction
equations and their singular limits, namely, free boundary problems. A large
part of the investigation will be to find solutions related to interfacial
phenomena, such as traveling spots, spikes, target patterns, checkerboard
patterns, rotating spiral waves, and self--replicating behavior. The underlying
investigation for patterns in free boundary problems and reaction--diffusion
systems will enable people to predict and to control the seemingly complicated
yet natural interfacial dynamics. It can also develop mathematical theories and
ideas. As a particular example, certain evolution equations that do not possess
uniqueness and thus classically are regarded as ill--posed, will be carefully
investigated and regarded as good models since they reflect the nature in which
an unobservable local microscopic change may affect the whole observable
macroscopic outcome. Such a research will be guided by the current industrial
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In chemistry, biology, and many applied sciences, it
is common that chemical substances move around in a liquid environment, due to
dissolution or chemical reaction. Quite often circular shapes are stable and
circular spots move and interact each other like elastic objects, with their own
special ``momentum laws". One purpose of the project is to develop, at least for
soluble solids in a liquid medium, a model enabling one to calculate the speed
of a traveling spot and the reflection principle---the relationship between the
incoming and outgoing angles when a traveling spot bounces off another spot or
the physical boundary of a container. The model developed for the motion of
spots is expected to find useful industrial applications in many areas such as
water contamination control, chemical testing, chemical processing, etc. This
project will involve graduate students and stimulate their interest in
mathematical problems of practical importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: June
14, 2002&lt;br/&gt;