* 0203159
* Topics in Quantum Magnetism, Nanoelectronics and Superconductivity
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Antonio Castro-Neto, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education in condensed matter
physics centered on three related areas: quantum magnetism, nanoelectronics and
superconductivity. Although a classical view of magnetism is often successful,
it fails badly in certain cases, in particular for quasi-one-dimensional (1D)
systems where the atomic spins interact much more strongly along chains in a
crystal than between chains. From a classical viewpoint, at zero temperature the
atomic spins would align in fixed directions ("up "and "down "). This often
doesn't occur in low dimensional systems. Instead, strongly quantum mechanical
groundstates occur, in which the spins are in collective linear superpositions
of up and down. In recent years this has become a very active experimental
field, with numerous examples of quasi-one-dimensional antiferromagnets being
synthesized and studied by increasingly refined techniques. This is motivated in
part by the connection of these materials, and some of the phenomena that occur
in them, with high-temperature superconductivity and spintronics. The PI will
continue developing fundamental theory and useful phenomenology for
understanding current experiments on various quasi-one-dimensional and quasi-
two-dimensional magnetic insulators. As electronic components continue to
miniaturize, a limit approaches where the largely classical views of memory
elements, transistors, etc. break down and quantum mechanics plays a crucial
role. In particular, remarkable quantum phenomena have been recently observed in
"single electron transistors "or quantum dots, where the number of electrons on
the dot can be varied in single steps. Such nano-engineered devices can exhibit
behavior previously studied in atomic impurities doped into metals, with the
quantum dot playing the role of a single atomic spin. Such a spin gets "screened
" by an electron from the metal (or the leads connected to the quantum dot). It
has been claimed that this screening electron is spread out over a very large
distance, of order .1-1 microns. This large length scale has never been verified
experimentally and has been a source of theoretical confusion. Quantum dots
provide unique opportunities to finally observe this Kondo screening cloud. The
PI will develop a theoretical understanding of this screening cloud and aims to
propose realistic devices and experiments whereby it could be measured.

The high-temperature superconductors hold out the promise of important
technological applications and, at the same time, raise very difficult
fundamental science issues. The will address several theoretical issues in this
field. In particular, by collaborating with experts on large scale numerical
simulations, he intends to study the possibility of holes arranging themselves
into narrow "stripes "separated y insulating antiferromagnetic regions in some
of these materials (and in some models used to study them). How generally this
occurs, for what reasons and whether it hinders or helps superconductivity are
important open questions in the field. %%% This award supports theoretical
research and education in condensed matter physics centered on three related
areas: quantum magnetism, nanoelectronics and superconductivity. Although a
classical view of magnetism is often successful, it fails badly in certain
cases, in particular for quasi-one-dimensional (1D) systems where the atomic
spins interact much more strongly along chains in a crystal than between chains.
From a classical viewpoint, at zero temperature the atomic spins would align in
fixed directions (say, "up "and "down "). This often doesn't occur in low
dimensional systems. Instead, strongly quantum mechanical groundstates occur, in
which the spins are in collective linear superpositions of up and down. In
recent years this has become a very active experimental field, with numerous
examples of quasi-one-dimensional antiferromagnets being synthesized and studied
by increasingly refined techniques. This is motivated in part by the connection
of these materials, and some of the phenomena that occur in them, with high-
temperature superconductivity and spintronics. The PI will continue developing
fundamental theory and useful phenomenology for understanding current
experiments on various quasi-one-dimensional and quasi-two-dimensional magnetic
insulators. As electronic components continue to miniaturize, a limit approaches
where the largely classical views of memory elements, transistors, etc. break
down and quantum mechanics plays a crucial role. In particular, remarkable
quantum phenomena have been recently observed in "single electron transistors
"or quantum dots, where the number of electrons on the dot can be varied in
single steps. Such nano-engineered devices can exhibit behavior previously
studied in atomic impurities doped into metals, with the quantum dot playing the
role of a single atomic spin. Such a spin gets "screened " by an electron from
the metal (or the leads connected to the quantum dot). It has been claimed that
this screening electron is spread out over a very large distance, of order .1-1
microns. This large length scale has never been verified experimentally and has
been a source of theoretical confusion. Quantum dots provide unique
opportunities to finally observe this Kondo screening cloud. The PI will develop
a theoretical understanding of this screening cloud and aims to propose
realistic devices and experiments whereby it could be measured.

The high-temperature superconductors hold out the promise of important
technological applications and, at the same time, raise very difficult
fundamental science issues. The will address several theoretical issues in this
field. In particular, by collaborating with experts on large scale numerical
simulations, he intends to study the possibility of holes arranging themselves
into narrow "stripes "separated by insulating antiferromagnetic regions in some
of these materials (and in some models used to study them). How generally this
occurs, for what reasons and whether it hinders or helps superconductivity are
important open questions in the field. ***