* 0203485
* Mathematical Aspects of Classical Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jalal Shatah, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 210,300.00

This proposal is concerned with questions related to the behavior of solutions
to nonlinear wave equations under perturbation. In particular we are concerned
with geometric PDEs such as wave maps and Schrodinger maps. These equations can
be viewed as constrained motion in space where the constraint forces the
solution to lie on a subspace such as a manifold or a metric space. This leads
to singularly perturbed wave and Schrodinger equations. We propose to study the
relationship between the wave map equations and the constrained motion in terms
of convergence and in terms of the dynamics of solutions. Specifically we
propose to study: 1) Convergence of the constrained motion when the data are not
"well prepared" leading to rapid oscillations; 2) the persistence of periodic,
quasi-periodic, and homoclinic orbits that asymptote to quasi-periodic orbits;
3) wave maps into the Heisenberg Group, as a metric space; and finally 4) the
relationship between Schrodinger maps and wave maps, where the wave map is
considered as a constrained motion on a Lagrangian submanifold of the
Schrodinger map into a Kahler manifold.



The dynamics of many physical systems can be described by geometric evolution
equations. For example dynamics of the magnetization field in a ferromagnetic
material is described by the Landau-Lifshitz equation; the study of a vibrating
membrane in a crystalline structure where there is a uniform distribution of
dislocations, is described by wave equations into the Heisenberg Group (which
also arises in other physical applications such as control theory, and the
motion of robot arms). These geometric evolution models need not be exact, but
should be considered as a limit of a singularly perturbed system. The general
questions that we propose to study are: What relationships exist between
solutions of the geometric equations and the singularly perturbed equations? How
much of the rich dynamical structure (periodic, quasi-periodic, and breather
type solutions) that the geometric equations have will persist under this type
of singular perturbation? One of the major goals of our work is to develop
analytical methods to deal with convergence questions related to this type of
perturbations. Another important goal is to develop and use infinite dimensional
dynamical systems techniques in conjunction with analytical methods to answer
the persistence question and ultimately to bridge the gap between finite
dimensional dynamical systems and PDEs.