* 0203143
* Workshop on Cooperative US-Europe Research in Sensors and Smart Structures Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Billie Spencer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/2002
* USD 34,195.00

Abstract 0203143 (B.F. Spencer, Univ. Notre Dame)

This project provides support for a joint US-Europe Seminar/Workshop in Sensors
and Smart Structures Technology in April 2002 in Somma Lombardo, Italy.. The
objective of this project is to establish a common framework for expanded future
joint research through mutual learning in the emerging subject areas between US
and Europe.

In the last few years, significant progress has been made in the area of sensing
technology and structural health monitoring/condition assessment in the US and
Europe. Innovative concepts involving new hardware, algorithms, and software, as
well as vibration control have been proposed. There have also been several full
scale trial implementations of densely sensor instrumented infrastructures and
health monitoring systems, as well as case studies on bridges in Europe and the
US. There is much can be learned from the European experts and vice versa,
especially in the area of experimental verification on small, medium, large and
full scale projects.

The program will consist of four seminar sessions on the theme topics of (1)
innovative sensing hardware, (2) advances in wireless technology, (3) damage
detection/characterization and condition assessment methodology, and (4) case
studies and experimental verification on international testbeds. Then four
workshop sessions will follow to summarize the status of the sensors and smart
structures technology in these topics, to identify the outstanding research
issues, and to formulate an action plan with recommendations for development and
implementation through possible collaborative research projects and sharing of
scientific data. A final report of the workshop will be prepared and made
available to the research and practitioner community through normal distribution
means and also through Internet for wider information dissemination.