* 0203987
* Proximal Adsorption in Colloidal Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Joseph Merola, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 311,000.00

Dr. William A. Ducker of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University is
funded for his research on proximal adsorption in colloidal systems by a grant
in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division. He will measure the
adsorption of surfactants as a function of the separation between particles (the
proximal adsorption) in a model system consisting of silica particles and
quaternary ammonium surfactants. In the analysis of particle forces and
stability, it is common to assume that surfactants do not adsorb or desorb when
particles collide. This can lead to serious errors. His results of force-
distance-adsorption measurements will be used to determine the effect of
proximal adsorption on colloidal forces. The results will also be compared to
the thermodynamic theory developed by Hall and by Ash et al., and the
microscopic mechanism behind proximal adsorption will be explored using self-
consistent field calculations. He will use the concept of interaction-driven
adsorption as a route for improved understanding of colloidal stability in
surfactant and polymer systems. The advantages of this approach over
conventional electrostatic and statistical mechanical calculations are that the
approach is simple, and the force is directly linked to the most easily
controlled experimental parameter: the concentration of additive in solution.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in both theoretical and
experimental approaches to surface chemistry, and will join in the development
of a new apparatus for measuring proximal adsorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
of the objects that we encounter in everyday life actually consist of very fine
particles. For example, bricks, paper, clothing, china, soil, most foods,
cosmetics, and even humans are composed of small particles. The physical
properties (e.g. stiffness, flow, and workability) of these objects depends on
the forces between the particles. Part of the process of creating new and
improved products is the manipulation of the forces between particles to obtain
desirable material properties. In practice these new properties are obtained
through the addition of surfactants and polymers, which adsorb to the surface of
the particles. We know that this adsorption is modified by collisions between
the particles, but this effect is not taken into account in most theories, and
therefore the reasoning commonly employed in formulating products is missing a
key step. The aim of this research is to measure, model, and understand the
change in adsorption during a collision. This should provide new guidelines for
predicting the physical properties of materials. &lt;br/&gt;