* 0203527
* Geometric Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Richard Gardner, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2007
* USD 155,219.00

ABSTRACT - DMS 0203527

Geometric tomography uses data concerning sections by planes and projections on
planes of geometric objects to obtain information about these objects. The
latter include general compact sets, but often they are convex bodies,
polytopes, star-shaped bodies, or finite sets. One advantage of this setting is
that it becomes more probable that inverse problems have a unique solution.
Generally, the a priori knowledge that the unknown object is of uniform density
can be exploited to retrieve more information than would otherwise be possible.
This can lead to algorithms that are more effective when few measurements are
available, and less sensitive to measurement errors or noise. Geometric
tomography has links to functional analysis, convex geometry, Minkowski
geometry, and combinatorics. The project will continue the development of
geometric tomography. New directions include an extension of Lutwak's dual
Brunn-Minkowski theory by the introduction of moments of sets; work towards a
coherent discrete Brunn-Minkowski theory that applies to finite sets, with
volume replaced by cardinality; and an investigation into the possibility of a
Brunn-Minkowski theory for capacity. In related applications, the plan is to
consolidate links between geometric tomography and a practical method called
local stereology, and to solve an inverse problem concerning finite sets with an
application to medical imaging. New discoveries about intersection bodies are
anticipated, with an application to the reconstruction of star bodies from the
volumes of their sections through the origin. Also included is a program
designed to stimulate undergraduate research.

CAT scanners are machines that save lives daily. They take X-rays in a number of
different directions, and synthesize the information to create an image of a
two-dimensional section of part of the body. The mathematics behind this process
is called computerized tomography. It is very successful, but not perfect; the
reconstructed image is only approximate, and to get a better picture with the
same procedure one has to take more X-rays, causing greater expense and
likelihood of side effects. In geometric tomography, only homogeneous objects
are allowed - the density of the object is the same everywhere inside it. An
example from medicine would be a bone or a kidney. One can use this information
to find better reconstruction procedures. The scope of geometric tomography is
actually much wider. Any measurement involving sections of a homogeneous object
by lines or planes or its shadows on lines or planes can be considered. Because
of this, it has many links to other areas, both in mathematics (there is a large
overlap with convex geometry, the geometry of shapes without holes or dents) and
outside. For example, a new technique called local stereology depends on
measurements of planar sections of biological tissue; each section passes
through a fixed point, usually the nucleus of a cell, and the measurements can
be made optically rather than physically. This project continues the development
of several aspects of the mathematics of geometric tomography. Also included is
a program designed to stimulate undergraduate research.