* 0203183
* EXPLORATORY: Environmentally Friendly Formation of Self-Assembled Monolayers and Surface-Initiated Polymer Films in Carbon Dioxide
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2003
* Randy Weinstein, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2003
* USD 111,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0203183&lt;br/&gt;Jennings, G. Kane&lt;br/&gt;Weinstein,
Randy D&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EXPLORATORY:
Environmentally Friendly Formation of Self-Assembled Monolayers and Surface-
Initiated Polymer Films in Carbon Dioxide&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research will investigate the use of environmentally benign carbon
dioxide (CO2) as a solvent in the formation of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)
and ultrathin polymer films grown by a surface-initiated process. Due to its
small molecular size and weak interaction with metal surfaces such as gold, CO2
is a nearly ideal solvent to promote the formation of densely packed, highly
crystalline SAMs, as recently reported by the authors of this project. Further
research will examine the formation of SAMs onto gold from partially fluorinated
alkanethiols and the effect of co-solvent on the structure and barrier
properties of monolayer films. This research also seeks to correlate for the
first time the surface-averaged structure and barrier properties of SAMs as
obtained by reflectance-absorption infrared spectroscopy (RAIRS) and
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), respectively, with their
microscopic properties such as domain size and defect content as determined by
scanning probe microscopy (SPM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will also
develop a new class of surface-initiated, living polymer films based on the
synthetic process of polyhomologation. The films are initiated from a boron-
terminated SAM and have the interesting property that the terminal groups of the
polymer film can be selected to create a wide variety of surface compositions.
During the growth of these films, the precursor molecules must diffuse through
the growing film and react at the active boron site so that solvents that
enhance the transport of the precursor through the film will increase the rate
of film growth and the ultimate thickness of the films. Carbon dioxide is a
potentially effective solvent for enhancing the growth of these novel polymer
films due to its ability to swell many polymers, its low viscosity and zero
surface tension, and the high diffusion rates of many small molecules in CO2. In
addition, the use of CO2 in this polymerization process enables a much simpler
one-pot synthetic procedure in contrast to the use of organic solvents that must
be conducted with numerous solvent transfers in a dry box. To date, there has
been no previous investigation of the use of CO2 in the formation of surface-
initiated polymer films and only one other study involving the formation of SAMs
in CO2. The successful completion of this project will provide new strategies
for forming these technologically important ultrathin films through
environmentally friendly processing. Furthermore, this project should enhance
the knowledge base for materials processing in CO2 and facilitate the increased
use of CO2 in research and industry.&lt;br/&gt;