* 0203941
* Knot Theory and Dynamics in Contact Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* John Etnyre, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 69,555.00

DMS-0203941 John Etnyre

The focus of this proposal is to better understand the nature of contact
structures in all (odd) dimensions, with special attention given to dimension
three, and to apply contact topological techniques to questions in
hydrodynamics. The first main theme of the proposed research is Legendrian
knots. Legendrian knots are knots that are tangent to a contact structure and
seem to encode a great deal of information about the contact structure. For
example, the famed tight vs. overtwisted dichotomy in dimension three can be
understood in terms of Legendrian knots. These knots also give an important
invariant of a contact structure. As part of this proposal the general structure
of Legendrian knots will be studied. The expected outcome will be various
classification result for certain Legendrian knots and contact structures; and,
moreover, a better understanding of Legendrian surgery (an important surgery
construction of contact structures). Legendrian knots in higher dimensions will
also be studied using contact homology. There is very little known about contact
structures, or Legendrian knots, in dimensions above three. By investigating
Legendrian knots in these dimensions the nature of contact structures should be
illuminated, just as the corresponding study revealed much about three
dimensional contact structures. The final part of the proposed research centers
on the connection between contact structures and hydrodynamics discovered a few
years ago by the Principal Investigator and R. Ghrist. Here work with Ghrist
will continue with the aim of understanding when, and what type of, closed flow
lines occur in fluid flows. We shall also study hydrodynamic instability from
the contact topological perspective. This naturally leads into the study of
energy minimization for fluid flows and relations between contact and Riemannian
geometry.

Contact structures are very natural objects, born over two centuries ago, in the
work of Huygens, Hamilton and Jacobi on geometric optics. Through the centuries
contact structures have touched on many diverse areas of mathematics and
physics, including classical mechanics and thermodynamics. In everyday life one
encounters contact geometry when ice skating, parallel parking a car, navigating
a submarine, using a refrigerator, or simply watching the beautiful play of
light in a glass of water. Many great mathematicians have devoted a lot of their
work to this subject but only in the last decade or two has it moved into the
foreground of mathematics. This renaissance is due to the recent remarkable
breakthroughs in contact topology, resulting in a rich and beautiful theory with
many applications. The most remarkable feature of all this recent work is the
intimate connections between contact structures and topology in dimension three.
Moreover, there were important newfound interactions with Hamiltonian mechanics,
symplectic and sub-Riemannian geometry, foliation theory, complex geometry and
analysis, topological hydrodynamics, and knot theory. The Principal Investigator
will explore new connections between contact structures and topology in all
(odd) dimensions and continue his study of idealized fluid flows (hydrodynamics)
via contact geometry.