* 0203739
* Measurement of the Superfluid Density and other Electronic Properties of Electron-Doped Cuprate Superconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Thomas Lemberger, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 11/30/2006
* USD 280,325.00

This project focuses on electronic properties of CuO(2) planes in electron-doped
cuprates, e.g., Pr(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4) and La(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4), in comparison with
hole-doped cuprates, especially the closely-related compound La(2-x)Sr(x)CuO(4).
At issue is the nature of the superconducting state in e-doped cuprates, and
whether there is a transition in pairing symmetry near optimal doping. The
project will provide the first measurements of two quantities of fundamental
importance. One is the magnitude and temperature dependence of the superfluid
density, which is proportional to the inverse square of the magnetic penetration
depth. The penetration depth will be measured from 0.5 K up to the
superconducting transition temperature in samples spanning a wide doping range,
x. Another is the electronic heat capacity anomaly at the superconducting
transition. Supporting measurements of normal-state transport, e.g., resistivity
and Hall coefficient will also be made. Research will provide excellent training
in state-of-the-art experimental techniques to graduate and undergraduate
students. This project benefits from a collaboration with the world's premier
maker of electron doped cuprate films, Dr. Michio Naito of NTT, Japan.

A central issue in condensed matter physics and in materials science is
identification of microscopic mechanisms that enable electrons to move within a
solid, rather than being attached to a particular atom. The present project
focuses on understanding electrons that move within copper-oxide planes in a
class of superconducting compounds that includes Pr(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4) and
La(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4). Superconductivity in these copper-oxide compounds has been
the subject of intense international research efforts since their discovery in
1986. The main question now is whether the superconducting state in these
compounds is the same as found in a very similar compound, La(2-x)Sr(x)CuO(4).
To illuminate this issue, the project will provide measurements of the
magnitudes and temperature dependencies of quantities of fundamental importance,
namely, the density of superconducting electrons, and the contribution of
superconducting electrons to the heat capacity at the transition into the
superconducting state. The research will provide excellent training in state-of-
the-art experimental techniques to graduate and undergraduate students.