* 0203342
* Solid State Chemistry of Low and Negative Thermal Expansion Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Angus Wilkinson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 425,000.00

This project will investigate the thermal expansion characteristics of materials
that determine suitability for various applications. For example, frameworks
that display low or negative thermal expansion at high temperatures often
undergo a phase transition on cooling to a denser form with a higher coefficient
of thermal expansion. The phase transition of quartz can be suppressed by
"stuffing", that is replacing some silicon with lithium or aluminium to produce
materials such as the commercially useful beta-eucrytpite. The "stuffing" of
phases with the zirconium phosphatre structure will be explored as a means of
producing new materials with interesting thermal expansion characteristics.
Additionally, the replacement of zirconium plus four with mixtures of metal plus
three and plus five ions will be examined as a means of suppressing this
unwanted phase transition. Many negative thermal expansion materials become
amorphous at modest pressures and this limits their application. The mechanism
of this amorphization will be investigated using techniques that include x-ray
absorption fine structure determinations at high pressure. The proposed work
will provide several graduate and undergraduate students with experience of a
wide variety of methods that are of general utility in the field of materials
science/chemistry. %%% The thermal expansion characteristics of a material play
a very important role in determining if it will be suitable for a particular
application. Low or zero thermal expansion is necessary in areas where
dimensional stability is a major issue, such as in the fabrication of precision
optical devices. Low or zero thermal expansion is also necessary in ceramics
that are exposed to thermal shock, such as those used in cookware and in some
internal combustion engine and aerospace applications. Negative thermal
expansion can be very valuable in niche applications, such as compensating for
the positive thermal expansion of another component in microelectronics. This
project focuses on the preparation of new materials displaying low or negative
thermal expansion and extending our understanding of both their preparation and
physical properties. The knowledge gained will be of value in the search for new
engineering materials. The project provides several graduate and undergraduate
students with experience in a wide variety of synthetic and characterization
methods that are of great and general utility in the fields of materials
chemistry and materials science. ***