* 0203779
* Electrical and Magnetic Properties of Rare Earth Metals and Alloys Subjected to Ultra High Pressures Using Designer Diamond Anvils
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2007
* USD 369,930.00

The grant explores the application of recently developed diamond anvil
technology to characterize the electrical and magnetic properties of rare earth
metals and alloys. A major focus is on the f-delocalization transitions in rare
earth systems such as Cerium, Praseodymium, Neodymium, Praseodymium-Neodymium
alloys and Samarium, in the pressure range of ambient to 300 GPa and in the
temperature range of 10 K to 350 K. The study will develop new understanding of
the equation of state and phase transitions in the rare earth metals as well as
carbon nanotubes. The central objective of this research is to directly monitor
the f-delocalization pressure (loss of permanent magnetic moment on rare earth
ions) at ultra high pressures, especially, where no crystallographic volume
collapse transitions are known to occur. The research will employ an eight probe
designer anvil for electrical conductivity measurements and a designer loop
anvil for magnetic susceptibility measurements. A significant goal of this study
is to systematically improve the designer diamond anvil technology by critically
examining the role of nitrogen impurity in the chemical vapor deposition
process. We also envision a new generation of designer diamond anvils with
multi-tasking capability. The broader impact of the work is in the involvement
of underrepresented minorities and undergraduate students in the high-pressure
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetic susceptibility measurements would
provide a sensitive probe for the changes in magnetic order and electrical
conductivity measurements would track changes in the electronic and phonon
density of states at high pressures. The f-delocalization pressure for the light
rare earth metals will provide critical test of the existing Mott transition and
Kondo models and further spur theoretical calculations on these systems at high
compressions. This research is likely to advance the state of the art in high-
pressure research, enabling experiments that were hither-to inaccessible or very
difficult.&lt;br/&gt;