* 0203846
* NGS:     An Integrated Middleware and Language/Compiler Framework for Data Intensive Applications in a Grid Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Joel Saltz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2006
* USD 467,947.00

EIA-0203846 Gagan Agrawal Ohio State University An Integrated Middleware and
Language/Compiler Framework for Data Intensive Applications in a Grid
Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop methods that will enable
data intensive applications to be developed or specified using high-level
interfaces, and yet effectively utilize grid resources. This will be
accomplished by developing runtime techniques, a middleware based upon filter-
stream programming, and Just in Time (JIT) compilation techniques for
decomposing high-level programs into a set of filters. Our tools and techniques
will exploit important commonalities of the data intensive applications we
target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our target class of applications include both
scientific and commercial data intensive applications. We are developing a
middleware framework called DataCutter. DataCutter provides support for
processing of datasets stored in archival storage systems in a wide-area
network. DataCutter exports an interface for specifying processing as a set of
coordination filters. While DataCutter offers a framework suitable for
developing scientific and commercial data intensive applications in a grid
environment, its programming interface is a relatively low-level one. The
programmers need to decompose their application into a set of filters and
specify the filters and their interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
we propose a series of high-level language interfaces that can be used for
expressing data-intensive applications. We target data parallel Java, XML query
language (XQL), and mining operators as interfaces that will allow processing to
be specified assuming that all data and compute cycles are available at a single
site. We propose research in compiler techniques that will decompose such
applications into a set of filters, based upon the availability of data,
computing, storage, and networking resources.&lt;br/&gt;