* 0203271
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Forests of Power and Memory: An Archaeology of Sacred Groves in the Eguafo Kingdom, Coastal Ghana, c. 1400-1900
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Christopher Decorse, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,940.00

Under the direction of Dr. Christopher R. DeCorse, Mr. Gerard Chouin will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his archaeological
and historical study of the Eguafo State, an historic polity located in coastal
Ghana. The landscape of Eguafo includes a number of sacred groves which are
patches of tropical forest recognized by today's' farming communities as
dwelling places of spiritual beings. A set of preliminary surveys suggest a
correlation between the presence of such groves and the location of early
settlements founded before the arrival of the Europeans in this part of West
Africa in the late fifteenth century and probably abandoned in the late
seventeenth century. Far from being surviving patches of virgin forest degraded
by people, as common sense often put it, sacred groves are major historical and
archaeological markers of sites where the archaeologist can study the
transformation of pre-contact coastal communities into a mercantilist society
fully integrated in the Atlantic world. The dissertation will aim at 1)
understanding the processes that led to the formation, conservation and,
nowadays, accelerated clearing of sacred groves in relation to archaeological
sites; 2) ascertaining and interpreting the chronology of regional change in
human occupation in relation with the opening of the Atlantic trade. To this
end, a sample of an estimated forty to sixty groves within the study area will
be surveyed. Oral history and ethnographic observations will be recorded.
Excavations will be conducted at five settlement sites associated with surveyed
sacred groves. Analyzes of ceramics and the artifact inventory, will allow the
establishment of a regional chronological sequence and insights into change in
settlements patterns, material culture and sociopolitical organization during
the little known transition between the Late Iron Age and the period of post-
European contact in coastal West Africa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chronology of
change in settlement patterns will be used to critically assess the notion of
"impact" that is largely used in culture contact studies in the sense of brutal,
rapid change induced by the emergence of European actors in West African trade.
If indeed, it can be demonstrated that from the late fifteenth to the late
seventeenth century, the network of settlements (and therefore trade routes),
remained the same as before the Portuguese arrival in West Africa, the idea that
the European presence brought about sudden structural change in West Africa will
have to be reconsidered. Instead, Mr. Chouin's research will contribute to
understanding how the opportunities of the Atlantic trade and the gradual
adoption of mercantilism generated internally induced mechanisms of social
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is also important because it will
call the attention on the on-going massive destruction of cultural resources in
West Africa, including archaeological and 'natural' sites such as sacred groves,
it will help to document and salvage part of this endangered heritage. It will
also assist a young social scientist to lay a foundation for a much-needed
larger historical and archaeological study of long-term social change in the
West African forest environments.&lt;br/&gt;