* 0203203
* Fractal Geometry:   Summer Workshops and Other Outreach
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Michael Frame, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,612,204.00

For each of the next four years, the investigators will continue and expand an
ongoing and successful series of &lt;br/&gt;two successive summer workshops on
Fractal Geometry at Yale University, and develop related outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intended workshop participants are high school,
community college, and college teachers interested in &lt;br/&gt;offering
fractal geometry courses for non-science students. Such a course has been run
very successfully at Yale since 1993. Fractal geometry presents these students
with a branch of mathematics that is recent, is visual, is computer-based, has
real mathematical content (in contact with the works of eminent living
mathematicians), and encourages student exploration and discovery. In addition,
the tremendous range of applications of fractal geometry extends beyond science
and engineering to arts and humanities. The applications outside science make
the course most attractive to liberal arts students. Generally, students
&lt;br/&gt;come out of this course with a feeling that mathematics is something
they can approach, is alive and well, and is relevant to their own interests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yet teaching this course is quite challenging. The very
applications that make it so appealing are outside the &lt;br/&gt;training of
most mathematicians. The purpose of the workshops is to survey fractal geometry
and some applications in detail sufficient to enable other teachers to
incorporate this material in their own courses. This lesson planning will be
aided by a support infrastructure. These ideas will be spread to a wider area
through other outreach activites, including establishing similar workshops at
satellite sites and producing a videotape illustrating these courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the proposers have prepared a webpage&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://classes.yale.edu/math190a/Fractals/Welcome.html&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;to support the workshops and to be a resource for the participants in
their courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposers' main goal is to build on what
has already been achieved. Specifically, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) to refine
these workshops, draw participants from a larger area, and establish a support
infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) to expand and elaborate the above-
mentioned website for use as the basis for Distance Learning courses on fractal
geometry,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) to develop and grow another website that
emphasizes the uses of fractals and extends the brief "Panorama" chapter of the
forthcoming book "Fractals, Graphics, and Mathematics Education," MAA 2002. A
preliminary version of this site already is online at&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http:
//classes.yale.edu/math190a/Fractals/Panorama/Welcome.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
(iv) to prepare a lab manual of simple experiments and classroom activities,
illustrating basic concepts of fractal geometry, and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(v) to
develop an outreach network for growing these workshops at other locations and
disseminating these ideas through other media, including a videotape.&lt;br/&gt;