* 0204999
* Stochastic PDEs:   Interdependence of Local and Long-term Behaviors, and Representation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Frederi Viens, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2006
* USD 122,001.00

0204999&lt;br/&gt;Viens&lt;br/&gt; The PI's research program on the behavior of
parabolic stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) focuses on four
topics: local behavior, long-term behavior, particle representation, and
fractional Brownian motion (fBm). The goals are to exhibit a strong
interdependence between local and long-term phenomena and to develop an
implementable particle representation. The PI considers stochastic perturbations
of the heat equation, with additive or multiplicative noise that depends on time
and space. The dependence in time is of white-noise type, while the dependence
in space can span a wide range of behaviors. The differential operator is the
standard Laplacian on the real line or on the circle (or sometimes in higher
dimensions), with a small diffusion parameter "kappa" included. In the
multiplicative noise case, a nonlinearity may be included. The basic point of
view is simple: an SPDE with a unique solution is an input-output system, and as
such the solution's behavior must be inherited from the equation's coefficients.
The local behavior to be considered is the modulus of continuity of the solution
in the space variable. The long term behavior of interest, specific to the
linear multiplicative case, is the large-time exponential asymptotics of the
solution (Lyapunov "exponent" question). The PI characterizes both of these
behaviors via the spatial modulus of continuity of the potential itself, extends
some of the results to equations driven by fBm, and designs a new numerical
method for the solution using a system of interacting particles. It is shown
that the solution's Lyapunov exponent is of the order of kappa to the power of
alpha/(1+alpha) where alpha is the almost-sure spatial Holder exponent of the
solution. It is also shown that the solution has spatial Holder exponent alpha
if and only if the same holds for the potential's antiderivative. An
investigation of how these results change when one uses fractional noise instead
of white noise is also considered. For the nonlinear equation, a branching and
interacting particle system is constructed as the basis for a numerical method
for simulating the solution. It is proved that the numerical scheme, when
properly mollified, converges to the solution in the Skorohod space of
continuous-function-valued "cadlag" processes. The particles interact because,
as they branch at evenly spaced short intervals, their mean number of offspring
is a random variable whose mean is calculated relative to a certain "fitness" of
all the other particles, and depends explicitly on the non-linearity of the
potential. &lt;br/&gt; The main physical meaning of the research is that a
complex space-time-dependent system with significant random perturbations can
exhibit an exponentially strong increase of size or energy in the long term, and
that the exponential rate of increase can be predicted precisely by looking at
the short-range spatial variability of the physical environment. This has
potentially important applications in hydrodynamics and turbulence, including a
local characterization of the so-called "fast dynamo effect." It would say that
a magnetic field in a magnetic fluid can be enhanced precisely by controlling
the fluid's mezoscopic level of turbulence. The research has important
educational effects. Ph.D. students and, under the PI's supervision,
undergraduates and MS students, conduct computer simulations in connection with
the particle methods, with an emphasis on designing efficient algorithms. The
simulations are being integrated as class projects in a new curriculum emphasis
in computational finance and other applications, preparing the students for the
technology-dominated job market and workplace. From the purely theoretical point
of view, the research brings together several areas of great current interest in
probability theory: infinite dimensional stochastic analysis, branching and
interacting particle systems and numerical methods, Gaussian regularity theory,
Lyapunov exponents. &lt;br/&gt;