* 0204175
* A Framework to Combine Semantic and Structural Information for Static Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jonathan Maletic, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT Jonathan I Maletic Kent State U 0204175 A Framework to Combine Semantic
and Structural Information for Static Analysis Jonathan I. Maletic

The research involves combining semantic and structural information of program
source code for the static analysis of software. Static analysis normally takes
into consideration only structural information of the source code. The research
investigates the use of information concerning the domain semantics to enhance
existing static analysis methods. The semantic information is derived from the
comments, documentation, and identifier names associated with the source code. A
framework will be developed that allows the combination of semantic and
structural information of the source code. The framework will provide means to
compute new measures and metrics that describe the software (e.g., cohesion and
coupling). Additionally, the research will study different information retrieval
methods and how they can be used to extract relevant semantic information from
the source code. An empirical assessment of the framework and the use of
semantic information for static analysis will be undertaken. Combining semantic
information with existing static analysis methods will result in new and
improved analysis tools. These tools will help software engineers better
analyze, maintain, and assess the quality of large software systems.