* 0204253
* ITWF: Women in the IT Workforce:  How Level is the Playing Field?
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Steven Sawyer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2006
* USD 419,287.00

&lt;br/&gt;EIA-0204253&lt;br/&gt;Wardell, Mark L., Rogers, Jacqueline K.,
Sawyer, Steven B.&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Women in the IT Workforce: How Level is
the Playing Field?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITWF award provides support to
study institutional contexts and their related factors that are theorized to
affect the work-related outcomes of women after they enter the information
technology (IT) workforce. By work-related outcomes is meant job tenure, job
satisfaction, job mobility, and job status, earnings and workforce retention.
The project will focus on the IT specialties of software and information systems
(as opposed to hardware or telecommunications) because they represent one of the
fastest growing segments of the computer and IT industry. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The expanding employment opportunities in IT work have encouraged a
popular view that possession of IT skills should level the playing field for all
workers. In effect, this perspective implies that job opportunities, or
alternately the lack of opportunities, are correlates of levels and types of
skill workers possess. Collectively, the bundle of skills and experiences
individuals bring to employers is known as human capital. The human capital view
says little about the institutional contexts that circumscribe IT work, or about
IT workers and their gender. This project theorizes that the job-related
outcomes for women entering the IT workforce will be influenced by various
institutional factors and that the outcomes of women will be different from
those of men. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;