* 0204543
* Dynamics of Production and Supply Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Esma Gel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 189,922.00

Proposal # 0204543&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dieter H. Armbruster&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Arizona State Univsity&lt;br/&gt;Title: Dynamics and Control in Semiconductor
Manufacturing Lines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
proposed to apply nonlinear dynamics methods from dynamical systems theory and
fluid dynamics to three problems in industrial mathematics: 1) The organization
of production lines with flexible workers. A dynamical systems model will be
derived and analyzed. The goal is to determine whether chaos or other
instabilities are present, to find out whether the production line is still
self-organizing, and to determine the resulting throughput. 2) A switched
arrival system&lt;br/&gt;for three parallel machines has been shown to be
chaotic. Increasingly realistic production scenarios will be added to this
model, and the resulting dynamics will be determined. Networks of such systems
will be studied to determine whether synchronization or partial synchronization
can occur. Such systems are hybrid dynamical systems that require new tools to
study their dependence on changing parameters. Such tools will be developed as
extensions of standard dynamical systems methods. 3) A hierarchy of fluid-
dynamical models to describe the flow of products through factories based on
conservation laws will be developed. These models are based on the methods of
gas dynamics and fluid averaging and promise to allow fast and accurate
simulations for supply networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is based on
an ongoing collaboration between researchers from Mathematics, Industrial
Engineering, and Intel Corporation. We expect that our results have a
significant impact on the understanding of the relationship between policies and
management decisions and the resulting performance of factories and whole
business networks. The three major areas of inquiry will be: i) The management
concept of bucket brigades: The organizational principle of bucket brigades will
be studied for workers with different skill levels along the production line as
well as changing skill levels due to learning. ii) There are theoretical results
stating that certain work allocation rules for parallel machines will lead to
chaotic behavior. These results are based on highly abstracted models. We will
study more realistic models and larger networks of production machines. iii)
Supply chain modeling and simulation: We will derive models that allow fast
scalable simulations of production flows in a supply chain. The long-term goal
is to optimize production across the whole supply chain, an intermediate goal is
to generate simulation tools that allow to explore business questions and to
pose "what if" questions on these simulations.&lt;br/&gt;