* 0204808
* Numerical Investigations of Three and Two Dimensional Free Boundary Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jean-Marc Vanden-Broeck, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 69,882.00

The work is concerned with the theory of free surface flows. Here a free surface
refers to an interface between two fluids. The position of such a surface is not
known a priori and has to be found as part of the solution. This leads to a
highly nonlinear mathematical problem, for which the PI will develop new
numerical and analytical approaches. The objective is to develop numerically and
analytically theories for three-dimensional nonlinear free surface flows and for
two-dimensional interfacial flows. Specifically: (A) Derive efficient and
accurate numerical approaches for three-dimensional nonlinear free surface
flows. (B) Use these new schemes together with analytical techniques to further
the understanding of three-dimensional free surface flows. This includes
extending linear and weakly nonlinear theories to the fully nonlinear regime and
discovering the limiting configurations of these flows. (C) Check the validity
of existing approximations in ship hydrodynamics and improve them. (D)
Investigate the existence of new types of waves propagating at the interface
between two fluids of constant densities. These waves should have properties
intermediate between those of ``generalized solitary waves" and those of
``classical fronts". Therefore it is appropriate to describe them as
``generalized fronts". Their existence is strongly suggested by previous work
but they have not been calculated explicitly. (E) Calculate the generalized
fronts and perform a numerical study of their stability.

Free surface flows are common in many aspects of science and everyday life.
Examples are waves on a beach, bubbles rising in a glass of champagne, melting
ice, pouring flows from a container and sails blowing in the wind. In these
examples the free surface is the surface of the sea, the interface between the
gas and the champagne, the surface of the ice, the boundary of the pouring flow
and the surface of the sail. The PI will concentrate on applications arising
from fluid mechanics. However the methods developed are general and have
applications outside fluid mechanics and the PI proposes to investigate them as
well. The research will benefit applied mathematicians interested in nonlinear
free surface flows and applied scientists in need of accurate schemes to solve
three-dimensional free surface flows. The proposed application to the nonlinear
wave pattern generated by a ship is relevant to ship hydrodynamics. The study of
waves on sharp interfaces has applications in oceanography. Such sharp
interfaces form in oceans, lakes and the atmosphere between adjacent masses of
different density associated with differences in temperature, salinity or amount
of suspension. One of the reasons for studying such sharp boundaries is that
they appear at the surface as frontal lines where dust, foam, timber and others
accumulate. Many of the problems proposed can be done in collaboration with
graduate students.

