* 0204247
* Degradation Modeling, Reliability Analysis, and Quality Improvement
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Vijayan Nair, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 259,477.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0204247&lt;br/&gt;PI: Vijayan Nair&lt;br/&gt;Title: Degradation
Modeling, Reliability Analysis, and Quality
Improvement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Degradation data
are a very rich source of reliability information and offer many advantages over
the analysis of time-to-failure data. This project will develop a flexible class
of models for analyzing degradation data and related reliability inference.
These results will be used to obtain efficient methods for the design and
analysis of accelerated tests and reliability improvement experiments. In this
work, time-to-failure is defined as the level crossing (first-passage time) of a
specified degradation threshold. The first part of the project will consider
models based on diffusion processes for analyzing degradation data with
continuous sample paths. These models can accommodate a variety of degradation
rates and shapes. They also lead naturally to a wide class of time-to-failure
distributions. The inverse Gaussian distribution plays a central role, similar
to the exponential distribution with constant hazard rates. The second part will
study a class of degradation-based models for repairable systems data that is
quite analogous to non-homogeneous Poisson processes with failure data. Multi-
state degradation models will also be considered. This work is an interesting
generalization of the formulation in traditional statistical process control.
Degradation data allow for more informative accelerated tests and reliability
improvement studies. Several research topics on design of accelerated
degradation tests, analysis of data from reliability improvement experiments,
and robust design studies will be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been
tremendous emphasis on quality and reliability improvement in industry, driven
by global competition and increasing customer expectations. There is also
continued pressure to reduce product development costs and cycle times. Design,
development, and manufacturing of highly-reliable products in this environment
raise many challenges. The focus within the reliability area has traditionally
been on the collection and analysis of time-to-failure data. High reliability
implies few failures, so reliability estimation and improvement for product and
process design can be extremely difficult. Fortunately, recent advances in
sensing and measurement technologies are making it feasible to collect extensive
amounts of data on degradation and other performance measures associated with
components, systems, and manufacturing processes. However, the lack of flexible
models and methods inference has been a major deterrent to the widespread use of
degradation data for reliability analysis. This project will develop new models
and methods for analyzing reliability data and use them for quality
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;