* 0204105
* Neutron and Synchrotron Radiation Scattering Studies of New Ferromagnetic Semiconductors and their Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Tomasz Giebultowicz, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 296,272.00

Magnetic semiconductors currently receive a great deal of attention because
these materials are expected to revolutionize the computer and communication
technologies. The new-generation electronics, usually referred to as
"spintronics", exploits not only the electronic charge, but also its spin - a
feature not taken advantage of in the presently used semiconductor chips. A
number of teams in the US, Japan and Europe are now competing to find the best
ways of synthesizing new magnetic semiconductors suitable for building practical
spintronics devices. Parallel to the ongoing efforts of material technologists,
much effort is also needed from condensed matter physicists to characterize the
magnetism and other related properties of the new emerging materials The
scattering of neutrons and synchrotron radiation are two powerful experimental
tools that allow one to obtain a detailed atomic-level insight into the
magnetism of a condensed matter system. The aim of this project is to use these
two techniques for investigating new spintronics materials, with particular
emphasis on the physical mechanism underlying their magnetism. It should be
stressed that the mechanism giving rise to semiconductor magnetism is not
exactly the same as in most other known magnetic systems (e.g., iron), and not
all details of that mechanism have yet been fully understood. The building
blocks of future spintronics devices will be nanostructures such as
superlattices - i.e., "sandwiches" made of alternating extremely thin layers of
magnetic and non-magnetic semiconductors. One question concerning such
sandwiches - very important from the viewpoint of designing spintronics devices
- is how two magnetic layers "communicate" across the intervening non-magnetic
"spacer". Neutron and synchrotron radiation tools are particularly well suited
for investigating these phenomena. Such studies are also an essential part of
our project.

Ferromagnetic semiconductors (FMSC) currently receive a great deal of attention
because such materials are essential for developing "spintronics" - a new-
generation electronics in which not only the current magnitude, but also its
spin polarization can be controlled. The aim of this project is to exploit the
potential of neutron and synchrotron radiation scattering techniques to shed
light on several important issues concerning newly synthesized FMSC materials
and their nanostructures. It should be stressed that FMSCs differ in many
respects from "conventional" ferromagnetic materials, which are either metals or
insulators. As in metals, the magnetism of certain novel FMSC systems (e.g.,
Ga(Mn)As) is induced by carriers - however, not by electrons, but by holes.
Details of this new physical mechanism have yet to be understood. Inelastic
neutron scattering tools may greatly help in such studies because they enable
one to obtain very accurate values of the exchange parameters characterizing the
interactions between magnetic ions. Another important issue is understanding the
mechanism of exchange interaction transfer between FMSC layers separated by a
non-magnetic spacer. Neutron and synchrotron radiation reflectometry are
powerful tools for investigating such interactions. These techniques also enable
one to study structural defects in the interface regions in heterostructures
made of magnetic/nonmagnetic semiconductors. Such defects may significantly
influence the performance of future spintronics devices. Therefore, insight into
this issue is of considerable importance.