* 0204918
* ITR: Enhancing Crystal Structure Determination through Data Mining, Collaborative Environments, and Grid Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2009
* Russ Miller, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,073,263.00

ITR: Enhancing Crystal Structure Determination through Data Mining,
Collaborative Environments, and Grid Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray
crystallography, with its unique ability to reveal the atomic or near-atomic
structures of a wide range of biomedically important molecules, is the
cornerstone of modern structural biology. This project will support critical
advances in the enabling technologies of automated tuning of software, learning
via data mining, geographically distributed collaborative environments, and grid
computing for the enhancement and determination of crystal
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer programs based on "direct methods" are
used to determine the majority of small-molecule organic crystal structures.
These methods begin to fail in the 100-200-atom range because the accuracy of
the underlying probabilistic relationships is inversely proportional to the
square root of the size of the structure. The Shake-and-Bake algorithm and SnB
program have extended the size of crystal structures amenable to direct-methods
phasing from 100 to 2500 atoms. SnB has also been used to increase the size of
heavy-atom substructures in large proteins that can be determined from 10 to 180
Se atoms. This provides a bootstrap by which complete structures, containing
hundreds of thousands of atoms, can be elucidated. Such accomplishments would
have been regarded as impossible only a few years ago, and the ultimate
potential of the Shake-and-Bake approach to ab initio structure determination of
macromolecules is unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated SnB collaborative
environment will allow multiple simultaneous users at distinct locations to work
together in a virtual environment via a variety of platforms (from 3D fully
immersive to desktop PC). Users will be able to navigate through a structure,
search and import structures available from public crystallographic data banks,
edit structures, and interface directly with SnB while running either in
solution mode or in refinement mode. The users will have the ability to work in
a collaborative fashion as they would if they were all situated in close
physical proximity. Finally, platforms consisting of computational grids are
available in many academic and commercial institutions that use crystallographic
software. A grid-enabled version of SnB will be created so that it can take
advantage of computational grids and networks of workstations that have
available computing cycles. The introduction of SnB has had an enormous impact
on the crystallographic community. The integration of the Shake-and-Bake
methodology with automated data warehousing and data mining should provide
equally spectacular advances in the near future. The introduction of
collaborative environments and the ability to exploit computational grids is
expected to have a significant impact as well. Advances in enabling technologies
coupled to a widely-distributed package, provides a unique opportunity to
evaluate the viability of these enabling technologies, which have far-reaching
applications to a wealth of diverse areas, including computational chemistry,
advanced design, optimization, and edutainment.&lt;br/&gt;