* 0204154
* Automorphic Forms, Moduli Spaces, and Quantization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Tatyana Foth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 79,595.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204154. PI: Tatyana Foth&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;I will study
holomorphic automorphic forms on bounded symmetric domains and
&lt;br/&gt;related problems of quantization. Let X be a quotient of a bounded
symmetric &lt;br/&gt;domain by a lattice. The space of holomorphic automorphic
forms can be &lt;br/&gt;identified with the space of holomorphic sections of a
tensor power of the &lt;br/&gt;canonical line bundle on X. In the context of
geometric quantization this &lt;br/&gt;is the quantizing line bundle, X is the
classical phase space, and &lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms are quantum states, i.e.
wave functions of a particle.&lt;br/&gt;I shall investigate properties of
Poincare series and relative Poincare series &lt;br/&gt;associated to real
submanifolds of X. From the point of view of quantization &lt;br/&gt;they are
components of the delta-function. Explicit construction of relative
&lt;br/&gt;Poincare series associated to closed geodesics in finite volume
smooth ball &lt;br/&gt;quotients and the spanning result can be used to obtain
rational structures &lt;br/&gt;on the spaces of cusp forms for arithmetic
subgroups of SU(n,1). Another &lt;br/&gt;problem I shall address is the
computation of curvature of a natural connection&lt;br/&gt;in the vector bundle
over a space of compatible complex structures on&lt;br/&gt;a symplectic manifold
X, whose fiber over J is the space of J-holomorphic &lt;br/&gt;sections of k-th
tensor power of the quantizing line bundle. To begin with,&lt;br/&gt;I will
compute the symbol of the curvature in the semiclassical limit
for&lt;br/&gt;certain types of X. The first interesting example would be the
case when X is &lt;br/&gt;a hyperbolic Riemann surface, where an explicit basis
in the space of&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms can be used as a moving
frame.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main object of my research
is automorphic forms on bounded symmetric &lt;br/&gt;domains. They are functions
with very special properties on spaces which have &lt;br/&gt;interesting
geometry and many symmetries. In addition to being an important &lt;br/&gt;and
intensively studied subject by itself it has a very close relation to
&lt;br/&gt;geometric quantization which is a part of mathematics whose
development was &lt;br/&gt;strongly motivated by physics and by general desire
to understand better the &lt;br/&gt;nature of the world and to describe it in
terms of suitable mathematical &lt;br/&gt;formalism. The main goal of geometric
quantization is to find a rigorous &lt;br/&gt;mathematical way to pass from
classical mechanics to quantum mechanics in &lt;br/&gt;a space which may have a
very complicated geometry. More precisely, the &lt;br/&gt;question is how one
can establish a suitable correspondence between &lt;br/&gt;classical observables
and quantum observables. The space of wave functions &lt;br/&gt;is, clearly, a
fundamental and very important object. It turns out that for &lt;br/&gt;certain
classical phase spaces automorphic forms are wave functions of &lt;br/&gt;a
particle. Properties of automorphic forms are strongly related to the
&lt;br/&gt;complex structure. One of the questions I shall address is to what
extent &lt;br/&gt;the procedure of geometric quantization depends on the complex
structure. &lt;br/&gt;That leads to discussion of connections in vector bundles
on certain moduli &lt;br/&gt;spaces which are of great interest and significance
for both mathematicians &lt;br/&gt;and physisists. &lt;br/&gt;