* 0204840
* Corrosion Mechanisms in Amorphous-Partially Nanocrystalline Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* John Scully, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2006
* USD 355,000.00

This project is aimed at fundamental understandings of the mechanisms by which
nanocrystal size, composition and structure control both localized corrosion and
acid-induced depassivation properties in nanocrystalline-amorphous alloys. The
alloys being considered include early transition metals such as zirconium, late
transition metals such as iron and simple metal elements such as aluminum.
Various compositions are processed at different temperatures to investigate the
influence of composition and structure. This generic class of materials exhibits
greater mechanical strengths and elastic moduli than conventional
polycrystalline alloys while simultaneously retaining the excellent macroscopic
corrosion resistance of the fully amorphous state as long as nanocrystals remain
smaller than 20 nm in diameter. A major goal of the project is to investigate
the underlying aspects associated with nanocrystal size that govern the
resistance to general corrosion in acids and the formation of localized
corrosion pits. This study develops new fundamental understanding involved with
preserving corrosion resistance along with high mechanical strength of these
nanomaterials. The project includes both modeling and experimental efforts with
extensive electron microscopy. Corrosion properties will be linked with
understandings of nm-scale electrochemical properties as well as nm-scale
composition and structure. Thus, this research will provide new nanometer-scale
structure-property knowledge regarding the corrosion behavior of a generic class
of materials of technological significance. These new alloys may be useful in
components requiring high specific strength and shape control such as MEMS and
NEMS where little corrosion can be tolerated. The funding of this research
provides an opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students including
underrepresented minorities to develop understanding and experience in the
multi-disciplinary fields of corrosion and materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new understanding of the corrosion
mechanisms in nanocrystalline-amorphous alloys and strives to avoid the trade-
off between high strength and good corrosion resistance in these new alloys. In
addition to scientific advances, this research will be useful in the development
of high strength alloys with excellent corrosion resistance required in MEMS and
NEMS technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;