* 0204617
* Nonlinear Homogenization and Applications to Porous and Nematic Elastomers
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Pedro Ponte Castaneda, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2007
* USD 232,070.00

Proposal: DMS-0204617 PI: Pedro Ponte Castaneda Institution: University of
Pennsylvania Title: Nonlinear homogenization and applications to porous and
nematic elastomers

ABSTRACT

This project proposes to develop and apply homogenization techniques for
estimating the macroscopic behavior of heterogeneous hyperelastic material
systems that are characterized by nonconvex energy functions. Two prototypical
examples will be analyzed in detail: porous elastomers and "polydomain" liquid
crystal elastomers (LCEs). The first is an example of a two-phase composite with
one void phase and one elastic phase. These materials are used extensively in
various industries for their insulation and shock absorption properties. The
second is an example of a polycrystalline aggregate involving single-crystal
grains made of a liquid-crystal elastomeric phase. They are materials that
exhibit "soft'' modes of deformation, are capable of being actuated by
temperature and light inputs, and also exhibit the remarkable property of
becoming optically transparent at sufficiently large stretches. In particular,
we propose to develop simple estimates of the Hashin-Shtrikman and self-
consistent type for these materials, which have already been found to be
extremely useful in other contexts. However, because of the finite deformations
involved in elastomeric systems, it will be necessary to also characterize the
evolution of the microstructure (e.g., porosity, texture, void or grain shape
and orientation) in these systems and its implications on the overall behavior.
Because of the non-convexity of the relevant energy functions, the possible
development of instabilities must also be taken into account, especially because
such unstable modes may be useful in the design of devices. This program of
research will involve an exciting combination of several tools in mathematical
analysis, including calculus of variations, convex analysis, differential
equations, and optimization, and is likely to impact our understanding of
constitutive theory of complex materials in general.

This proposal is concerned with heterogeneous material systems that can undergo
large elastic (recoverable) deformations. Examples of these material systems
include, among others, carbon-black-filled elastomers, polymeric foams, liquid
crystalline elastomers, block copolymers and skeletal muscle tissue. Two
essential features characterize their mechanical response: 1) they can undergo
large elastic (recoverable) deformations; and 2) they exhibit non-unique
behavior (micro-buckling and other instabilities). In addition, most importantly
from the applications point of view, the behavior of many of these material
systems can be controlled by external fields (temperature, electric, magnetic,
chemical inputs). Because of their remarkable properties, these materials,
usually appearing in the form of composites or polycrystalline aggregates, will
continue to provide the vehicles for many technological innovations, ranging
from rubber tires, more than a century ago, to light-activated switches and
artificial muscles, today. Because of their highly nonlinear properties, the
characterization of these material systems is also mathematically challenging.
In particular, even though much progress has been made in recent years in
developing rigorous homogenization frameworks for these material systems, much
work remains to be done in terms of developing "constructive" mathematical tools
to estimate the constitutive behavior of specific systems within this class.

