* 0204827
* Glassy Liquid Crystals for Reflective Coloration and Optical Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Shaw Chen, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2005
* USD 339,021.00

Glasses are traditionally classified as amorphous materials having isotropic
properties. As a class of noncrystalline solids, glassy liquid crystals are
characterized by a uniaxial, lamellar, helical, or columnar molecular
arrangement underlying liquid crystalline mesomorphism. Thanks to optical
anisotropy and device robustness, glassy liquid crystals are well suited for
optics, photonics, and optoelectronics. However, most liquid crystals tend to
crystallize on cooling from melts, thereby losing the desired order and yielding
grain boundaries that scatter light and limit charge transport. Under prior NSF
support, a definitive set of materials has been generated following an empirical
approach in which liquid crystalline groups are chemically bonded to a volume-
excluding central core. Unique features of glassy liquid crystals include: a
well-defined molecular structure with a low to medium molecular weight, superior
chemical purity and film-forming ability, and favorable rheological properties
that facilitate processing into large area monodomain thin films. In addition,
feasibility has been demonstrated for latching electro-optic devices, such as
optical switches, attenuators and tunable filters; efficient circular polarizers
and polarized light emitters; and high-performance optical notch filters and
reflectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To take on new intellectual and technological
challenges, the PI's propose to develop glassy nematics and cholesterics with a
high glass transition temperature (80 to 150 C) and a wide mesomorphic fluid
temperature range; to furnish molecular-level understanding of vitrification, as
opposed to crystallization, of liquid crystals; to functionalize glassy liquid
crystals with photoresponsive moieties that are thermally&lt;br/&gt;stable and
fatigue resistant; and to demonstrate concepts for reversible tunability of
reflective coloration and patterning as well as rewritable optical data storage.
Glassy liquid crystals are particularly promising because of their ability to
undergo repeated heating-cooling cycles across a wide temperature range (through
the glass transition temperature) without encountering crystallization. The
project involves implementation of deterministic synthesis strategies for
multifunctional materials; preparation and characterization of ordered solid
films; analysis of material stability against thermally activated
crystallization; determination of crystalline lattice structures with x-ray
crystallography and powder diffractometry; and reversible modulation of optical
properties through photoinduced ring closure ring opening of diarylethene
moieties. Aimed at cultivating new knowledge crucial to the development of novel
optical materials, the proposed research is highly relevant to optical
information technology that is undergoing a rapid growth worldwide. Transition
of academic research to civilian and defense applications will be facilitated
through collaboration and partnership with government and industry laboratories.
From an educational perspective, students participating in the project will
develop unique skills from conducting their thesis research in a
multidisciplinary environment, gaining a broad perspective in a strategically
important area of research and development.&lt;br/&gt;