* 0204050
* Next Generation Software: Scalable Real-Time Simulation of Embedded Systems and Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Phillip Sheu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 06/30/2006
* USD 623,000.00

Scalable Distributed Real-Time Simulation of&lt;br/&gt; Embedded Systems and
Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Kane Kim&lt;br/&gt; University of California
-Irvine&lt;br/&gt; 0204050&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Major improvements
in the validation technology for embedded systems are under increasing demands
from industry. Not only description but also simulation of non-computer parts
and application environments of embedded systems is needed in validating many
embedded system software designs and implementations. Here the desired types of
simulators are real-time (RT) simulators which exhibit the timing behavior that
are the same as or sufficiently close to the timing behavior of the simulation
targets. Such simulators can enable highly cost-effective testing of the
embedded system software and such testing can be a lot cheaper that the testing
performed in actual application environments while being much more effective
than the testing based on non-RT simulators of
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this research, the joint university-
industry research team intends to establish the scientific foundation for the
DTS scheme in a sound form, thereby realizing fundamental advances in the state
of the art in RT simulation. Development of support middleware and other tool
prototypes is planned. Successful accomplishment of these will mean that the
validation technology for embedded systems will be advanced in fundamental ways.
Case studies for evaluating the improvements in simulation performance and
validation effectiveness realized by use of the DTS scheme in practical contexts
will be conducted with the assistance of industry partners. Advanced
instrumentation and performance measurement technologies and graphic interface
technologies developed by international collaborations partners will also be
incorporated and integrated with the DTS scheme. More specifically, the
proposing team intends to establish:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Scientific foundation for
DTS, including that related to consistency among distributed simulator nodes and
maximization of concurrency, (2) Middleware and application programming
interfaces that support DTS and simulator programming, (3) A methodology for
validation of RT object-structured distributed software for embedded systems,
which is centered around the use of RT simulators of the non-computer parts and
environments and additionally uses performance measurement and graphic
visualization tools, and (4) Case studies involving an RT simulation of immune
buildings designed to protect inhabitants against bio-weapon attacks and that of
miliary command-control environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;