* 0204051
* RUI:   Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Study of Hydrogen in New Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Natalie Adolphi, Knox College
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2003
* USD 14,158.00

This individual investigator award supports a project that will use Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) techniques to investigate the behavior of hydrogen in
three different materials: lanthanum and yttrium hydrides, fullerenes, and
quasicrystals. Thin films of lanthanum and yttrium hydrides switch from a
reflecting state at low hydrogen concentrations to a transparent state at high
concentrations. This "switchable mirror" behavior is due to a metal-to-non-metal
transition, but a detailed understanding of this transition is still lacking.
NMR will be used to characterize the crucial structural and electronic phenomena
underlying the optical transition. Carbon-based materials are attractive
candidates for new hydrogen storage media, and recent attention has focused on
the use of carbon nanotubes. Difficulties in nanotube sample preparation and
analysis have hampered progress in measuring crucial properties, including the
hydrogen transport rate. The rate of hydrogen transport in solid fullerene, as a
first step towards understanding the more complicated nanotube materials, will
be studied using NMR techniques. Quasicrystals are solids with aperiodic yet
highly ordered structures and remarkable electronic properties. Calculations
showing fine structure in the electronic density of states may explain these
properties; however, the experimental evidence remains controversial. NMR
relaxation measurements combined with control of the hydrogen content of a
titanium-based quasicrystal will be used to test for the existence of the fine
structure. All of this work will be carried out at a liberal arts college using
undergraduate research assistants, who will gain valuable experience as they
prepare for and pursue careers in physics and related fields. %%% Hydrogen is
absorbed by a surprising array of solids, often yielding materials with
significant technological importance. This individual investigator award will
support a project at a predominately undergraduate institution that utilizes
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) to study the behavior of hydrogen in three
different materials: solid C60, rare earth "switchable mirrors, " and titanium-
based quasicrystals. NMR measurements of the motion of hydrogen in C60 will
serve as the first step in understanding hydrogen motion in more complicated
derivatives of C60, such as carbon nanotubes. Carbon nanotubes are attractive
candidates for next generation hydrogen storage media, crucial for the
development of clean-burning hydrogen as a viable fuel. "Switchable mirrors" are
thin films that change from reflecting to transparent depending on the hydrogen
content. NMR measurements of their structure and electronic properties will
yield a better fundamental understanding of the switching phenomenon. This
understanding will aid the development of useful devices, such as switches for
optical fiber networks. Quasicrystals are solids with unusual atomic structures
that have a number of novel electronic properties. NMR measurements of the
electronic properties combined with careful control of the hydrogen content of a
quasicrystal will be used to test some of the more controversial theoretical
explanations of the unusual properties. All of this work will be carried out at
a liberal arts college using undergraduate research assistants, who will gain
valuable experience as they prepare for and pursue careers in physics and
related fields. ***