* 0204535
* Topics on Low-Dimensional Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Shuguang Wang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2007
* USD 88,706.00

DMS-0204535&lt;br/&gt;Shuguang Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study
several issues in Topology and Geometry.&lt;br/&gt;The central theme is that of
real structures which can be defined&lt;br/&gt;on symplectic and contact
manifolds. With the presence of such&lt;br/&gt;structures, the proposal aims to
introduce new versions of Gromov-Witten&lt;br/&gt;theory, Seiberg-Witten-Floer
theory, and to apply the resulting&lt;br/&gt;invariants to String Theory as well
as Real Algebraic Geometry.&lt;br/&gt;Another aspect of the project will study
related analytical problems&lt;br/&gt;on manifolds that possess open conical
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real Algebraic Geometry concerns the real
solutions of real polynomials&lt;br/&gt;which arise naturally in many real-life
applications. Despite the&lt;br/&gt;fact that this is one of oldest Mathematical
branches, we have so far&lt;br/&gt;made very little progress in understanding
it. Our project will attempt&lt;br/&gt;to fill the gap partially by using new
machinery following from the&lt;br/&gt;pioneer work of Donaldson, Floer, Taubes
etc. It was Einstein's dream&lt;br/&gt;to unify all four fundamental forces in
the nature. Through Quantum&lt;br/&gt;Mechanics, it is possible to unify the
strong force, the weak force and&lt;br/&gt;the electro-magnetic force. However
the unification with the fourth&lt;br/&gt;force, the gravity, has eluded some of
the greatest thinkers of our time.&lt;br/&gt;Nowadays it is commonly believed
that String Theory offers the best hope&lt;br/&gt;to achieve this last
unification. Complex manifolds with real structure&lt;br/&gt;are called
orientifolds in String Theory. These are popular but&lt;br/&gt;still poorly-
understood objects for Physicists. A purpose in the project&lt;br/&gt;is to lay
down a rigorous mathematical foundation for Gromov-Witten&lt;br/&gt;