* 0204779
* PFSMETE Starter Grant Proposal: Further Studies of Metacognition and Chemistry Learning
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Dawn Rickey, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/29/2004
* USD 49,999.00

0204779

Despite the importance of a whole spectrum of knowledge from general thinking
strategies to specific content in scientists' thinking, most science instructors
focus their courses only on content knowledge and neglect to equip students with
appropriate thinking strategies. Thus, it is not surprising that students often
gain factual and procedural knowledge, but are unable to link and use these
ideas to solve novel problems, give coherent explanations, or construct a
principled understanding of science. This is unfortunate because, without these
abilities, science content knowledge is practically useless to students. On the
other hand, understanding of the fundamental principles and thinking strategies
of science fosters independent science learning and problem solving. Research in
cognitive science and education illustrates that instructors can promote better
understanding by explicitly teaching students to use thinking strategies that
experts use implicitly.

Metacognition refers to the monitoring and regulation of one's own thoughts, and
includes the use of both general and domain-specific thinking strategies. An
example of a general thinking strategy is evaluating new ideas by comparing them
with other things you know about to see if the ideas fit together and make sense
to you. A strategy that is more specific to the domain of chemistry is making
connections between macroscopic observations and molecular-level explanations.
Research has shown that high levels of metacognition are key for understanding
ideas and for problem solving. While it is clear that metacognition contributes
favorably to learning, many open questions about its specific role remain.

With funding from a PFSMETE starter grant, I propose to continue my research
regarding metacognition and chemistry learning. First, I propose to use funds
from this starter grant to provide a bridge between my PFSMETE postdoctoral work
and plans for larger-scale dissemination and study of student learning in the
laboratory via the MORE Thinking Frame. Thus, a major focus of this project will
be to study the use of the MORE Thinking Frame as implemented by a graduate
student instructor who has never used the tool before and the student learning
that results from such an implementation. Second, of the three arenas in which
chemistry is taught at the college level (lecture, laboratory, and recitation),
by far the most challenging context in which to promote student metacognition is
that of the large lecture class. Thus, the second major focus of this project
will be to develop and study instructional methods that can be used to promote
student metacognition during a "lecture" period.

I expect that the research and development activities of this project will
result in information about how to best design and disseminate metacognitive
methods and materials, including an understanding of how use of such innovative
methods may be sustained in different instructional contexts; valuable
professional development opportunities for graduate students involved in the
project; and improved metacognitive abilities, understanding of chemistry ideas
and problem solving abilities for students. Overall, the proposed research can
be expected to advance understandings of methods for promoting and assessing
metacognition in chemistry courses, the cognitive mechanisms underlying
chemistry learning, and approaches to the design of more effective learning
environments.

