* 0204059
* Spectra, Geometry, and Asymptotics of Some Differential Equations of Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Evans Harrell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

In this project functional analysis will be used to understand how the shapes of
systems are connected with energy levels, whether arising as eigenvalues of
linear equations, such as the Schroedinger equation which describes quantum
mechanical particles, or arising from nonlinear equations like those describing
carrier transport in semiconductors. Small parameters are often present, whether
Planck's constant or a physical dimension, and careful asymptotics are required
in order to elucidate the role of the geometry of a domain. It is intended to
seek useful estimates of energies and other physical quantities in terms of
curvature, and to determine the shapes and geometric properties that optimize
those quantities.

This rigorous mathematical research will contribute to nanotechnology and
quantum mechanics. Laboratories are beginning to produce very small-scale
electrical devices, including quantum wires and quantum waveguides. The
properties of these devices, such as conductivity and energy levels, are
sensitive to their shape and configuration. This project will make these effects
quantitative and help guide the design of devices. The work also has
implications for other quite diverse phenomena described by similar equations.
These include practical applications to the seepage of fluids and the stability
of bulk matter, as well as purely mathematical applications to geometry.