* 0204277
* A Social-Technical Approach to the Evolutionary Construction of Reusable Software Component Repositories
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Yunwen Ye, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2006
* USD 202,875.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;SEL - 0204277&lt;br/&gt;Gerhard Fischer&lt;br/&gt;U of
Colorad @ Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Social-Technical Approach to the
Evolutionary Construction of Reusable Software Component Repositories PIs:
Gerhard Fischer and Yunwen Ye &lt;br/&gt;Although software reuse improves both
the quality and productivity of software development, systematic reuse has not
yet met its expected success due to difficulties in creating and maintaining
reuse repositories and enabling software developers to build new systems with
components from the reuse repository. The two issues are in a deadlock: if
software developers are unable to reuse, the investments on reuse cannot be
justified; if companies are unwilling to invest in reuse, software developers
have little to reuse. This project takes a social-technical approach to address
both issues. It will develop reuse-conducive environments based on the Seeding,
Evolutionary Growth, and Reseeding (SER) model to guide thedevelopment and
evolution of reuse repositories. It will instantiate the conceptual framework
for reuse by creating a set of tools to support each phase of the SER model:
SEEDER, BROKER, ENHANCER, and RESEEDER. This research will create a new
understanding of the social, cognitive, and technical issues in software reuse,
and explore new approaches and develop innovative tools to support reuse. The
results of the research will make a significant impact on the design of
information repository systems and human-centered software development
environments.