* 0204454
* The Classification Problem for Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Jeffrey Brock, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 10/31/2003
* USD 64,414.00

DMS-0204454&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey F. Brock&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE CLASSIFICATION
PROBLEM FOR HYPERBOLIC 3-MANIFOLDS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, Jeffrey Brock,
will synthesize diverse techniques in the&lt;br/&gt;deformation theory of
hyperbolic 3-manifolds to address classification&lt;br/&gt;problem for
hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Brock will undertake joint work&lt;br/&gt;with K.
Bromberg that employs the theory of hyperbolic cone-manifolds&lt;br/&gt;to show
that each tame hyperbolic 3-manifold M is approximated
by&lt;br/&gt;geometrically finite 3-manifolds. This conjecture, known as
the&lt;br/&gt;Density Conjecture has recently been solved by Brock and Bromberg
in&lt;br/&gt;certain cases. Brock will also work toward completing joint
work&lt;br/&gt;with R. Canary and Y. Minsky to prove Thurston's ending
lamination&lt;br/&gt;conjecture, which predicts that a tame hyperbolic
3-manifold is&lt;br/&gt;determined by its topology and its end invariants:
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;invariants attached to the ``ends'' of a hyperbolic
3-manifold. In&lt;br/&gt;new joint work with Bromberg, R. Evans, and J. Souto,
Brock will study&lt;br/&gt;the question of whether each algebraic limit of a
sequence of&lt;br/&gt;geometrically finite hyperbolic 3-manifolds is itself
topologically&lt;br/&gt;tame. This joint project has implications for a
conjecture of Ahlfors&lt;br/&gt;that the limit set of a finitely generated
Kleinian group has either&lt;br/&gt;measure zero or full measure in the Riemann
sphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classifying mathematical objects plays much the
same scientific role&lt;br/&gt;as classifying biological, chemical, or physical
phenomena in the&lt;br/&gt;development of these fields. For example, with the
human genome&lt;br/&gt;"cracked," scientists may now isolate specific genetic
causes or&lt;br/&gt;predispositions to diseases, greatly furthering the ability
of science&lt;br/&gt;to address these problems. In the proposed research, Brock
will&lt;br/&gt;endeavor to solve the classification problem for a "generic"
class of&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional spaces, the "hyperbolic 3-manifolds."
These&lt;br/&gt;non-Euclidean spaces have geometry locally like our own
Euclidean&lt;br/&gt;space, but their large scale geometry is expanding
exponentially:&lt;br/&gt;for example, light rays (a metaphor for geodesics)
emanating from a&lt;br/&gt;point-source diverge exponentially rather than
linearly. William&lt;br/&gt;P. Thurston's revolutionary and pioneering work in
the 1970's and&lt;br/&gt;1980's showed that almost all 3-manifolds are
hyperbolic, and went on&lt;br/&gt;to raise as many questions about hyperbolic
3-manifolds as it&lt;br/&gt;answered. From his contributions, a compelling
conjectural picture of&lt;br/&gt;the right classification of hyperbolic
3-manifolds has emerged as a&lt;br/&gt;lasting problem for researchers in the
field of geometry and topology.&lt;br/&gt;Recent work of the PI and his
collaborators has put the solution of&lt;br/&gt;this problem within reach; the
PI will make use his NSF support to&lt;br/&gt;facilitate ongoing collaborations
to solve this fundamental problem,&lt;br/&gt;thereby making a "database" of
hyperbolic 3-manifolds available for&lt;br/&gt;wider use by other mathematicians
and physicists alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;