* 0204628
* Quantum Field Theories on Algebraic Curves and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Leon Takhtajan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 344,997.00

DMS-0204628 - Leon Takhtajan &lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is devoted to the study of quantum field theories on
&lt;br/&gt;algebraic curves from complex analytic and algebraic points of view.
&lt;br/&gt;String theory is the unifying theme of the complex-analytic part
of&lt;br/&gt;the project. The main goals of this part are: 1) geometric
formulation &lt;br/&gt;of two-dimensional quantum Toda theories associated with
simple Lie &lt;br/&gt;algebras; 2) Fermi-Bose correspondence for compact Riemann
surfaces and &lt;br/&gt;closed smooth Jordan curves; 3) proof of general
Kleinian reciprocity on &lt;br/&gt;deformation spaces; 4) construction of the
universal Weil-Petersson &lt;br/&gt;potential for the universal Teichmuller
space; 5) curvature properties of &lt;br/&gt;the new Kahler metric on moduli
spaces of punctured Riemann surfaces; 6) &lt;br/&gt;explicit form of
factorization formula for determinants of Laplace &lt;br/&gt;operators acting on
higher order differentials; 7) Faddeev-Popov ghosts &lt;br/&gt;for string field
theory of open strings. Symmetries and Ward identities &lt;br/&gt;for
correlation functions are guiding principles of the algebraic part &lt;br/&gt;of
the project. The immediate and long term goals of this part are: 1)
&lt;br/&gt;proof of adelic Fermi-Bose correspondence for vertex operators,
complete &lt;br/&gt;construction of quantum field theory of multiplicative
bosons and proof &lt;br/&gt;of A. Weil's reciprocity law; 2) construction of
quantum field theories &lt;br/&gt;on algebraic curves in non-zero characteristic
with Artin-Schreier and &lt;br/&gt;Kummer theories as main examples, proof of
Artin's reciprocity law using &lt;br/&gt;quantum field-theoretical methods; 3)
adelic formulation of the WZW &lt;br/&gt;theory on algebraic curves in
characteristic zero.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In mathematical development a pivotal
role is played by ideas from &lt;br/&gt;physics, originated in the study of the
surrounding world. The last twenty &lt;br/&gt;five years have been characterized
by dramatic success in application &lt;br/&gt;of quantum fields and strings to
different areas of mathematics. The idea &lt;br/&gt;is to probe mathematical
objects by quantum theories and to measure their &lt;br/&gt;response in order to
get new information about the various mathematical &lt;br/&gt;properties of
these objects. Usually the output is encoded in terms of &lt;br/&gt;partition
function and correlation functions of physical theory, and the
&lt;br/&gt;problem is to decode it back in mathematical terms. The goals of this
&lt;br/&gt;proposal are the following: 1) to extend further quantum-theoretic
method &lt;br/&gt;for the study of complex analytic properties of surfaces in
two &lt;br/&gt;dimensions and their families; 2) to develop a new systematic
&lt;br/&gt;quantum-theoretic approach for arithmetic surfaces and algebraic
number &lt;br/&gt;fields (like the usual field of rational numbers). Fundamental
properties &lt;br/&gt;of these objects are discrete and it is only natural to
study them at a &lt;br/&gt;microscopic scale using quantum theory. In
particular, many classical &lt;br/&gt;mathematical results about fields of
algebraic functions and algebraic &lt;br/&gt;numbers, known as reciprocity laws,
can be interpreted as conservation &lt;br/&gt;laws (like conservation of energy)
in quantum theory. The main goal of &lt;br/&gt;the algebraic part of the project
is to develop a new approach based on &lt;br/&gt;quantum theory towards
fundamental laws that are satisfied by the very &lt;br/&gt;basic mathematical
objects: algebraic numbers - solutions of algebraic &lt;br/&gt;equations with
coefficients being rational numbers, and algebraic &lt;br/&gt;functions -
solutions of algebraic equations with coefficients being &lt;br/&gt;rational
functions. Realization of the goals of the proposal will &lt;br/&gt;contribute
to the fundamental interface between mathematics and physics.&lt;br/&gt;