* 0204069
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY 2002
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Harry Stern, Stern                   Harry          A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
Informatics for FY2002. The fellowship supports research and training at the
postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
these fellowships will play important roles in training the future workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Computer
simulation of lipid bilayer permeation." Phospholipid bilayer membranes regulate
the transport of molecules into and out of the cell. Though most transport is
assisted by channels or membrane proteins, passive transport directly through
the bilayer does occur. A molecular-level understanding of membrane permeation
can shed light on the blood-brain barrier, the mechanisms of anesthesia, and
basic processes such as osmosis and the diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
It may also assist in predicting the bioavailability of orally-administered
drugs. The proposed research is the computer simulation of the permeation of
small molecules through lipid bilayer membranes using recent algorithms
developed for long-time molecular dynamics simulations.

