* 0204531
* Collaborative Research: Theory and Methods for Nonparametric Survey Regression Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Jay Breidt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 71,166.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0204642 &amp; DMS-0204531
(Collaborative)&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Opsomer/Briedt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Collaborative Research: Theory and Methods for Nonparametric Survey Regression
Estimation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops new methods for
the efficient use of auxiliary information in complex surveys, based on
nonparametric regression techniques. Current practice relies on parametric
regression techniques, which have good efficiency if the regression model is
well specified, and which have a number of appealing operational features. The
nonparametric techniques share these operational features, lose little
efficiency when the parametric specification is correct, and gain efficiency
when the parametric specification is incorrect. The project increases the scope
of applicability of the nonparametric regression estimation approach, by
considering complex survey designs, varying types of auxiliary information, and
alternative smoothing techniques. Specifically, the project investigates multi-
stage surveys with cluster or element-level auxiliary information; multivariate
auxiliary information; and alternative smoothing techniques. Parametric and
nonparametric techniques are blended using semiparametric additive models to
provide a flexible tool for use in complex surveys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-
scale surveys are used to collect data in a wide range of fields, from studies
of human populations to inventories of natural resources. Information external
to the survey, such as administrative records or remote sensing, is often
available. This research project makes it possible to incorporate auxiliary
information easily and effectively into survey estimates, by using nonparametric
regression methods. Nonparametric regression, sometimes referred to as
smoothing, is widely used in other areas of statistics, but its use in survey
estimation has been limited so far. The investigators show that incorporating
auxiliary information into survey estimation through nonparametric regression
can improve the precision of the surveys, often at reduced costs. &lt;br/&gt;