* 0204028
* NGS:  An Application Development Environment for Complex Heterogeneous Distributed Real-Time Embedded Computing Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 09/30/2006
* USD 579,934.00

EIA-0204028 Alexandru Nicolau University of California-Irvine An Application
Development Environment for Complex Heterogeneous Distributed Real-Time Embedded
Computing Platforms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, describes a number of
coordinated strategies that will develop to ensure robust and automatic
composition of ( DRE) distributed real-time and embedded systems, based on
advances in architectural and resource descriptions that enable concurrent
exploration. The DRE applications to be explored in this work are representative
of a range of real world distributed computing scenarios form Grids to
microelectronic systems-on-chip (SOCs). SOC-based computing resources
incorporating diverse sensing and substantial processing capabilities are useful
in many DRE application domains, such as avionics, biomedical computing
resources and tele-medicine, remote sensing, space exploration, and command and
control systems. Examples of domains that could benefit from these advances
include: automated transportation systems distance learning, tele-medicine,
analysis for combat situations, video conferencing, virtual reality simulation,
and weather forecasting and analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of our
proposal focuses on coordinated compile-time and runtime strategies that enable
simultaneous and integrated optimization of (1) DRE application and middleware
software and (2) the underlying hardware platform consisting of distributed
high-performance processing elements and customized memory systems.&lt;br/&gt;