* 0204690
* Statistical Models of Biopolymer Sequence and Folding
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Scott Schmidler, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 165,000.00

Proposal ID: 0204690&lt;br/&gt;PI: Scott Schmidler&lt;br/&gt;Title: Statistical
models of biopolymer sequence and
folding&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves development of new probabilistic and Bayesian statistical models for
the analysis of biopolymer sequences. Emphasis is on predictive modeling of
proteins and RNA. Models for sequences of random variables with complex short-
and long-range interaction structure are developed and explored. Particular
focus is placed unifying statistical models estimated from data with statistical
mechanical models of polymer folding estimated via experimental parameter
measurement. Targeted applications include protein structure prediction, protein
folding kinetics, and protein-RNA binding. Statistical methodology development
focuses on connecting statistical models for sequence analysis and change-point
problems, including graphical Markov models and random fields, to statistical
mechanical models of polymer folding, especially on biopolymers (proteins and
RNA), to develop predictive theories. An additional core component of this
research program concerns development of computational methodology for
probabilistic inference in these models, including novel Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) algorithms for multi-modal distributions and rough energy
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern research in the molecular biosciences
and biomedicine relies increasingly on both computational modeling and analysis
of large collections of experimental data. This research concerns development of
novel and unified methods for combining these areas. This work leverages
physical models to develop improved methods for statistical data analysis, and
uses statistical methodology for improving predictive accuracy of physical
models. The focus is on analysis of protein and nucleic acid sequences and
structures being generated by high-throughput whole-genome analyses. These
advances will provide important new statistical methodology for computational
biology, as well as provide domain scientists with improved tools for data
analysis and predictive modeling.&lt;br/&gt;