* 0204019
* Developing a Resource-Aware Adaptive Compilation System for High-Performance Distributed Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Richard Wolski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2003
* USD 29,925.00

Developing a Resource-Aware Adaptive Compilation System for High-Performance
Distributed Computing

The goal of our work is to combine successful Grid infrastructure with novel
program compilation and optimization techniques to support portable and high-
performance distributed computing. We plan to develop adaptive compilation and
runtime techniques that are guided by the dynamic performance characteristics of
underlying Grid resources. To investigate these techniques, we will use language
environments that come from Internet computing (Java and .Net) as development
vehicles.

The framework we propose, a Resource-Aware Adaptive Compilation System, makes
resource performance and availability predictions, e.g. for networks, CPUs,
memory, disk, etc., available to a dynamic compilation system so that programs
compiled "just-in-time" achieve minimum overall execution time adaptively. That
is, we will adapt the level of program optimization (and subsequent execution
time tradeoff) dynamically, based on the instantaneous performance profile of
the Grid resources at hand.

To address this problem of achieving portable high-performance using the Grid,
we propose to investigate adaptive program compilation and on-the-fly
optimization of high-performance distributed applications using Computational
Grid resources. We will guide runtime and compiler optimization using predicted
resource performance (generated by the Network Weather Service) and re-optimize
code to adapt to changes.