* 0204191
* Gauge Theory, Harmonic Maps to Singular Spaces and Applications to Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Georgios Daskalopoulos, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 187,496.00

&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0204191 PI: Georgios Daskalopoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes three projects. In the first, the PI proposes to&lt;br/&gt;study
regularity of harmonic maps into the completion of Teichmueller&lt;br/&gt;space.
The two main applications are on symplectic Lefschetz pencils&lt;br/&gt;and on
superrigidity of lattices in the mapping class group. In the&lt;br/&gt;second
project the PI proposes a proof of higher dimensional
partial&lt;br/&gt;analogues of the conjectures of Atiyah and Bott on Yang-
Mills&lt;br/&gt;equations over Riemann surfaces. These are
nontrivial&lt;br/&gt;generalizations to higher dimensions of the PI's previous
work on the&lt;br/&gt;connection between Yang-Mills and the theory of
holomorphic vector&lt;br/&gt;bundles. Finally in the third project the PI
proposes some questions&lt;br/&gt;about harmonic maps from three-dimensional
manifolds to trees which&lt;br/&gt;generalize the well-known theory of harmonic
maps from surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for the first project is
to use harmonic maps in order&lt;br/&gt;to understand analytically the results
of Kaimanovich-Masur and&lt;br/&gt;Farb-Masur on the superrigidity of lattices
of rank at least 2 in the&lt;br/&gt;mapping class group. In the process the PI
realized that the methods&lt;br/&gt;should also shed light in the rank one case.
The second project&lt;br/&gt;shows that there are still very close connections
between the&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the Yang-Mills equations and algebraic
geometry. These&lt;br/&gt;connections have been exploited in great detail by
several people in&lt;br/&gt;the case of Riemann surfaces but very little is
known in higher&lt;br/&gt;dimensions. The PI's work sheds some light in this
direction.&lt;br/&gt;