* 0204009
* Nonregular Designs:    Classification, Optimality and Construction
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Hongquan Xu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 72,704.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0204009 PI: Hongquan Xu Title: Nonregular designs:
Classification, optimality and construction

Nonregular designs, such as Plackett-Burman designs and many other orthogonal
arrays, are widely used in practice due to their run size economy and
flexibility. However, many commonly used nonregular designs are not optimal.
Unlike regular designs, which have been studied thoroughly in recent years,
theory and construction of nonregular designs are still very primitive and
urgently needed. The objectives of this proposed research are to classify and
construct optimal nonregular designs. In the classification part, general
frameworks and novel approaches are proposed for investigating the following
important issues: estimation capacity, design efficiency, projection properties,
and aliasing structure. In the construction part, novel methods and algorithms
are proposed for constructing optimal nonregular designs for a wide variety of
situations, including supersaturated designs and block designs. Coding theory
will be employed to develop general results for multi-level and mixed-level
nonregular designs.

Experimental design is an effective and commonly used tool in scientific
investigation. Over the last century, it has made tremendous impact in many
areas of research, including agriculture, biology, manufacturing and high-tech
industries, and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future. While most of
the existing research has concentrated on the study of regular designs, this
proposed research focuses on the study of nonregular designs. Nonregular designs
are widely used in practice due to their run size economy and flexibility, for
example, Taguchi designs for process improvement and quality control. However,
it is important to note that many commonly used nonregular designs are not
optimal. Unlike regular designs, which have been studied thoroughly in recent
years, theory and construction of nonregular designs are still very primitive
and urgently needed. The objectives of this proposed research are to classify
and construct optimal nonregular designs. This proposal emphasizes an important
interdisciplinary connection between error-correcting codes and factorial
designs. The proposed work will develop fundamental results for nonregular
designs, and will lead to remarkable new advances in design theory and better
practice in experimentation.