* 0204326
* Calabi-Yau manifolds and mirror symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Mark Gross, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 120,449.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204326.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M. Gross plans to study the
geometry of mirror symmetry for Calabi-Yau&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. This will be
done from the perspective of the Strominger-Yau-Zaslow&lt;br/&gt;conjecture and
algebro-geometric analogues of this conjecture currently&lt;br/&gt;being
developed by M. Gross and B. Siebert. These ideas will be pursued&lt;br/&gt;with
a goal of finding a general mirror symmetry construction,
associating&lt;br/&gt;to any polarized maximally unipotent degeneration of
Calabi-Yau manifolds a mirror family&lt;br/&gt;of polarized Calabi-Yau
manifolds. Implications of these ideas to understanding&lt;br/&gt;the behaviour
of Ricci-flat metrics near maximally unipotent degenerations&lt;br/&gt;and the
counting of rational curves using the notion of log Gromov-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;invariants will also be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
proposed by M. Gross lies at the intersection of string theory&lt;br/&gt;and
geometry. String theory replaces the traditional notion of &lt;br/&gt;the point
particle with a small loop of string, moving through space-time.&lt;br/&gt;To
make string theory compatible with quantum mechanics, space-time
must&lt;br/&gt;be ten-dimensional. Since space-time appears four-dimensional,
one expects &lt;br/&gt;six of these dimensions to be a very small `curled up'
geometric object. &lt;br/&gt;These geometric objects are called Calabi-Yau
manifolds. In the early&lt;br/&gt;1990s, string theorists proposed a remarkable
association between&lt;br/&gt;completely different Calabi-Yau manifolds: certain
calculations extremely&lt;br/&gt;difficult to perform on one Calabi-Yau manifold
could be completed&lt;br/&gt;by performing completely different, and much
easier, calculations on&lt;br/&gt;a different Calabi-Yau manifold. This
discovery was known as mirror symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;Since this time, many
geometers have been trying to understand &lt;br/&gt;the mathematics behind this
miraculous observation. The work of M. Gross&lt;br/&gt;hopes to give
mathematical insight and explanation for the phenomenon&lt;br/&gt;of mirror
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;