* 0204920
* Structure and Entropy of Materials Studied by Nuclear Resonant Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Brent Fultz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2006
* USD 395,000.00

The objective of this research is the development of reliable and accurate
techniques for the determination of structural and vibrational properties of
complex materials. A major goal of the study is to investigate the disorder in
metallic alloys with the unique chemical environment selectivity of Mossbauer
diffractometry. The unique feature of the technique is its capability to select
iron atoms in a particular chemical environment, and obtain a diffraction
pattern from those iron atoms alone. With the new Mossbauer diffractometer, it
is possible to measure the periodicity of an irregular chemical site of iron
atoms with 3 aluminum first-nearest neighbors in ordered FeAl. Studies will also
be made on alloys of FeRh and PdFe with emphasis on investigating the inelastic
spectra to obtain the phonon partial density of states of iron atoms. Extreme
high pressures using diamond anvil cells will be used to investigate the
influence of pressure on interatomic force constants. In a different style of
experiment, the Mossbauer diffractometer will be used to study the spatial scale
of thermal relaxations in magnetic nanoparticles. A specific experiment on
thermal relaxations on hematite nanoparticles will be developed over the course
of the work. Such results show how the vibrational entropy of alloys depends on
interatomic separations, and can elucidate the reasons for the P(V,T) equation
of state of iron alloys. The broader impact of the proposed work lies not only
in developing reliable techniques for the structural determination of complex
materials but also in obtaining detailed information on interactions in solids
at the atomic level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermodynamics and atom arrangements
are at the core of materials science, and the proposed work will apply new
experimental methods for studying them. The methods are specialized, but have
unique capabilities for resolving a high level of detail about the structure and
dynamics of materials. The structure of materials is the focus of the work on
Mossbauer diffractometry. The entropy of materials is the focus of the work on
inelastic nuclear resonant scattering. The basic issues in diffraction and
scattering are also of broad academic interest in materials science. &lt;br/&gt;