* 0204156
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:   Application of Remote Sensing/GIS Technique in Sustainable Development, Southern Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 24,966.00

0204156&lt;br/&gt;Stern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a research project by Dr. Robert Stern, Center for Lithospheric
Studies, University of Texas, Dallas (UTD), Dallas, Texas and Dr. Mamdouh
Abdeen, National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences (NARSS), Cairo,
Egypt. They plan to study the use of remotely sensed geographical data to help
in the development in Upper Egypt, specifically the Aswan-Kom Ombo-Gallaba Plain
region. The two investigators will focus on understanding mid-Pleistocene
drainage reorganization resulting from tectonic uplift of the Nubian Swell, and
on identification of new groundwater resources. The project will have three
components: 1) Investigation of paleodrainages using ground-penetrating radar
(GPR) and trenching; 2) Mapping of surface and shallow subsurface drainages and
structures using Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) and SPOT images and Shuttle
Imaging Radar and 3) Building a Geographical Information Science (GIS) database.
Fieldwork will focus on evaluating the hypothesis that the Gallaba Plain is
underlain by a buried river channel, which drained the Eastern Desert.
Processing and interpretation of remote sensing imagery will provide regional
perspective for understanding drainage reorganization and will be used as a
layer in the GIS. The two scientists plan to build up a complete GIS database of
an 80 km wide corridor flanking the Nile and extending from Aswan north. This
project will be a continuation of joint activities by UTD in Texas and the NARSS
in Egypt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This proposal brings together new
technology, GPR, and remote sensing to create a database that can be used to
determine the Pleistocene history of drainage in the Gallaba plains region. A
million years of climate change in Egypt are represented by several different
generations of drainage in separate parts of the desert and Nile valley, and
this research is to test one of the areas where an old river channel may exist.
Such an understanding will potentially aid in the identification of new
groundwater reserves. The research will ultimately lead to an improved supply of
water for this region of Egypt, and possibly to an improved evaluation of
natural hazards. The developed database will be of use for scientific studies
and also for future development efforts. The two teams are qualified and have a
successful record of past collaboration, and the project has the advantage of
involving U.S. junior researchers and graduate students. There will be training
of U.S. and Egyptian researchers in the use of the GPR and in the development
and use of the GIS database. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;