* 0204389
* Syntactic Theories: Their Automation and Logical Foundation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Zena Ariola, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2006
* USD 159,998.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0204389&lt;br/&gt;Zena Ariola&lt;br/&gt;U of Oregon
Eugene&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general objective of this proposal is to gain a
more robust understanding of the semantics and&lt;br/&gt;logical foundations of
programming languages. The activities will be based on the close correspon-
dence&lt;br/&gt;between syntactic theories for realistic programming languages
and sequent calculi for logic.&lt;br/&gt;This correspondence is a generalization
of the Curry-Howard isomorphism that relates the simply&lt;br/&gt;typed calculus
and intuitionistic natural-deduction logic, and is at the heart of many
automated&lt;br/&gt;proof systems for reasoning about programs. The specific
objectives and their potential impact are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms and
Tools: Our experience has shown that the proposed study of syntactic the-
ories&lt;br/&gt;and associated logics is tedious and error-prone: it requires
many mundane but fun-damental&lt;br/&gt;tasks to be repeatedly performed. Such
tasks include verifying that the syntactic heory is well-formed, that evaluation
is a well-defined partial function, and that subject re-duction holds. On the
logical side, these properties are related to the consistency of the logic and
the soundness of the proof simplication rules. Hence, to enable the study of
non-trivial syntactic theories and logics, previous work by the investigators
included the design and im-plementation of algorithms and theorem-proving
techniques suitable for the automation of&lt;br/&gt;the manipulation of
syntactic theories. This effort has led to a prototype system (SL) for
lightweight description and reasoning about syntactic theories. This proposal
includes ac-tivities to extend and refine the current prototype and to make it
available to all interested researchers and students.