* 0204041
* The Structure of Smooth 4-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Ronald Stern, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 218,951.00

DMS-0204041&lt;br/&gt;Ronald Stern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the last 25 years it
has been the goal of exciting and deep &lt;br/&gt;mathematics to classify smooth
4-dimensional manifolds. An arsenal of &lt;br/&gt;techniques has been thrown at
this problem; it is the focus of dozens of &lt;br/&gt;research groups. The most
successful attempts have associated to each &lt;br/&gt;4-dimensional manifold
the solution space to complex systems of &lt;br/&gt;equations that arise in
particle physics: the Yang-Mills equations and &lt;br/&gt;the monopole equations
of Seiberg and Witten. These solution spaces are &lt;br/&gt;useful in
distinguishing cunningly constructed 4-dimensional manifolds. &lt;br/&gt;The
result of this assault is that 4-dimensional manifolds are more
&lt;br/&gt;complicated than we ever expected. As a result, it is impossible to
&lt;br/&gt;predict a classification scheme. It is the goal of this project to
more &lt;br/&gt;systematically approach the existence and uniqueness framework
for a &lt;br/&gt;classification scheme. The first goal is to understand why
smooth &lt;br/&gt;structures on 4-manifolds are sensitive to local topological
change. &lt;br/&gt;This project describes the underpinnings of how the smooth
structures &lt;br/&gt;change in the known constructions. Log transformations on
&lt;br/&gt;null-homologous tori are shown to play a significant role. The first
&lt;br/&gt;step is to determine if two smooth structures on a fixed
homeomorphism &lt;br/&gt;type of simply-connected smooth 4-manifold are related
by a sequence of &lt;br/&gt;log transformations on null-homologous tori. The
second step is to &lt;br/&gt;determine the characteristic numbers of irreducible
smooth 4-manifolds &lt;br/&gt;and to determine how these topological invariants
affect their &lt;br/&gt;Seiberg-Witten invariants. A notion of general-type
smooth 4-manifolds &lt;br/&gt;is given and a conjectured restriction on their
Seiberg-Witten &lt;br/&gt;invariants is proposed. This project outlines new
constructions that &lt;br/&gt;show that there are general-type manifolds that
fill out the regions &lt;br/&gt;determined by these restrictions. Careful
investigation of these &lt;br/&gt;constructions should indicate why they are
best possible. Other &lt;br/&gt;questions related to potential restrictions on
the characteristic &lt;br/&gt;classes of irreducible simply-connected smooth
4-manifolds will be &lt;br/&gt;investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excitement has
been generated by the idea that the puniest of all &lt;br/&gt;forces, gravity,
may in fact be a strong as nature's other three &lt;br/&gt;fundamental forces:
the strong force which binds protons and neutrons &lt;br/&gt;together in atomic
nuclei; the weak force which governs radioactive &lt;br/&gt;decay; and the
forces that govern electricity and magnetism. The &lt;br/&gt;perceived mismatch
between these three forces and gravity creates a &lt;br/&gt;theoretical
nightmare; it's the principle reason we have yet to find a &lt;br/&gt;grand
unified theory. However, it has recently been hypothesized that &lt;br/&gt;this
weakness is a mirage; the force of gravity only appears weak &lt;br/&gt;because
its force is diluted in our own universe and most of gravity's &lt;br/&gt;force
radiates out into extra dimensions. All other forces remain &lt;br/&gt;trapped
in our 3-dimensional world, while gravity is free to roam other
&lt;br/&gt;dimensions. With this hypothesis, there could be other worlds that
are &lt;br/&gt;parallel to our own; they all neatly stack up, each oblivious of
the &lt;br/&gt;other, with gravity the only force that moves between them. This
would &lt;br/&gt;also account for the missing dark matter of our universe; it
actually &lt;br/&gt;resides in other parallel universes. New mathematics will be
generated &lt;br/&gt;in this project to further explore these ideas. Much of the
relevant &lt;br/&gt;mathematics has already exposed the special nature of
dimensions three &lt;br/&gt;and four. These parallel universes may be explained
by the theory of &lt;br/&gt;(singular) foliations. The proposed study of
singular foliations may &lt;br/&gt;structure the way in which we view our own
universe -how we stack up &lt;br/&gt;with possible parallel universes. These
singular foliations will also &lt;br/&gt;provide new insight into the
classification of 4- dimensional &lt;br/&gt;manifolds. At bottom, the goal of
this project is to develop more &lt;br/&gt;systematic constructions of smooth
4-dimensional manifolds with the hope &lt;br/&gt;that a general picture begins
to emerge that will at least suggest a &lt;br/&gt;classification
scheme.&lt;br/&gt;