* 0204146
* Taylor Expansion Diagrams:  A Compact Canonical Representation for RTL Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Maciej Ciesielski, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 286,000.00

The goal of this work is to develop a new canonical representation and an
efficient verification infrastructure to support the RTL verification of large
designs. The proposed graph-based representation, called Taylor Expansion
Diagram, is based on a different decomposition principle than used by
decision&lt;br/&gt;diagrams such as BDDs and BMDs. It is obtained by treating
the symbolic expression of the design as a continuous, differentiable function
and applying Taylor series expansion with respect to its word-level variables.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting Taylor Expansion Diagram (TED) is canonical
for a fixed ordering of variables. TEDs can be used to represent functions
containing both algebraic and Boolean expressions, facilitating the
representation of complex designs with arithmetic operators and Boolean logic,
typically encountered in &lt;br/&gt;RTL specifications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
are building an RTL verification infrastructure centered around TED that can be
used to verify functional equivalence of RTL designs. We are developing
systematic, algorithmic techniques for constructing and manipulating TED
representations of HDL designs, based on the new theory.&lt;br/&gt;We are also
investigating how to exploit TEDs for implementation verification, that is
checking functional equivalence between an RTL specification and its logic,
gate-level implementation. By carrying out extensive experiments, the
applicability of TEDs to realistic designs with arithmetic circuits and Boolean
logic must be evaluated, and the performance of TEDs compared against that of
BDDs and *BMDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has also an important
educational role of teaching students about modern design representations from
decision diagrams to more abstract, word-level data structures in the context of
design synthesis and verification.&lt;br/&gt;