* 0204386
* Geometry and Topology of Knots and Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Jerome Levine, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 149,644.00

DMS-0204386&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Ruberman, Jerome Levine, and Kiyoshi Igusa
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topology group at Brandeis University proposes
research on knot &lt;br/&gt;theory and 3-manifolds, gauge-theory and
4-manifolds, and on higher &lt;br/&gt;Reidemeister torsion of families of
manifolds. Jerome Levine plans &lt;br/&gt;to continue his study of finite type
invariants of 3-manifolds. In &lt;br/&gt;particular, he plans to investigate a
graphical interpretation of a &lt;br/&gt;new surgery-theoretic theory proposed
in a recent paper. He also will &lt;br/&gt;investigate various questions
concerning boundary link invariants &lt;br/&gt;such as the signature-type
invariant and the relationship between the &lt;br/&gt;Farber invariant and non-
commutative Reidemeister torsion. Daniel &lt;br/&gt;Ruberman's research uses
gauge theory to investigate the geometry and &lt;br/&gt;topology of
4-dimensional manifolds. He will extend his program of &lt;br/&gt;using Seiberg-
Witten theory and Yang-Mills theory to explore families &lt;br/&gt;of
diffeomorphisms of 4-manifolds and positive scalar curvature &lt;br/&gt;metrics
on a 4-manifold. Further work explores whether finiteness &lt;br/&gt;theorems of
Riemannian geometry hold in dimension 4. Seiberg-Witten &lt;br/&gt;and Donaldson
theory will also be used to investigate a simple but &lt;br/&gt;important class
of non-simply-connected 4-manifolds. Kiyoshi Igusa's &lt;br/&gt;work extends his
study of higher Franz-Reidemeister torsion to the &lt;br/&gt;complex case and to
various new spaces of graphs. He will use this &lt;br/&gt;to interpret the
Miller-Morita-Mumford classes in terms of the higher &lt;br/&gt;Franz-
Reidemeister (FR) torsion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research encompasses a
number of themes in geometry and topology. &lt;br/&gt;One of these is the
interplay between topology and algebra, and &lt;br/&gt;another is the interplay
between topology and theoretical physics. &lt;br/&gt;To study spaces or other
topological objects such as knots, we encode &lt;br/&gt;some aspects of the
space into familiar algebraic objects such as &lt;br/&gt;matrices or
polynomials. Some of the algebra used to study &lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional objects
is connected with ideas developed by physicists &lt;br/&gt;to understand quantum
field theory, especially the Feynmann integral. &lt;br/&gt;Investigating this
interplay contributes to our understanding of the &lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional world
in which we live. Part of our work is concerned &lt;br/&gt;with the evolution of
spaces--the study of the way in which they &lt;br/&gt;change as some parameter
is varied. Some of the research in this &lt;br/&gt;direction develops algebraic
tools which apply in the case when there &lt;br/&gt;are many independent
parameters. Another component studies the &lt;br/&gt;evolution of 4-dimensional
spaces and geometries, using techniques &lt;br/&gt;arising in gauge theory, a
fundamental geometrical tool in &lt;br/&gt;theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;