* 0204573
* Differential-Difference Equations and Their Application to Crystalline Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Christopher Elmer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 106,633.00

The PI proposes to study spatially discrete reaction-diffusion equations
(SDRDEs) and their application to growth and interface motion in crystalline
materials. The PI intends to do this by finding and analyzing solutions that are
more general than traveling plane wave solutions as well as by analyzing the
stability of plane wave solutions in higher dimensions. The goals include
demonstrating that the SDRDE is a better model than many existing models for
interface motion and growth in materials with a crystalline lattice structure.
Specifics include studying stable pattern formation for the spatially discrete
one-dimensional Allen-Cahn equation and applying the results to multiple
interface problems, studying equilibrium shapes for the SDRDE in two and three
dimensions, showing that a small local perturbation in an equilibrium planar
interface solution for a two- or three-dimensional SDRDE can and does cause the
solution to evolve to a spatial translate of the original equilibrium interface,
and accurately modeling the growth of helium-4 crystals. The techniques the PI
will be using include construction using integral transforms, linear Fredholm
theory, and the implicit function theorem, showing existence and continuation of
solutions, finding and classifying equilibrium shapes using the free-energy
functional, and analyzing the stability of an edge (3D) or corner (2D) where two
planer interfaces (facets) meet. Although modeling phase changes in crystalline
materials with SDRDEs is natural and can be done from the fundamental properties
of the physical systems, the mathematical tools to effectively study the
resulting equations have been lacking until now; hence, SDRDEs are now ready to
be used as a modeling tool.

This project intends to develop, solve, and apply mathematical equations which
model phase transitions (solidification or melting, movement of a grain
boundary, etc.) in crystalline materials, where the atoms line up in an ordered
arrangement. Examples include water, metals, and salts. Existing models are
either at the atomic structure (micro-) scale or the (macro-) scale of the
entire system. (Some hybrid models combine the two scales). Micro-scale models
of phase transitions have to be solved computationally and are extremely
computational-resource intensive. They also depend on atomic interactions that,
if properly modeled, often make the problem too "large" to compute. Macro-scale
models can represent phase transitions with a pair of evolution equations but
lose the ability to account for the influences of the ordering at the atomic
level. Somewhat successful attempts have been made to reclaim the ordering
information, but in a phenomenological manner. The modeling tools that are being
studied in this project are a simple pair of evolution equations (which can be
studied both analytically and computationally) that contain both the macro-scale
and micro-scale properties derived from the basic physics of the materials.
Although the idea for using such equations has been around for over 40 years,
the mathematics necessary to study and solve these equations is just now
reaching maturity. The result is a more accurate mathematical description and
understanding of crystalline materials. The applications range from predicting
the failure of mechanical parts (for example, in jet turbines) to controlling
the growth of crystals (for example, in forging steel or growing gem stones).