* 0204356
* Fault Detection and Diagnosis for Mixed-Signal Circuits Using Wavelet Based Transient Current Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Kaushik Roy, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2008
* USD 160,000.00

As intrinsic leakage in transistor increases with technology scaling the
effectiveness of quiescent current (IDDQ) testing reduces significantly.
Transient current (IDD) based testing has been often cited and investigated as
an alternative and/or supplement to IDDQ testing in Digital CMOS circuits. While
the potential of IDD testing for fault detection has been established for
digital and analog circuits, there is no known efficient method for fault
diagnosis using IDD analysis. We propose a novel integrated method for fault
detection and diagnosis in digital CMOS circuits using IDD waveform analysis
using wavelet transform. We use wavelet transform to decompose the IDD waveform
in both time and frequency domain. The time-frequency resolution of the IDD
signal helps us detect as well as localize faults. Initial experimental results
on an 8-bit ALU show that wavelet based IDD analysis has the potential to
efficiently detect and localize faults considering practical issues like effect
of process variation and measurement noise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transient
current (IDD) analysis can also be effective for defect oriented testing of
analog circuits. We observe that wavelet transform renders an efficient way for
analyzing IDD for fault detection in analog circuits. The property of wavelet
for resolving events in both time and frequency domain simultaneously and the
property of better sub-banding than Fourier analysis, makes it a effective tool
for IDD analysis. Moreover wavelet transform can be easily adapted to current
waveforms from different circuits. We have observed that for equivalent number
of spectral components, sensitivity of wavelet based fault detection in analog
circuits is much higher than fourier or time-domain analysis for both
catastrophic and parametric faults. Initial experimental results on a benchmark
circuit show that wavelet based method is on average 25 times more sensitive
than DFT for parametric faults and can be considered as a promising alternative
for analog fault detection amidst measurement hardware noise and process
variation. In the proposed research we will develop an integrated fault
detection and diagnosis methodology using wavelet based transient current
analysis for mixed-signal circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will present the
results of our research in domestic and international conferences. International
conferences include (International Conference on CAD and CG in Macau, December
2003, and International Conference on CAD and CG 2005; IEEE Design and Test in
Europe).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;