* 0204730
* Degenerate Microlocal Methods and Geometric Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Rafe Mazzeo, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 248,491.00

&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal DMS - 0204730: Rafe Mazzeo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work in this project involves the continuing&lt;br/&gt;development of
analytic tools to study a variety of problems&lt;br/&gt;in geometric analysis.
These include the global theory of&lt;br/&gt;the moduli space of constant mean
curvature surfaces in Euclidean&lt;br/&gt;space, the application of new gluing
techniques to construct&lt;br/&gt;new types of Einstein metrics, a more detailed
study of the&lt;br/&gt;analytic and geometric behaviour of conformally compact
Einstein&lt;br/&gt;metrics and the deformation theory of such metrics, with
special&lt;br/&gt;attention to self-dual conformally compact Einstein metrics
in&lt;br/&gt;four dimensions. The proposed techniques here include
further&lt;br/&gt;extensions of Cauchy data matching, as developed by the PI
and&lt;br/&gt;Pacard, as well as refinements of the PI's `edge
calculus'.Abstract for &lt;br/&gt;Other parts of the proposal involve use of the
pseudodifferential&lt;br/&gt;calculus of fibred boundary operators, as developed
by the PI and&lt;br/&gt;Melrose, to the study of gravitational instantons,
particularly&lt;br/&gt;their L2 cohomology. Finally, the PI and Vasy propose
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate the connections between geometric scattering
theory&lt;br/&gt;on symmetric spaces of rank greater than one, as well as
a&lt;br/&gt;class of spaces asymptotically modelled on these, and
the&lt;br/&gt;microlocal theory of quantum N-body scattering. For the
human&lt;br/&gt;resources component, the PI proposes to continue his
directorship&lt;br/&gt;of the Stanford University Math Camp, a residential
summer&lt;br/&gt;program for talented high school students, and also to
continue&lt;br/&gt;his other outreach efforts to disseminate mathematics
appreciation&lt;br/&gt;to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a more
general point of view, the PI's research concerns&lt;br/&gt;problems arising in
geometry and analysis involving what are&lt;br/&gt;known as curvature equations
(the theory of Einstein metrics in&lt;br/&gt;general relativity being the best-
known case) as well as scattering&lt;br/&gt;theory on spaces which possess high
degrees of symmetry `at infinity'.&lt;br/&gt;A central concern throughout is the
application of somewhat novel&lt;br/&gt;techniques from harmonic and microlocal
analysis to these problems. The&lt;br/&gt;theme is that one should develop
analytic techniques which are&lt;br/&gt;specifically adapted to each geometric
problem, and these geometric&lt;br/&gt;settings in turn should suggest new
developments in the analytic&lt;br/&gt;technology. This approach has proved very
successful in the PI's&lt;br/&gt;previous research. The problems considered here
are inspired by main&lt;br/&gt;trends in various aspects of mathematical
physics, most specifically&lt;br/&gt;the two somewhat separate fields of quantum
scattering and some parts&lt;br/&gt;of string theory. Some of the current and
proposed work has already&lt;br/&gt;stimulated interest on the part of some
communities of physicists,&lt;br/&gt;and their intuitions provide an interesting
guide for further mathematical&lt;br/&gt;directions in this work. Beyond these
motivations, the PI regards this&lt;br/&gt;particular interplay between geometry
and analysis as an important one,&lt;br/&gt;particularly because the types of
geometric objects studied here are&lt;br/&gt;becoming increasingly important in
many other places in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;The PI has also undertaken extensive
human resources development,&lt;br/&gt;including the above-mentioned summer
program, and is active in&lt;br/&gt;mentoring a number of young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;