* 0204798
* Convection Parameterization and Climate Simulation in the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Climate System Model
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Guang Zhang, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 04/30/2006
* USD 353,421.00

Two deficiencies in the NCAR Community Climate System Model (CCSM) are believed
to be related to the parameterization of convection in the model. The model is
thus biased toward weak intraseasonal variability in the tropical atmosphere and
excessive precipitation in the Arabian Peninsula, compared to observations.
Because of the wide use of the CCSM, it is important to conduct research to
address them. The goal of this research project is to address these issues by
focusing on convective parameterization in the model. Specifically, the
investigation aims to achieve the following fundamental scientific objectives:
(i) Understand how convection interacts with the large-scale processes in
different climate regimes; (ii) Incorporate observational data to improve
convective parameterization in CCSM; (iii) Improve the simulated temporal
variability of convection and the atmospheric state in CCSM; (iv) Determine the
cause of the erroneous precipitation simulation over the Arabian Peninsula in
CCSM and eliminate it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic research tools used in
this work are the NCAR CCM3, which is the atmospheric component of CCSM, and the
Zhang-McFarlane convection scheme, together with field observational data from
different convection regimes in the tropics and midlatitudes. Simulations with
improved convective parameterization will be analyzed using statistical and
composite techniques to examine the improvement in the tropical intraseasonal
variability. Systematic initial tendency error analysis will be applied to
simulations from a series of carefully designed numerical experiments to
understand the causes of large summer precipitation bias in the Arabian
Peninsula in CCM3. The research should result in an improved convective
parameterization, a better understanding of the role of convection and a better
simulation in tropical climate and its variability in the NCAR CCM3. This
research is important because it has potential to improve climate predictions
and projections, which are of great value to world societies.