* 0204515
* Industrial Mathematics Modeling Workshop for Graduate Students, July 22 - 30, 2002, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Hien Tran, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2003
* USD 40,000.00

The 2002 NCSU Industrial Mathematics Modeling Workshop for graduate students
(IMMW2002) is designed to expose students in mathematics, statistics and
engineering to problems from industry and government laboratories, and introduce
them to a team approach to problem solving. The workshop is scheduled for the
time period July 22, 2002 to July 30, 2002 and is organized by Pierre Gremaud,
Zhilin Li, Ralph Smith, and Hien Tran. The workshop accommodates approximately
36 graduate students (for a total of 6 teams) from national and international
institutions. Scientists from industry or government laboratories will be
invited to present current research problems and lead teams of 6-7 students
through model formulation and at least partial solution of the problems. This
enriches the traditional graduate experience and provides valuable training for
both students considering academic careers and those students preparing for
noncademic careers. For students preparing for an academic career, the workshop
provides experience which will significantly broaden their perspective in the
classroom and may provide a catalyst for later research. The experience is even
more significant for students pursuing nonacademic careers since it provides
them with an exposure to important ``real life'' problems and gives them some
initial experience at addressing such problems.