* 0204232
* Power, Variability, and Optimality in Adaptive Designs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Feifang Hu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 205,364.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0204232&lt;br/&gt;PI: Feifang Hu&lt;br/&gt;Title: Power,
variability, and optimality in adaptive
designs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive designs use
sequentially accruing data in allocation decisions to reach some objective. In
this proposal, the objective is based on an optimization criterion, such as
minimizing the cost of an experiment. The investigators use the power of a
hypothesis test as a benchmark for comparisons of adaptive designs. They
explicitly derive the relationship between power and the design in terms of bias
of the target allocation from the actual allocation and variation induced by the
design. For four classes of adaptive designs: urn models, sequential maximum
likelihood procedures, doubly adaptive biased coin designs, and treatment effect
mappings, the investigators will uniquely unify the theory for easy comparison
based on power, optimality, and variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive
designs are useful in many scientific disciplines and have application in
clinical research, industrial experiments, bioassay, to name a few areas. The
idea is to dynamically use sequentially accruing data in decisions for
collecting future data in order to satisfy some objective, which could be
minimizing the cost of an experiment, maximizing expected treatment successes in
a clinical trial, etc. The use of adaptive designs can improve efficiency of an
experiment by incorporating current knowledge into design decisions. Heretofore
what has been unknown is the relationship of variability of the adaptive designs
to efficiency of the experiment. The investigators will develop guidelines that
will allow direct comparison of efficiency of designs by exploring their
variability. The grant will involve both undergraduate and graduate students
across two campuses and will lead to increased understanding of how to
efficiently design costly or ethically demanding experiments.&lt;br/&gt;