* 0204615
* Group proposal in topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Ib Madsen, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 530,514.00

DMS-0204615&lt;br/&gt;J. Peter May&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with
research in a wide range of topics &lt;br/&gt;in topology, geometry, and related
areas of mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;May studies a variety of categorical and
homotopical &lt;br/&gt;structures in stable homotopy theory, equivariant
&lt;br/&gt;algebraic topology, and other fields. Although his current
&lt;br/&gt;work is primarily foundational, his students and collaborators,
&lt;br/&gt;among others, make extensive calculational applications of it.
&lt;br/&gt;He and his collaborators have recently unified the foundations
&lt;br/&gt;of stable homotopy theory by proving that all of the &lt;br/&gt;new
highly structured categories of spectra are Quillen &lt;br/&gt;equivalent model
categories, via structure-preserving functors. &lt;br/&gt;The analogous, and
deeper, unification of the foundations of equivariant stable homotopy has also
been carried out. Within &lt;br/&gt;algebraic topology, May has been working on
various other &lt;br/&gt;projects in equivariant and non-equivariant homotopy
theory. &lt;br/&gt;He has also been working on various topics that have roots in
&lt;br/&gt;algebraic topology but are of a more general nature. &lt;br/&gt;In
particular, he has recently obtained a new definition &lt;br/&gt;of enriched
weak $n$-categories and has spearheaded a very &lt;br/&gt;large scale
unification project in higher category theory. &lt;br/&gt;Weinberger studies
various areas of geometric topology and &lt;br/&gt;differential geometry. He has
a longstanding interest &lt;br/&gt;in transformation groups, especially surgery
theory on &lt;br/&gt;manifolds with group actions. In particular, he studies
&lt;br/&gt;problems concerned with removing the ``gap hypothesis''
&lt;br/&gt;that obstructs the direct generalization of the
&lt;br/&gt;nonequivariant theory. Weinberger also has a longstanding
&lt;br/&gt;interest in the Novikov, Borel, and Baum-Connes conjectures,
&lt;br/&gt;and he has made recent progress on them. In a new direction,
&lt;br/&gt;Weinberger has been engaged in a large scale
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with Nabutovsky that concerns applications of logic to
&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian variational problems and to the large scale
&lt;br/&gt;geometry of moduli spaces. Some of his recent results defy
&lt;br/&gt;easy characterization. For one example, he has applied an
&lt;br/&gt;old theorem of Browder about finite H-spaces to obtain a
&lt;br/&gt;theorem about the "social choice problem". For another, &lt;br/&gt;in
recent work with Farb he has shown that "hidden symmetries"&lt;br/&gt;on a
locally symmetric manifold force it to be
arithmetic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides May, the algebraic topology group at
Chicago &lt;br/&gt;includes four nontenured faculty and eight graduate
&lt;br/&gt;students. The geometry group includes Weinberger and &lt;br/&gt;four
other tenured faculty, six nontenured faculty, and &lt;br/&gt;fifteen graduate
students. There is considerable interaction&lt;br/&gt;between these groups, and
between them and other groups &lt;br/&gt;at Chicago, such as the geometric
Langlands group and &lt;br/&gt;the algebraic geometry group. The research funded
by this &lt;br/&gt;grant is part of a web of research projects in progress at
&lt;br/&gt;the University of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;