* 0204072
* Stability of Waves With Continuous Spectrum
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Myunghyun Oh, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 64,829.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0204072 Mathematical Sciences: Stability of Waves with
Continuous Spectrum

Abstract

0204072 Oh

Periodic waves and spiral waves arise in a rich variety of applied problems.
Important examples include periodic wave patterns in models of media with
multiple phases, for example van der Waals gas dynamics and elasticity, or
three-phase flow in porous media. Planar spiral wave patterns occur in chemical
reactions, such as the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction, and in various biological
and physical systems. There is a similarity between periodic waves and spiral
waves, since the continuous spectrum associated with a periodic wave or a spiral
wave touches the imaginary axis. The goal of this project is to investigate
linear and nonlinear stability of such waves in not only the one-dimensional
case but also multi-dimensional cases.

Mathematical models of interest in physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering
often have classes of special solutions that are particularly important for
understanding behavior of the systems under study. This project analyzes two
such important classes of solutions in models that involve partial differential
equations: periodic waves and spiral waves. The goal is to provide rigorous
mathematical analysis of the stability of these solutions. This qualitative
information determines the suitability of the differential equations to model
the physical phenomena under investigation.