* 0204513
* Gaussian Methods and Probability Estimates of Rare Events
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Wenbo Li, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Wen Chen Masters
* 12/31/2005
* USD 113,374.00

0204513&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt; This research centers on developing Gaussian
methods for the study of rare events, mainly depending on small values of a
positive random quantity. The major objectives are to extend the understanding
of related topics and build a general theory based on systematic study of
various techniques and applications. The recent completion of the connection
between small ball probabilities and metric entropy problems allows applications
of tools and results from functional analysis to provide the most powerful
method available at this time for estimating the lower bound for Gaussian
processes. In turn, it suggests many further questions connected to applications
in probability theory and geometric functional analysis. Similar relationships
will be studied for other random processes such as stable processes and Gaussian
chaos. The overview on rare events depending on small values unifies many
problems from diverse areas in mathematics. The very successful applications of
Gaussian methods to lower tail probabilities, the Brownian pursuit models and
the first exit times will be expanded to a detailed study of zeros of random
polynomials, balancing vectors, and Hadamard matrices. &lt;br/&gt; The primary
focus of this research is a better understanding of rare random phenomena
related to Gaussian processes and others which serve as models in many
applications. These types of problems often arise in estimating the chances for
rare events to occur in areas where such events are of fundamental importance,
such as weather, economic indices, epidemics, etc. This research should improve
our understanding of rare random events and provide basic tools for the study of
our random environment. &lt;br/&gt;