* 0204514
* Observable Signatures of Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Abraham Loeb, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2005
* USD 179,398.00

AST 0204514&lt;br/&gt;Loeb&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the most current
theories of cosmology, hydrogen, the most abundant element left over from the
big bang, was formed out of free electrons and protons when the Universe cooled
below a temperature of a few thousand degrees. However, recent observations
imply that most of this relic cosmic hydrogen was dissociated once again (i.e.,
`re-ionized') less than a billion years after the big bang. It is commonly
believed that the cosmic hydrogen was re-ionized by the ultraviolet radiation
emitted by the first generation of stars and black holes in the universe. How
and when did the first galaxies form in the Universe? What was their effect on
the surrounding cosmic gas? These are two of the most exciting questions in
observational and theoretical cosmology today. This project will combine
analytic calculations and limited numerical simulations of radiative transfer
problems to address these questions and make detailed predictions for the
expected clues that future, cutting-edge observations might reveal. In
particular, it will identify observational probes that could signal the cosmic
time at which most of the hydrogen was re-ionized. The interplay between theory
and observations of the hydrogen re-ionization epoch will constrain the
properties of the first sources of light in the early Universe as well as
fundamental cosmological parameters (including the nature of the dark
matter).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;