* 0204660
* Urban Infrastructure Services in a Time of Crisis: Lessons from Septerber 11th
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2005
* Rae Zimmerman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas A. Birkland
* 11/30/2005
* USD 89,497.00

The quality of existing infrastructure appears to have played an important role
in restoring the quality of life after September 11th, including the safety and
security of the population. This exploratory research focuses on time sensitive
data and field research on urban infrastructure services provided before,
during, and after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center (WTC) in New
York City, NY on September 11, 2001. The objective of this research is to better
understand urban infrastructure systems behavior, resilience, and recovery under
critical conditions with the aim of generalizing design and management (both
operational and policy) characteristics that lead to resilient infrastructure.

Understanding the role of infrastructure in restoration involves examining a
constellation of facilities and services at many levels, the impact of the event
on them, the conditions of these services prior to the event, and the ability of
the system to rebound. The research, therefore, explores pre-event
infrastructure condition, service interruption, and infrastructure resiliency.
Historical precedents and analogies as well as the trends in response and
recovery are critical components of the evaluation of both initial vulnerability
of the infrastructure and subsequent resiliency of the facilities services
during the restoration period. The research will also include an evaluation of
the impacts on the transport, energy, telecommunications, water, sewer, and
solid waste management. The research will identify performance frameworks used
in the emergency response, outputs such as measures that reflect management
arrangements, system resiliency, and transferability to new situations.
Moreover, interactions among the facilities will be examined, generalizations
across infrastructure systems will be sought, as well as common lessons about
how infrastructure organizations work together. Such lessons offer the broader
impact of improved preparedness and response to future catastrophes, regardless
of whether they are induced by natural, technological, or deliberate mechanisms.
The research will also be conducted in the context of infrastructure services
citywide and regionally and will thus provide valuable information to other
municipalities and regions.





