* 0204431
* SGER: Mechanisms of Resilence in the Face of On-Going Threat
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Lisa Feldman Barrett, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 12/31/2004
* USD 38,320.00

This small grant for exploratory research investigates the mechanisms by which
people show resilient responses to the events surrounding the September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks. The project focuses on how positive emotions allow for
psychological resilience in the face of ongoing threat. Psychological resilience
involves the ability to overcome stress and even thrive in the face of
adversity. Much of the existing literature focuses on the predictors of
resilience (e.g., individual, social protective factors) and their outcomes
(e.g., positive mental and physical health). Remarkably, very little attention
has been given to the underlying mechanisms that contribute to this capacity to
fare well, especially in the face of ongoing stressful experiences. In light of
the continuing threat and vulnerability associated with the aftermath of the
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon,
including threats involving bioterrorism, war, and economic turbulence, it is
important to examine the factors that protect individuals from developing
negative psychological consequences associated with on-going stress of a serious
nature. The continued threat associated with the ambiguity of future events
could have dire consequences on an individual's decision-making strategies for
future events in a host of life domains, possibly resulting in psychological and
physical damage to the individual. This project examines three possible
mechanisms that might begin to explain the process by which positive emotions
are useful in achieving resilience, especially in the face of ongoing threat:
emotional complexity, attention, and tolerance of ambiguity. The aim of the
project is to conduct initial tests of a conceptual model, which illustrates how
positive emotions promote psychological resilience.&lt;br/&gt;