* 0204847
* Developing Synergy Between Experiment and Theory: Applications of EPR Spectroscopy to Transition Metal Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Sarah Larsen, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2006
* USD 286,985.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0204847&lt;br/&gt;PI: Larsen, Sarah
C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Larsen will conduct an experimental
and computational investigation on electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) of
paramagnetic transition metal complexes. Density functional theory will be used
to augment the experimental work in computing the electronic g-tensor and the
hyperfine coupling tensor A, for transition metal complexes. CW and pulsed EPR
will be used to study the local environment of transition metal catalysts. The
experimental and computational techniques are synergistically linked in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research deals with properties of certain
metals that act as efficient catalysts to facilitate chemical reactions. These
metals, known as transition metals due to their position in the periodic table,
have magnetic properties that are probed by the technique of electron
paramagnetic resonance. In conjunction with the experimental work, theoretical
tools are used to elucidate the paramagnetic properties of these metal
catalysts. Among the goals of this research is a better understanding of the
catalytic process, which may ultimately lead to their improved technical use.
Students and external collaborators participate in this research.&lt;br/&gt;