* 0204667
* On the Geometry of Kahler-Einstein Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Zhiqin Lu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2005
* USD 101,905.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204667.&lt;br/&gt;PI: Zhiqin Lu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; On the
Geometry of Kaehler-Einstein Manifold&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
proposer is going to understand&lt;br/&gt;Kaehler-Einstein metrics, especially
Calabi-Yau manifolds&lt;br/&gt;using the theory of moduli spaces, through three
different&lt;br/&gt;ways. The first way is to study the potential function
of&lt;br/&gt;the Bergman metric of a polarized compact
Kaehler&lt;br/&gt;manifold. For the application in the Kaehler-
Einstein&lt;br/&gt;geometry, one needs to estimate the potential function
from&lt;br/&gt;below for a family of manifolds. The problem is related
to&lt;br/&gt;the stability of manifolds in the sense of
Geometric&lt;br/&gt;Invariant Theory. The second way is to study the
relation&lt;br/&gt;between the K stability and the Mumford stability. Such
a&lt;br/&gt;relation, if exists, would give one new insights of
the&lt;br/&gt;relations between the Kaehler-Einstein geometry and
the&lt;br/&gt;stability of manifolds. The third way is the geometry
of&lt;br/&gt;moduli space of polarized Calabi-Yau manifolds. A
Kaehler&lt;br/&gt;metric on the moduli space has been defined and was
found&lt;br/&gt;that the Ricci curvature of such a metric is negative
away&lt;br/&gt;from zero by the proposer. In order to introduce
geometric&lt;br/&gt;analysis to the place, one needs to prove a version of
the&lt;br/&gt;maximal principle on the moduli space, even if the
moduli&lt;br/&gt;space, in general, is not
smooth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Einstein's general theory of relativity is a theory
that&lt;br/&gt;interprets the concept of gravity into the
geometric&lt;br/&gt;property of the space. Recent development of in
physics&lt;br/&gt;shows that the universe may be of dimension ten, with
three&lt;br/&gt;dimension in space and one dimension in time plus a
tiny&lt;br/&gt;six dimensional space called Calabi-Yau threefold. One
of&lt;br/&gt;the main mathematical tool to study the geometry of
the&lt;br/&gt;space is differential geometry. Since the discovery of
the&lt;br/&gt;general relativity, differential geometry becomes crucial
to&lt;br/&gt;both mathematicians and physicists. The project is one
of&lt;br/&gt;the main field in differential geometry. It will help a
lot&lt;br/&gt;in understanding one of the basic force of the universe:
the&lt;br/&gt;gravity and ultimately understanding the space we are
living&lt;br/&gt;with. It is difficult to believe that without an
extensive&lt;br/&gt;study of fundamental sciences such as general
relativity,&lt;br/&gt;modern technology like the use of atomic energy can
come&lt;br/&gt;true. By the same reason, today's fundamental study will
not&lt;br/&gt;only enlarge our knowledge but eventually benefit
people's&lt;br/&gt;life as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;