* 0204869
* Nonparametric and Semiparametric Models for High-Dimensional Data
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Hans-Georg Mueller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 158,070.00

Abstract

DMS-0204869 PI: Hans-Georg Mueller

Title: Nonparametric and Semi-parametric Models for High Dimensional Data

The investigator will focus on statistical models, theory, algorithms and
applications geared towards the analysis of high-dimensional and in particular
functional data. Semiparametric methods are particularly appropriate for such
data since usually little is known about the structure of these data, while at
the same time a dimension reduction step is necessary in order to avoid the
"curse of dimension". Dimension reduction in the form of projections by fitting
single index or multiple index models, or by truncating the number of terms
included in an expansion of functional data, is therefore a major emphasis of
this project. Another emphasis of this project are statistical methods that take
into account that curve data often are random curves that are subject to
individually varying time scales. This leads to models, theory, methodology and
algorithms for time warping of functional data. Curve data are abundant in
genetics where dissemination of gene expression profiles is of highest interest
and also in the field of aging and mortality. The investigator will develop
methods for functional regression, correlation, discriminant and cluster
analysis. These methods will provide tools to establish relationships between
random functions and allow classification of observed sample curves into
distinct categories.

Large and increasingly complex data that are being collected in scientific and
other experimental and observational studies are often data that may be viewed
as curves or functions. Such data often contain valuable information about the
time-dynamics of physical and biological phenomena, and advance statistical
techniques are needed to extract it. For example, recordings of repeated cDNA
expression data with genetic microarrays may contain valuable information about
the dynamics of gene activation patterns and gene regulation. Other examples
where such data play a major role concern the relationship between reproduction
and aging, the dynamic structure of aging and longevity, or the relationship
between various blood proteins that are recorded continuously. The investigator
will develop statistical methods and models specifically designed for the
analysis and interpretation of such data.