* 0204572
* Shape-Restricted Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Mary Meyer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 07/31/2004
* USD 68,367.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0204572&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mary
Meyer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Shape-Restricted
Inference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consider the problem of estimating a function
given observations with some random component. The function may be a regression
function, a density, or a probability density function such as in bioassay
models. Shape-restricted methods allow the practitioner to impose only
qualitative restrictions on the class of functions, such as increasing, concave,
or sigmoidal. Estimates may be obtained using maximum-likelihood ideas; there
are many problems in inference to be solved. Goals for this proposal include
developing confidence bounds for regression functions using shape restrictions,
developing tests for an ANCOVA type of model with a shape-restricted covariate,
time-series analysis with shape-restricted trend function, smooth shape-
restricted function estimation, and developing a robust regression estimator
using a shape-restricted error density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
statistical methods for regression, density estimation and bioassay problems
include: 1) estimating a function, 2) estimating the quality of fit, perhaps
using confidence bounds, and 3) testing hypotheses about the function. The
investigator wishes to develop these methods nonparametrically, that is, without
imposing a parametric form for the function. Shape-restricted methods in
statistics approach these estimation and inference problems with a minimum of
assumptions about the functional form. For example, a growth curve may be
assumed to be increasing and concave, or a probability curve might be sigmoidal-
a more general assumption than the usual logistic model. A density function
might be assumed to be symmetric and unimodal, in a situation where stronger
assumptions like normality might not be justified. A fit to a function using
fewer assumptions will have more fidelity to the data. Perhaps more importantly,
these shape-restricted fits may be used to test the validity of the parametric
models, or to select from several candidate parametric models. &lt;br/&gt;