* 0204496
* Geometric Analysis with Applications in Low Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Richard Wentworth, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 204,000.00

NSF Grant DMS-0204496&lt;br/&gt;Title: Geometric Analysis with Applications in
Low Dimensions&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Richard A. Wentworth (Johns
Hopkins University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes three
research projects in the area of geometric analysis.&lt;br/&gt;This work will
produce new results on rigidity problems in low dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology,
a better understanding of certain geometric structures on&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds
arising from complex analysis, and a new approach to regularity&lt;br/&gt;issues
for a type of minimizing subvariety. The first project deals
with&lt;br/&gt;homomorphisms from fundamental groups of Riemannian manifolds to
the mapping&lt;br/&gt;class group of a compact oriented surface. Examples arise
as monodromy&lt;br/&gt;representations of surface bundles. Building on previous
work in this area,&lt;br/&gt;the PI will use harmonic map theory to give a new
proof of the finiteness&lt;br/&gt;theorem of Farb-Kaimanovich-Masur for lattices
in higher rank Lie groups.&lt;br/&gt;New results for lattices in rank one groups
will be obtained from these&lt;br/&gt;techniques. Symplectic Lefschetz pencils
also provide especially&lt;br/&gt;interesting examples to which this method may
be applied. The second project&lt;br/&gt;studies spherical CR structures on
3-manifolds. The PI will consider three&lt;br/&gt;aspects of the subject:
uniformizability, rigidity, and compactness. The&lt;br/&gt;research will develop
a new approach to these problems based on subelliptic&lt;br/&gt;analogs of
harmonic map equations. A goal of the work will be to prove
a&lt;br/&gt;compactness theorem which will have implications for new
3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;invariants. The third part of the proposal seeks to extend
the method of&lt;br/&gt;Taubes to prove regularity results for certain
calibrated rectifiable&lt;br/&gt;currents. This will provide a clarifying
framework for a variety of&lt;br/&gt;geometric constructions that are of current
interest. In addition to these&lt;br/&gt;new projects the PI will complete
previous work on a conjecture of Bando-Siu&lt;br/&gt;concerning the Yang-Mills
flow on higher dimensional Kaehler
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most fascinating subjects
in contemporary mathematics is the&lt;br/&gt;study of spaces of dimensions three
and four. These are also the most&lt;br/&gt;important from a physical point of
view, since we live in three dimensional&lt;br/&gt;space, and dynamical behavior
takes place in four dimensional space-time.&lt;br/&gt;The use of analytic
techniques to understand the geometry and topology of&lt;br/&gt;low dimensional
spaces continues to be a fruitful avenue of research, but&lt;br/&gt;there is
much work still to be done. The focus of the PI's research in the&lt;br/&gt;area
of the geometry of low dimensions and mathematical applications of
new&lt;br/&gt;ideas in physics. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;