* 0204886
* New Roles for Polarimetry
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Roger Hildebrand, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 06/30/2005
* USD 264,669.00

AST-0204886&lt;br/&gt;Hildebrand&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discoveries in the last
few decades have shown that magnetic fields affect the structure and energy
balance of gas in galaxies; that they provide substantial vertical support for
the gas layer; that they transport energy and modify the structure of
interstellar shocks; that they accelerate and confine cosmic rays; and that they
strongly influence the collapse of clouds to form stars. Much of our
understanding of these fields has been gained by observations of the
polarization of starlight due to partial absorption in magnetically aligned
grains along the line of sight, and by observations of polarized emission from
magnetically aligned dust grains in relatively dense regions. Although the
polarization measurements have advanced our understanding of magnetic fields,
the interpretation of the results has been limited by unknown factors. The
polarization depends on the inclination of the mean magnetic field from the line
of sight; on the turbulence of the field; on the degree of alignment of the dust
grains with the local field; and on the size, shape, and composition of the dust
grains. This project, directed by Dr. Roger Hildebrand at the University of
Chicago, addresses opportunities to expand the role of polarimetry by
investigating each of the factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Chicago polarimeter, built by Dr. Hildebrand, has an important role in these
investigations, but there is increasing reliance on complementary observations
in other parts of the spectrum. The work on the magnetic field inclination
combines submillimeter wavelength polarimetry with measurements of line widths
for ionic and neutral molecules. Observations in the wavelength range from 850
to 1300 micron will be made with the instrument SCUBA at the James Clerk Maxwell
telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. Observations of the microwave foregroung will
rely on the instruments DASI (at the South Pole) and MAP (space mission) which
are already deployed for measurements of background polarization.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;