* 0204563
* Estimating the Structural Dimension of Regressions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Efstathia Bura, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 12/31/2006
* USD 89,845.00

Abstract (DMS-0204563)&lt;br/&gt;PI: E. Bura&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
ESTIMATING THE STRUCTURAL DIMENSION OF
REGRESSIONS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional approaches to reducing dimension in
a regression context focus on modeling: a sequence of models are fitted and
associated diagnostic tools that may lead to a reduction of the dimension of the
predictors a posteriori are used in order to select the most reliable yet
simplest model. A different approach is taken in this proposal where the goal is
to investigate and develop methods of reducing the dimension of the regressor
vector at the outset of the analysis without applying any a priori fitting or
model selection procedures. The methods proposed in this project use inverse
regression as a tool to estimate the structural dimension of a regression, which
is defined to be the dimension of the subspace generated by a sufficient number
of linear projections of the regressor vector. Furthermore, the case of
intrinsically nonlinear relationship between response and regressors will be
considered. A "translation" of the nonlinear manifold of the regressors to an
equivalent linear subspace (equivalent in the sense that all information on the
response is retained) is proposed. The research should make a significant
contribution to the available inferential tools and software for analyzing high-
dimensional data. The goals of the proposed research are (a) to extend and
generalize existing parametric-based dimension reduction methodology to
nonparametric techniques, (b) to apply the developed methods and devise new ones
in order to fully estimate the structural dimension of a regression and not only
a lower bound on the full dimension, (c) to generalize the methods so that they
apply to nonlinear manifolds of the regressor vector, (d) to develop state-of-
the-art implementation computer code, which will be freely available to the
research community, and (e) to compare the proposed dimension reduction
techniques to the existing ones using simulated and real world data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-dimensional data have become
increasingly common in practically all scientific and business related fields.
Modeling such data is challenging, mostly because of our inability to visualize
them. Consequently, it is practically imperative to reduce the dimension of the
input data prior to any attempts at modeling. Dimension reduction is especially
relevant and appealing in the era of cheap and easily available computing power
and technology, where huge multivariate data sets are collected or continuously
generated and accumulated. The proposed research will extend existing and
develop new technology for reducing the complexity of the input data at the
outset of the modeling process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;