* 0204637
* Modeling of Multiscale Inhomogeneous Materials with Periodic and Random Microstructure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Leonid Berlyand, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2008
* USD 187,980.00

Proposal #0204637&lt;br/&gt;PI: Leonid Berlyand&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Penn
State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Modeling of Multiscale Inhomogeneous Materials
with Periodic and Random
Microstructure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
core of this proposal is centered around four areas. Homogenization is the
common theme of all four areas, and it is expected that the proposed work will
result in the development of new homogenization techniques and tools. The first
area concerns the discrete network approximation for highly packed high-contrast
composites. The main objective is to characterize the dependence of the
effective transport properties of composites on the shapes and random locations
of the filling particles in a rigorous mathematical framework with a controlled
error estimate. Our objective in the second area is to obtain analytical
formulas for the effective properties of composites. Such formulas reveal the
explicit dependence of the effective properties on geometrical and physical
parameters and provide a valuable physical insight, which can be used to test
numerical algorithms developed for generic situations. The important practical
issue of polydispersity will be addressed from different perspectives in the
first as well as the second area, and the results will be compared. The third
area concerns the rheology of complex fluids such as polymeric composites,
suspensions and micellar fluids. The main features here are: (i) the interaction
between micellar tubes or balls, which leads to a drastic change in the
effective constitutive equations as compared with the constitutive law of the
phases, (ii) the laminarization of the flow and drag reduction in viscoelastic
flows (reduction in pressure). The fourth area is the exploration of novel
features of homogenization for some nonlinear problems with nonstandard boundary
conditions arising in modeling of superconductors and liquid crystals. The main
objective is to characterize the dependence of the homogenization limit on the
domain size and to explore the ramification of this size effect in physical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Composite materials are of critical technological
importance. The modeling and design of these materials raises fundamental
questions of physics, materials science, and mathematics. Many of these
questions are not yet answered, and mathematics has much to contribute. This
project will advance our understanding of composite materials through a
theoretical effort of the principal investigator, his collaborators and advisees
coordinated with experimental studies by materials scientists. The long-term
goal is to enhance the contribution from mathematics to very contemporary
technological problems. This will be done with an emphasis on fostering
interdisciplinary connections across neighboring disciplines, as well as between
academia, laboratories and industries. The results of this research will be used
in developing new materials with superior properties for various industrial
needs. The main applications include the design of thermal protection packages
for electronic industries, which will address the need for further
miniaturization of modern electronic devices (e.g., cell phones); the use of
fluids with polymer and micellar additives for cooling of various devices (e.g.,
reactors) and more efficient transport of oil; and the optimization of transport
properties of polydispersed suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;