* 0205057
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Assessing the Role of Perlecan for Basement Membrane Function and Cartilage Formation Using Transgenic Mice
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Kathryn Rodgers, Rodgers                 Kathryn        D
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2004
* USD 98,054.00

0205057 Rodgers

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Kathryn
D. Rodgers to work with Dr. Reinhard Fassler at Max Planck Institute of
Biochemistry in Martinsreid, Germany.

This project will provide valuable information about the different roles of
proteoglycans in basement membrane development and how they compensate each
other functionally. The first goal is to cross heterozygous mice to generate
agrin/perlecan knockouts to assess the roles of these proteins in development
and to clarify the results from the single knockouts. The second is to analyze
whether perlecan expression has an effect on cartilege development and collagen
fibril development. The PI will generate mice expressing perlecan under control
of the type II collagen promotor, and then to cross these mice with the
perlecan-null mice. Detailed EM-level analysis together with biochemical methods
will be used to assess the collagens that are formed. The third goal is to use
Cre/loxP system to develop a mouse with a deleted IG3 module of domain IV of
perlecan, as well as antibodies to detect the IG2/IG4 recombinant molecule. This
will address more specifically the portion of the perlecan molecule that has
particular functions, with a great level of molecular detail.

In addition to Dr. Fassler, the PI will work with Drs. Rupert Timpl, Max Planck
Institute, Anders Aspberg, Lund University in Lund, Sweden, and Peter Bruckner,
Westfalische Wilhelms Universitat Munster, in Munster, Germany.