* 0205960
* RUI: Reconstructing Galaxy Histories
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Michael West, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 10/31/2006
* USD 363,329.00

AST 0205960&lt;br/&gt;West&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the origin and
evolution of galaxies is one of the major goals of modern
&lt;br/&gt;astrophysics. It is generally believed that galaxies arose from small
density fluctuations in the &lt;br/&gt;primordial matter distribution that were
amplified over time by gravity. However, our &lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the details
of the galaxy formation process is still far from complete, and many
&lt;br/&gt;important questions remain unanswered. How and when did galaxies
form? How have they &lt;br/&gt;evolved over time? How do their environs
influence galaxy properties? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the past few years, Dr.
Michael West has been pursuing a number of original lines of research, both
observational and theoretical, to address these questions. With this award he
will build upon previous successes and explore new avenues that may lead to
further insights about the &lt;br/&gt;genesis of galaxies. Specific goals of
this project include the following: &lt;br/&gt; o One of the most promising ways
to learn the secrets of galaxy formation is by studying their globular cluster
populations. Globular clusters are dense aggregates of up to a million stars
that are held together by their mutual gravitational attraction. Most galaxies
are surrounded by systems of tens, hundreds, or thousands of globular clusters
that swarm around them like bees around a hive. The present-day globular
populations of galaxies reflect the cumulative effects of billions of years of
ongoing galaxy formation and evolution via mergers and collisions, accretion,
generations of star formation, and other processes. Careful analysis of a
galaxy's globular cluster population can thus &lt;br/&gt;allow astronomers to
reconstruct its history. A major goal of Dr. West's project is to undertake the
most comprehensive study yet of the globular cluster systems of hundreds of
galaxies in the Virgo and Coma clusters. &lt;br/&gt; o Dr. West and
collaborators recently found evidence of the existence of a sizeable population
of intergalactic globular clusters that are not gravitationally bound to
individual galaxies but instead roam freely throughout the cores of galaxy
clusters. The discovery of this new class of objects is an exciting result that
invites further study, and searches for intergalactic globulars in several
nearby galaxy clusters are currently underway. The colors, luminosity function,
and spatial and velocity distributions of these intergalactic globulars will
place strong constraints on their origin. &lt;br/&gt; o A growing body of
evidence suggests that galaxy destruction might be a much more common occurrence
than previously thought, and that the births and deaths of galaxies are
intertwined. Rich galaxy clusters are especially harsh environments, where small
galaxies can be cannibalized by larger ones, collisions between galaxies can
strip material from their halos, ablation removes their interstellar gas, and
galaxies may be partially or even completely torn apart by tidal fields as they
travel through the cluster core. Yet the demise of some galaxies may also give
rise to new ones, as material spilled into intergalactic space is eventually
recycled into other galaxies. A goal of this research project is to conduct the
first systematic survey to look for the faint remains of disrupted galaxies in
galaxy clusters, in order to place quantitative constraints on the current rate
of galaxy destruction in dense environments. &lt;br/&gt;This award is made under
the auspices of the Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program at the
NSF. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;