* 0205972
* Dynamical Studies of Molecular Cloud Formation in Spiral Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Stone, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 229,921.00

AST-0205972&lt;br/&gt;Ostriker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several lines of
observational and theoretical evidence suggest that giant molecular clouds
(GMCs) have short lifetimes, forming and dissociating within a few tens of
millions of years. Prevailing theoretical arguments favor instability mechanisms
in spiral arms to form GMCs, but existing work has suffered from technical
limitations, and has not previously directly demonstrated that condensations
with the properties of GMCs indeed form. Dr. Eve Ostriker, at the University of
Maryland, will lead an investigation of a series of linear stability analyses,
nonlinear numerical simulations, and supporting diagnostics to address
outstanding questions concerning GMC formation in spiral galaxies. The modeling
will include several important technical innovations. These researchers will,
for the first time:&lt;br/&gt;o Use direct numerical simulations to study
development of the Parker instability in 3D with realistic rotational shear
self-consistent with large-scale density gradients through arm and interarm
regions of galaxies, also incorporating self-gravity to study linear and
nonlinear coupling of Parker and Jeans modes;&lt;br/&gt;o Comprehensively
survey, using spectral methods, shearing-wavelet integrations, and magneto-
hydrodynamic (MHD) simulations, the potential effects of the magnetorotational
instability in galactic disks, focusing on coupling to self-gravitating modes in
both secular-growth and saturated-state regimes;&lt;br/&gt;o Incorporate a
realistic multi-phase gaseous medium for the initial conditions in two and
three- dimensional simulations of self-gravitating and magnetically-driven
galactic disk instabilities;&lt;br/&gt;o Directly confront stochastic
coagulation vs. collective instability mechanisms for forming GMC-scale
condensations by performing controlled experiments of multiphase evolution with
and without self-gravity and magnetic effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As GMC
formation is intimately coupled to star formation, and the cold ISM is the most
dynamically-responsive component of a disk galaxy, the results of this project
will have broad impacts on both Galactic and extragalactic astronomical
research, with implications for understanding the global regulation of star
formation and the structure and evolution of spiral galaxies across the Hubble
sequence.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;