* 0205294
* ITR:  Internet Flows as First-Class Values: Support for Dynamic, Flexible Internet Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Assaf Kfoury, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,683,497.00

The recent metamorphosis of the Internet-from a mere best-effort transport
medium to an open communication and computation infrastructure necessitates the
development of robust abstractions that facilitate its use to support a
constantly increasing number of applications, in compliance with widely-accepted
correctness standards that ensure a verifiably safe, fair, secure, and efficient
access of Internet resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programming new Internet
applications and services suffers from the same lack of organizing principles
that afflicted programming systems some thirty years ago. The researchers
believe that recognizing network flows as the central abstraction around which
to organize a programming system for the Internet is perhaps the key organizing
principle. Speciffically, to rapidly experiment with and deploy a wide range of
new services within the existing constraints of the Internet infrastructure, it
is necessary to adopt a more powerful model for the naming, creation,
composition, sharing, and processing of Internet
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards this goal the researchers promote Internet
flows to first-class values, i.e., entities that are directly accessed, acted on
and programmed according to needs. As a consequence, the task of developing an
Internet application or service (e.g., a CDN broker or an end-system multicast)
becomes the task of writing an appropriate program to manipulate Internet flows
(along with other first-class values relevant to the application). To enable the
speciffication and compilation of programs manipulating Internet flows, in
particular application-specific Internet protocols, it is necessary to conduct
basic research that encompasses two computer science disciplines: Networking
Systems and programming Languages. Basic research in networking systems is
needed to develop the core services that support the various abstractions to be
presented to protocol programmers. Basic research in programming languages is
needed to develop the primitives and formalisms that enable the expression of
protocol properties and the verification of certain safety properties of the
protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will focus on the following
specific areas: (1) Transport Services to support various degrees of
reliability, congestion management, and timeliness, (2) Routing Services to
support various degrees of mobility and multicasting, (3) End-to-End Services to
support various degrees of QoS and security, (4) Naming mechanisms to support
flexible composition of Internet services, and (5) Type inference to support
efficient and safe flow-oriented programming.&lt;br/&gt;Towards the goals
outlined above, the proposed research will be a collaborative effort carried
primarily by members of established research groups in Networking Systems and in
Programming Languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of the proposed work
is implementation and prototyping. To that end, the utility of a paradigm in
which Internet flows are first-class values will be demonstrated by implementing
NetBench a programming environment in which a core set of network flow types and
operations will be supported, along with a type-checking and type-inference
system to handle types of network flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pursuit of the
research goals outlined in this proposal is timely. Achieving these goals will
leapfrog current piecemeal attempts aiming at supporting Internet growth. The
researchers believe that the proposed effort will improve the flexibility,
reliability, safety, and security of network software development environments,
leading to economic efficiencies similar to the higher productivity of software
developers arising from traditional programming language research. The research
team assembled to pursue these ambitious goals has made significant, nationally-
recognized contributions to research in Programming Languages and Internet
Technologies and has an established record in software development and
technology transfer. Boston University is committed to supporting this team
through substantial financial and infrastructural commitments that complement
and leverage the support sought from NSF.