* 0205198
* ITR:  Development of a General Computational Framework for the Optimal Integration of Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models and Measurements Using Adjoints
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* John Seinfeld, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,299,997.00

The overall goal of this project is to develop general computational tools, and
associated software, for assimilation of atmospheric chemical and optical
measurements into chemical transport models (CTMs). These tools are to be
developed so that users need not be experts in adjoint modeling and optimization
theory. These developments will foster a deeper understanding of: (1)
inaccuracies in CTMs; (2) sensitivities of CTMs input and parameter
uncertainties; and (3) the comparison of model predictions and atmospheric
measurements. These computational tools have the promise to move the field of
atmospheric chemical modeling to the next plateau of understanding the extent to
which model predictions encompass available measurements, an understanding that
is currently hampered by the absence of systematic theory and general analysis
tools. These techniques and analysis tools will be applied both to the
interpretation of observational data and to forecasting activities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research approach will entail: (1) Development of novel and
efficient algorithms for 4-dimensional-Var data assimilation in CTMs; (2)
Development of general software support tools to facilitate the construction of
discrete adjoints to be used in any CTM; and (3) Application of these techniques
to important applications including: (a) analysis of emission control strategies
for Los Angeles; (b) the integration of measurements and models to produce a
consistent/optimal analysis data set for the ACE-Asia intensive field
experiment; (c) the inverse analysis to produce a better estimate of emissions;
and (d) the design of observation strategies to improve chemical forecasting
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is the
development and utilization of Information Technology Research (ITR) tools to
integrate measurement and modeling analysis with the goal of providing an
optimal analysis state of the atmosphere, that is an intimate and close
integration of modeled and measured quantities. This improved estimate of the
state better defines the spatial and temporal fields of key chemical components
in relation to their sources and sinks. This information is critical in
designing cost-effective emission control strategies for improved air quality,
for the interpretation of observational data such as those obtained during
intensive field campaigns, and to the execution of air-quality forecasting. The
development of the tools to integrate measurements and models is also critical
to the challenge of a full utilization of the vast amounts of satellite chemical
data in the troposphere that are now becoming available, and which will become
more prevalent in the coming years. In addition to these broader impacts in the
fields of information technology, atmospheric chemistry, air quality, and global
change, this project will provide opportunities for students and post-docs to
participate in a highly interdisciplinary and collaborative activity.