* 0205588
* ITR:   Collaborative Research:   Natural Language in the Development of High-Confidence Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Robyn Lutz, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 213,774.00

0205447 and 0205588&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: ITR: Collaborative Research: Natural
Language in the Development of High-Confidence Software&lt;br/&gt;PI: John
Knight and Robyn Lutz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inadequate communication of domain
knowledge in natural language (such as English textual descriptions) is a major
source of requirements defects in high-confidence software. Such defects can
threaten lives, property, and the dependability of critical infrastructures.
This research develops innovative, multi-disciplinary techniques designed
expressly to identify and cope with the properties of natural language that lead
to these problems. It analyses the domain-knowledge communication problem from
the perspective &lt;br/&gt;of current linguistic theory in order to generate
models and techniques that reduce communication breakdowns between domain
experts and software developers. On the basis of this analysis, techniques for
the elicitation, recording, and propagation of domain knowledge in requirements
activities will be designed. A set of tools will also be developed to support
the practical use of these engineering techniques. Several case studies will be
used to assess and refine the techniques and tools on actual, high-confidence
software systems in the aviation and spacecraft application domains. The
research effort is directed at the reduction of requirements defects through the
application of techniques that take into account the linguistic difficulties
particular to domain knowledge communication.