* 0205521
* Acoustic Resonances in Solids:  Pressure-, Spatial- and  Photo-tuning
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2008
* Ratnasingham Sooryakumar, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 11/30/2008
* USD 351,937.00

The condensed matter physics project will develop a new laser light scattering
technique to measure the elastic constants of materials up to mega-bar pressures
achievable in a diamond anvil cell. The research is based on the detection of
standing wave resonances that develop because of surface corrugation effects.
The technique is particularly useful for studies of opaque materials and will be
applied to key materials important in geophysics. Experiments are proposed that
should provide insights into the physics of poorly understood deformation
mechanisms and elastic properties associated with buried interfaces and embedded
laminar structures. The frequency profile and spatial confinement of acoustic
waves confined in these systems will yield new opportunities for acoustic wave
device applications. In addition, the unusual mechanical properties of a new,
photo-modified, state of glass that is stabilized at optimum connectivity in
binary chalcogenide glasses will be investigated. Also of interest is the
important interplay between mechanical stability and pronounced glass forming
tendencies related to local connectivity between atoms. The project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in challenging issues in contemporary solid
state physics. They will gain valuable experience with modern laser spectroscopy
techniques. This education will prepare them for productive careers in academia
or industry.

The project will support a laser spectroscopy study of the acoustic and
mechanical properties of solids. The research involves the behavior of materials
under extreme compression - approaching pressures at the Earth's interior. It
will develop a new method to probe high-pressure behavior of materials and will
yield critical parameters for theories of material structural properties. The
study dealing with high frequency acoustic waves confined to buried layers
should provide important information into the physics of localized excitations.
The frequency profile and spatial confinement of the waves will yield new
technological opportunities that will not suffer from bandwidth limitations of
conventional surface wave devices. The proposed study of glasses addresses key
aspects of their elastic and optical properties through creation of a new,
photo-modified, state. Of interest is how the properties of this state relate to
the formation of glasses and how glass properties depend on the specific local
connectivity of atoms. Together with the freedom and flexibility associated with
the non-crystalline nature of glasses, the unusual light-induced effects may
yield results of technological value in these useful materials. This research
will be conducted with the aid of graduate and undergraduate students. They will
gain valuable experience through their involvement in contemporary forefront
research in solid state physics and laser spectroscopy techniques. These
experiences will be of great value in their further studies, or employment in
industry, academia or government laboratories.