* 0205544
* ITR:  Cache-Resident Databases
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Todd Mowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Databases are at the very heart of the information
economy. Database&lt;br/&gt;performance is a driving factor that dictates what
is possible through the&lt;br/&gt;use of information technology. While database
management systems have&lt;br/&gt;evolved since they were invented several
decades ago, their current design&lt;br/&gt;is unfortunately antiquated given
the state-of-the-art computer memory&lt;br/&gt;hierarchies of today (and even
more so tomorrow). This project seeks to&lt;br/&gt;alleviate this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While processor speeds double every year, memory
access speeds follow a&lt;br/&gt;much shallower improvement curve. To bridge
this speed gap, small, fast&lt;br/&gt;memories called caches are used to hold
frequently accessed data and&lt;br/&gt;instructions close to the processor. When
executing database workloads,&lt;br/&gt;accesses often miss in the (fast) cache
and access the (slow) memory,&lt;br/&gt;thereby reducing performance
significantly. Hardware approaches are&lt;br/&gt;typically limited by access
time constraints and by applicability to a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of workloads. To
keep the hardware design feasible, caches typically&lt;br/&gt;use simplistic
data placement and replacement schemes, and are oblivious to&lt;br/&gt;the
memory access behavior of the application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cache-conscious
software methods are, on the contrary, extremely promising.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed algorithms collect data statistics in order to correctly
group&lt;br/&gt;data with similar usage patterns and optimize cache utilization.
By&lt;br/&gt;carefully observing behavior, data is prefetched into the cache
before it&lt;br/&gt;is used. Preliminary results demonstrate that these
techniques (i) minimize&lt;br/&gt;the number of misses in the cache and (ii)
significantly reduce the&lt;br/&gt;incurred penalties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;