* 0205445
* ITR:   Scalable Location-Aware Monitoring (SLAM) Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Seth Teller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,000,000.00

This proposal describes SLAM, a scalable network architecture integrating
millions of real-world sensors with actuators and distributed software
applications. SLAM will enable a broad variety of novel monitoring and control
applications including rapid disaster response, scalable crime detection and
prevention, facilities maintenance, asset monitoring, and navigation. SLAM
solves three problems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Full exploitation of a sensor's
data stream requires knowledge of contextual information, particularly location
and time.&lt;br/&gt;2. Fine-grained monitoring of millions of assets and
facilities requires the physical deployment of sensors in the environment an
intensive and cumbersome manual task.&lt;br/&gt;3. Use of deployed
sensors/actuators by distributed software applications requires network
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SLAM architecture has three main
components that address these issues:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Cricket, a
ubiquitous and precise location infrastructure. No current location-sensing
technology works everywhere in all places and at all times. Cricket is a novel
multi-sensor location architecture to solve this problem, using a combination of
RF and ultrasound indoors and at building perimeters, and GPS outdoors. Cricket
incorporates self-configuration algorithms and energy-efficient protocols for
scalability and longevity. &lt;br/&gt; 2. An activated environment and efficient
activation method. SLAM requires that the subject environment be activated with
sensors and actuators. Without special attention, the activation process could
become unmanageable due to the complexity of the environment. Therefore SLAM
provides virtual location-based tagging, typically for immobile objects. The
human installer affixes virtual tags to physical regions or objects by pointing
at them with a Cricket-equipped handheld device, triggering an association of a
unique identifier and the tagged entity's location and other attributes in a
persistent store. This eases environment activation.&lt;br/&gt;3. A scalable
network infrastructure connects sensor information and events to software
handlers. The network consists of fixed and mobile sensor proxies, physically
co-located with the objects and events they monitor, to integrate location,
identity, and temporal information to form an event stream. Sensors and their
proxies communicate using sensor-specific low-energy communication protocols.
Applications are written as event handlers distributed across the network. SLAM
provides support for dynamically distributing handlers across proxies and
compute servers, routing events to handlers, and performing query processing
operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SLAM architecture introduces
three innovative ideas: ubiquitous, energy-efficient location infrastructure
(drawing on ideas from beacon-based location systems, computational geometry,
and wireless networking); virtual region and object tagging for environment
activation and asset management (drawing on ideas from geometric modeling and
database management systems); and distributed proxy-based event and response
processing (drawing on ideas from networking and database
systems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting with an existing environment (a
building, campus, or town), the operational model to put SLAM in place is as
follows. First, the location infrastructure is activated. Location beacons are
placed in the environment, and a digital representation of the environment is
constructed, enabling location inference anywhere within the environment.
Second, the environment is activated. Sensors and virtual and physical tags are
affixed to objects of interest within the environment (and environment
representation). Third, the SLAM network is activated, connecting raw
sensor&lt;br/&gt;data streams to sensor proxies. The proxies annotate sensor
data streams with location and temporal information, and forward them to
appropriate handlers via the event-processing network. Handlers produce further
events, as well as actions and notifications to be forwarded to actuators or
humans.&lt;br/&gt;As a challenging test case, we plan to deploy SLAM on a large
university campus with millions of interesting entities. These include many
sensors in offices, machine rooms, physical plant, and laboratories to monitor
power, temperature, humidity, and pressure; smoke and fire detectors; burglar
alarms and physical intrusion detection systems; motion detectors; monitors of
leaks, floods, chemicals, and hazardous materials; large-scale theft- and crime-
prevention apparatus, and navigation aids. The goal is to monitor the
university's physical assets and improve the personal safety of over ten
thousand individuals moving in and around thousands of offices, labs, and common
spaces in hundreds of buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target SLAM system
will focus initially on three capabilities at MIT with a variety of interested
partners: efficient facilities monitoring and maintenance (with MIT Physical
Plant); scalable asset monitoring for inventory, crime prevention and detection
(with the MIT Property Office, MIT Campus Police, and MIT Libraries); and
navigation assistance, including both personal way-finding and pervasive active
signage (with the MIT Schedules Office and the MIT Safety Office).