* 0205128
* Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications to Physical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Mark Levi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 239,970.00

Proposal #0205128&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mark Levi&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Penn State
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications to Physical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists
of three parts. The first part deals with a fundamental theoretical question of
dynamics: To understand the nature of physically observable chaos. Despite the
great amount of work done over the past five decades, the fundamental question
of demonstrating genuine chaotic behavior in a physically realistic differential
equation has not been answered. The answer seems finally within grasp, due to
incremental progress in understanding two-dimensional mappings on the one hand
and some new insights into differential equations on the other. The second part
of the project deals with rapidly vibrating systems. High-frequency oscillations
lead to fascinating phenomena, which have found their use in such areas as
particle confinement, particle accelerators, and laser tweezers. A recent
observation of the author shed a new light on these phenomena and opened
connections with other fields, which will be further explored in this project,
along with possible new applications. The third part of the project deals with
the mathematical analysis of a geometrical object (a class of area-preserving
cylinder maps) which is of independent mathematical interest on the one hand and
gives insight into physical systems on the other. These systems include (i)
charged particles in magnetic fields, (ii) the Frenkel-Kontorova model of an
equilibrium configuration of electrons in a crystal lattice, and (iii) arrays of
Josephson junctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves three different
research directions. The first direction addresses a major gap in our
understanding of how chaos really manifests itself in physical systems.
Surprising as it may seem, despite the large amount of sometimes deep work in
the field of "chaos," chaotic behavior has not been proven (understood in the
mathematical sense) in realistic physical systems. The nature of chaos has
really been understood only in mathematical models that are too simplified to
include some key features of real systems (although even those simplified models
can be quite complex). The theory, however, has reached a level where such
understanding seems finally within grasp. A mathematical proof of the existence
of chaos for a realistic physical system would be the culmination of a long
development over the past five decades or more. The second direction of the
project deals with the study of physical systems with rapid oscillations, where
phenomena occur that are both utterly fascinating and useful. For example,
subjecting the end of an open bicycle chain to high-frequency vibrations will,
in theory, enable the chain to stand up stably (!) on its end. The theory which
underlies this curiosity is also responsible for the workings of such seemingly
unrelated devices as particle traps, particle accelerators, laser tweezers
(which allow one to move a particle inside a cell by a laser beam without
breaking the cell wall), and acoustic levitators. Over the past few years, the
author has found an explanation of these effects; prior theory predicted the
result but did not answer the "why." The explanation opened new directions,
which we plan to explore further. We plan, in particular, to better understand
the concept of vibrational control and explore the use of vibration for
filtering (using acoustic waves). The third direction is of basic mathematical
interest but has significance in several physical situations. The mathematical
theory will give insight, otherwise inaccessible, into at least three different
phenomena: (i) the behavior of particles in magnetic fields of certain patterns;
(ii) the electric conductivity of certain types of crystals, and (iii) the
electric behavior of some arrays of Josephson junctions known as superconducting
quantum interference devices (the so-called SQUIDS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;