* 0205655
* Collaborative Research:  ITR--Ensemble-Based State Estimation for a Next-Generation Weather Forecasting Model
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Chris Snyder, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2007
* USD 695,802.00

In a variety of disciplines large, numerical simulations have become a
fundamental scientific tool. A key problem is how to inform or update such
simulations in real time with large numbers of noisy observations, especially
when many of the predicted variables are unobserved or the observed quantities
bear a complex relation to the predicted variables. In principle, Bayesian
methods provide a solution to this state-estimation problem, but evolving and
updating the required probability distributions are problematic in practice, as
the most straightforward approaches require computations of overwhelming size.

These collaborative investigators will address these issues through the use of
novel ensemble-based or Monte Carlo approaches and within the context of
numerical weather prediction (NWP). Weather prediction is a challenging test of
any approach to state-estimation, as operational models for the continental
United States will soon have of the order of 108 degrees of freedom and ingest
an observational data stream of more than a terabyte per day. The Principal
Investigators' application of ensemble state-estimation techniques to NWP is
motivated by recent success in test problems with simulated observations,
ranging from the prediction of isolated thunderstorms in a cloud model to global
atmospheric flow in a general circulation model, and by potential advantages
over existing operational data assimilation schemes. In particular, ensemble-
based techniques directly estimate the uncertainty of the prior prediction and
thereby avoid the assumption of stationary, isotropic forecast uncertainty made
in most existing schemes. The benefits of this direct estimation will also
likely increase as next-generation of NWP models reach resolutions of about 1 km
and the use of remotely-sensed observations, such as from the operational
network of Doppler radars, increases at those scales. Thus, this research will
lay the foundation for a significant step forward in weather forecasting,
especially at the scales where most severe and disruptive weather occurs.

The proposed work will be carried out within the context of the Weather Research
and Forecasting (WRF) model, which is a next-generation NWP model designed for
use at the horizontal resolutions of 1-10 km. The WRF model will be employed in
operational weather forecasting and also will be supported for use by the
research community. Use of WRF multiplies the educational benefits of this
project beyond the direct involvement of students and postdoctoral researchers
and provides a clear path to the implementation of results to improve routine
weather forecasts.

The team assembled within this group Information and Technology Research project
includes leaders in ensemble assimilation techniques as well as members with
expertise in numerical modeling, ensemble forecasting, and the interpretation of
Doppler radar observations. The project will be coordinated through joint
supervision of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, joint publications
and annual workshops. In addition, common software will be used in all the
research, thus facilitating the transfer of methodologies and expertise within
the group.

Successful completion of this research potentially will provide significantly
improved capabilities in weather numerical models. These improvements will allow
advances to be made in the forecasting of a variety of weather phenomena.