* 0205571
* ITR:   COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Towards a Seamless Process for the Development of Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Lenore Zuck, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2005
* USD 699,999.00

Pnueli, Emerson, and Sistla&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0205571, CCR-0205483 and
CCR-0205365&lt;br/&gt;"Towards a Seamless Process for the Development of
Embedded Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded systems are of vital
economic importance and are literally&lt;br/&gt;becoming ubiquitous. They have
already become an integral component of&lt;br/&gt;safety critical systems
involving aviation, military,&lt;br/&gt;telecommunications, and process control
applications. Interest in&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems is growing further due to
the expectation that they&lt;br/&gt;will become a key component of many
commonplace consumer appliances.&lt;br/&gt;Consumers will expect levels of
reliability and predictability&lt;br/&gt;associated with the very best brands of
cars, televisions, and&lt;br/&gt;refrigerators. Glitches, crashes, and general
erratic behavior of the&lt;br/&gt;sort seen with prior generations of consumer
PC software products will&lt;br/&gt;be unacceptable for these embedded
applications. It thus becomes&lt;br/&gt;crucial that these embedded software
systems satisfy high levels of&lt;br/&gt;correctness criteria, well above those
of today's large software&lt;br/&gt;systems, which are often highly error-
prone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the requirement of a new standard of
functional correctness,&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems pose additional challenges
which were not fully&lt;br/&gt;addressed by previous validation and verification
approaches. These&lt;br/&gt;include adequate guarantees of timeliness, low or
controlled power&lt;br/&gt;consumption, and low or controlled memory
utilization. With the&lt;br/&gt;spread of embedded systems, and the need to
guarantee an acceptable&lt;br/&gt;level of functionality and reliability of the
applications they are&lt;br/&gt;embedded in, the industry needs an effective and
reliable development&lt;br/&gt;process. Due to market constraints, such a
process should also support&lt;br/&gt;a fast turn-around time as well as enable
the easy design of many&lt;br/&gt;customized variations of the same
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing the foundation for a
seamless design&lt;br/&gt;process for embedded systems as described below. In
particular, it is&lt;br/&gt;developing:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A formal visual
language for requirements, including behavioral,&lt;br/&gt; temporal, and TPM
constraints;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A methodology for the automatic synthesis of
an executable&lt;br/&gt; specification from the requirement specification
language;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A methodology for the verification of the
intermediate and&lt;br/&gt; distributed representation of the systems against
requirements;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A methododology for automatic code-
distribution of&lt;br/&gt; specifications, possibly with some architectural
constraints&lt;br/&gt; provided by the user;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A model for
representing hardware/software co-design&lt;br/&gt; platforms that enables
modeling of both loosely- and tightly-coupled&lt;br/&gt; components as well as
compositional reasoning about them;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Algorithms for
automatically generating &lt;br/&gt; architecture-optimized code from executable
specifications;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Methods for translation validation of
the&lt;br/&gt; generated code and run-time validation on the system
using&lt;br/&gt; monitors;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Design of a profiler
process which analyzes machine code,&lt;br/&gt; computes the resulting figures
for time, power, and memory, and&lt;br/&gt; back-associate these figures with
their executable specification&lt;br/&gt; sources, enabling early-stage analysis
of these requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the project is to
streamline and significantly&lt;br/&gt;accelerate the time to market of embedded
applications of both new&lt;br/&gt;products and revisions and customizations of
existing product lines.&lt;br/&gt;Another impact is to upgrade the level of
dependability and&lt;br/&gt;predictability of embedded software to new
standards, compatible and&lt;br/&gt;comparable to those expected from the best
brands of consumer&lt;br/&gt;products.&lt;br/&gt;