* 0205892
* Dynamics of Extrasolar Planets and the Kuiper Belt
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Eugene Chiang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2006
* USD 207,228.00

AST 0205892&lt;br/&gt;Chiang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extrasolar planets and the
Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt of trans-Neptunian bodies constitute
two&lt;br/&gt;powerful drivers of planetary astronomy. Since the discovery of
these objects less than a decade&lt;br/&gt;ago, theoretical understanding of
their dynamical characteristics remains elusive. Why are the&lt;br/&gt;orbital
eccentricities of extrasolar planets so large compared to those of Solar System
gas giants?&lt;br/&gt;What is responsible for delineating an apparent edge to
the Classical Kuiper Belt at a heliocentric&lt;br/&gt;distance of 47 AU? How did
the orbital inclinations of Classical Belt objects become
dramatically&lt;br/&gt;inflated? Dr. Eugene Chiang and colleagues, at the
University of California at Berkeley, will investigate a series of theoretical
dynamical problems that directly address these issues. He will examine how these
two seemingly disparate classes of objects participate in many of the same
dynamical processes, most notably orbital migration and resonant interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planets can be remarkably mobile while embedded in their
natal gaseous disks. Known extrasolar planets are sufficiently massive that they
clear annular gaps in disk material about their orbits. A gap-opening planet is
slaved to the viscous evolution of its host disk. Viscous diffusion times of
magnetohydrodynamically turbulent disks shorten with decreasing distance from
the star. Thus, two gap-opening planets migrate towards their parent star such
that the ratio of the period of the outer planet to that of the inner planet
grows. The divergence of this ratio implies that a series of mean motion
resonances will be crossed. Each resonance crossing can generate substantial
orbital eccentricities in the migrating bodies. Dr. Chiang and his collaborators
will explore this mechanism for exciting eccentricities. The viscous, thermal,
and mass profiles of protoplanetary disks will be computed to determine
planetary migration timescales. The celestial mechanics of resonance crossings
will be investigated through a series of analytic and numerical orbit
integrations. Numerical hydrodynamic simulations of planet-disk interactions
will be undertaken to test the effectiveness of resonance passages. The
circularity of orbits of Solar System giants may be reconciled with the extreme
elongations of extrasolar planetary orbits within the framework of
protoplanetary disks whose viscosities decrease dramatically with distance; this
framework indicates that the orbital architecture of the outer Solar System may
indeed be commonplace.&lt;br/&gt;The extent to which Neptune's outermost,
strongest 2:1 mean-motion resonance gravitationally sculpted the Classical
Kuiper Belt will be ascertained. As Neptune migrated outwards
during&lt;br/&gt;the era of late heavy bombardment, its resonances swept outward
and captured Kuiper Belt Ob-&lt;br/&gt;jects into librating orbits. Dr. Chiang
and his collaborators will account for, through analytic and&lt;br/&gt;numerical
calculations, the finite masses of bodies librating within the 2:1 resonance. A
massive,&lt;br/&gt;migrating 2:1 resonance may leak objects into the Classical
Belt domain; imperfect efficiencies of&lt;br/&gt;resonant capture and of
retainment determine the fraction of bodies that reside in the 2:1 and
the&lt;br/&gt;fraction of bodies that comprise the non-resonant Classical Belt.
The degree of dynamical heating&lt;br/&gt;by eccentric, inclined 2:1 perturbers
on Classical Belt Objects will be gauged. This study will&lt;br/&gt;culminate in
predictions for the mass within the 2:1 resonance that can be tested by
dedicated&lt;br/&gt;observations in which Dr. Chiang is already actively
involved.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;