* 0205227
* ITR: Methodologies for Robust Design of Information Systems under Multiple Sources of Uncertainty
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Sarma Vrudhula, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,807,329.00

As CMOS technology enters the nanometer-regime, one of the most fundamental
challenges will result from the loss of predictability of design behavior due to
both variations during manufacturing and interferences between components during
normal operation. As features on the die continue to shrink, control of the
physical parameters, such as the feature size of transistors, their doping
levels, and oxide thickness, will become increasingly difficult to control,
resulting in dramatic increased uncertainty in the electrical characteristics of
individual devices. Also, the close proximity of devices to each other will give
rise to significant interference from elements surrounding a device, due to
inductive and capacitive coupling, and due to environmental factors, such as
power supply and temperature fluctuations. The increase in the number of
uncertainties, as well as their severity will result in a general loss of
predictability in nanometer-CMOS design and will threaten the ability to produce
robust designs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we are developing a
statistical framework for analysis and optimization of system performance,
power, and functional integrity, as well as their newly emerging trade-offs in
nanometer design. In the presence of variations due to process fluctuations and
environmental interferences, signals are inherently stochastic as are the basic
measures of design quality, such as delay and power. The research is therefore
investigating the development of stochastic models for performance metrics that
capture their dependence on the various sources of uncertainty. The new design
methodology will focus on robustness as a new measure of design quality,
including delay, power consumption and measures of functional integrity, and
will allow these design objectives to be constrained at prescribed levels of
confidence. Furthermore, the research team is considering new methods for
simultaneous optimization of performance, energy, and functional integrity that
effectively exploit new trade-offs and interactions between these objectives in
nanometer design. &lt;br/&gt;