* 0205754
* RUI:    Statistical Modeling of Microlens Masses
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* William Heacox, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 07/31/2005
* USD 34,926.00

AST-0205754&lt;br/&gt;Heacox&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. William Heacox will
analyze gravitational microlens survey data in the current literature in order
to deduce the mass distributions of the objects causing the lensing, and thus
help characterize their natures. Microlensing is a promising means of detecting
otherwise undetectable planetary- to stellar-mass objects in such locations as
the halo of our galaxy, where a large amount of dark matter of unknown nature is
known to exist. In a typical microlens survey, a few million stars in the Large
Magellanic Cloud are monitored periodically to detect the optical amplification
caused by gravitational lensing when a Galactic halo object (the lens) passes
nearly in front of a background star (the source). While the resulting
amplification amplitude depends upon lens mass, it also depends upon such
unknowable quantities as the relative velocity of lens and source, and the
distance of closest encounter of the lens to the line-of-sight to the source.
This complication has prevented accurate estimates of lens masses, so that the
observation of a few tens of microlenses has not greatly aided in the
identification of halo dark matter. Dr. Heacox' research consists of the
application of sophisticated statistical modeling techniques to the entire set
of observed microlenses in a survey, in order to determine the statistical
distribution of lens masses (rather than the masses of individual lenses). The
method uses all that is knowable about the kinematics (velocities, distances) of
lens and source populations, together with the set of observed microlens
parameters, to infer all that can be deduced about the mass distribution of the
underlying &lt;br/&gt;population causing the lensing. In application to the
Galactic halo microlenses, the result &lt;br/&gt;should be the first credible
estimate of the mass distribution of the halo dark matter, and a
&lt;br/&gt;concomitant increase in our understanding of the nature of this
material. The nature of dark &lt;br/&gt;matter in the Universe is one of the
outstanding problems in modern astronomy; a better &lt;br/&gt;understanding of
the component in our galaxy will be a useful first step in determining what
&lt;br/&gt;most of the Universe is made of. This award is made under the
auspices of the Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;