* 0205594
* ITR:  New directions in clustering and learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Amit Sahai, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,530,001.00

New directions in clustering and learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faced with ever-
larger amounts of data, researchers, government &lt;br/&gt;institutions,
corporations and even the general public seek tools that help them deal
&lt;br/&gt;with large bodies of information, identify patterns in it, learn what
these&lt;br/&gt;patterns mean, and act upon that information in a timely
fashion. &lt;br/&gt;Developing such tools involves a novel and interesting blend
of algorithms, &lt;br/&gt;statistics, AI, and machine learning. The project
assembles a team of experts (four&lt;br/&gt;from academia and two from industry)
in these areas to attack an interesting&lt;br/&gt;and meaningful subset of such
problems which have the general flavor of&lt;br/&gt;clustering or
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The defining philosophy of this proposal is that
no clear boundary &lt;br/&gt;Separates the twin notions of clustering and
learning. Clustering is usually driven&lt;br/&gt;by the end goal of learning,
but can also be viewed as a learning task&lt;br/&gt;in itself since it results
in a more compact description of the data.&lt;br/&gt;By the same token all
learning involves clustering of some sort, and&lt;br/&gt;in fact this viewpoint
is implicit in recent papers in the learning &lt;br/&gt;literature. The project
takes an integrated view of the entire problem of learning&lt;br/&gt;patterns in
data, starting from streaming computations that might
produce&lt;br/&gt;representative sketches of the data as it streams by, to
problems of &lt;br/&gt;clustering data into meaninful patterns (with attendant
problems of outlier removal,&lt;br/&gt;multiobjective optimization etc.), to
learning algorithms that fit&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated models (SVMs, bayesian
nets, gaussian mixtures etc.) for &lt;br/&gt;inference and reasoning
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators believe that all these disparate
algorithmic efforts have&lt;br/&gt;unifying ideas. Furthermore, their
synergistic approach throws up several&lt;br/&gt;interesting ideas of its own
that could lead to significant advances. &lt;br/&gt;Examples: include using
coding theoretic ideas in disparate applications such as &lt;br/&gt;Multiclass
learning (a broad class of learning problems including text and speech
&lt;br/&gt;categorization, part-of-speech tagging, gesture recognition etc.) and
shape recognition&lt;br/&gt;in vision; the use of clustering ideas to do
dimension reduction (offering&lt;br/&gt;an alternative to popular SVD based
approaches), and using ideas from&lt;br/&gt;approximation algorithms and
clustering to do near-optimal model fitting&lt;br/&gt;for models such as
bayesian nets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also includes a management and
educational plan that involves&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of the ideas of this
research through development of new &lt;br/&gt;courses and also pieces of
learning software that will be placed in the public domain.&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms
developed in as part of this project will be tested on large
&lt;br/&gt;datasets, including those obtained from Google Inc. Some algorithmic
ideas will &lt;br/&gt;also be implemented in industry (including
Google).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;