* 0205983
* Coordinated Global Time-Series Photometry of Variable Stars: the Whole Earth Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Steven Kawaler, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2006
* USD 313,329.00

AST-0205983&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Kawaler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After decades
of progress, many stages of stellar evolution remain only modestly understood.
The investigators here will exploit a powerful tool that Nature provides for
probing the interiors of stars, namely asteroseismology. At several points in
their evolution, stars undergo self-excited nonradial pulsations, which are
observable as multiperiodic brightness variations. By observing these variations
as continuously as possible for as long as is practical, they resolve the
multiple frequencies of variation in these stars. Since each frequency
represents a normal-mode of oscillation of the star, by consulting theoretical
models they will deduce details of the global and internal structure of these
stars with striking detail. Among other things, using asteroseismology they will
measure the mass of isolated pulsators to great accuracy, determine where there
are structural or compositional changes in the interior of pulsators, and place
limits on or actually measure the chemical composition of a pulsator as a
function of radius. The success in this project results from the operation of a
unique instrument known as the Whole Earth Telescope (WET). The WET is an
international partnership of astronomers, distributed around the Earth, who
gather continuous time-series brightness measurements of rapidly varying stars
and analyze these data to extract the astrophysical insight contained therein.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;