* 0205542
* ITR:  A Framework for Rapid Development of Reliable Robotics Software
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Paul Hudak, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 510,344.00

Taha, Walid&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0205542&lt;br/&gt;"ITR: A Framework for Rapid
Development of Reliable Robotics Software"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robots are
entering daily life. Commercially available systems are&lt;br/&gt;delivering
medication to patients in hospitals, mowing lawns, vacuuming&lt;br/&gt;floors,
and finding wide applications in the entertainment industry. In the future, they
will play a more substantial role in areas such as space exploration, health
care, and search and rescue. But as&lt;br/&gt;these applications grow, so does
the complexity of these robots, making&lt;br/&gt;the reliability of their
software and the productivity of their&lt;br/&gt;programmers a priority. It is
not clear that current techniques for&lt;br/&gt;programming robots are
sufficient for building systems that are orders of magnitude more complex than
the ones available today. The vast majority of programming methods in current
use focus on high-level planning and task and behavioral aspects. By contrast,
there are no widely-accepted specialized software processes or programming
languages for the integrated development of robotics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the impact of state-of-
the-art programming languages techniques in a small-scale robotics setting. The
project applies domain-specific languages methods and automatic program
generation techniques. The framework exploits core technologies such as multi-
stage programming with simple, high-level annotations&lt;br/&gt;to avoid
unnecessary runtime overheads yet provide a natural and algorithmic approach to
program generation, where generation occurs in a first stage, and the execution
of the synthesized program occurs in a second stage. Because (even when the
final goal is embedded software) the first stage does not need to be resource-
bounded, conventional programming techniques can be used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge, then, becomes ensuring that the generated
programs are suitable for execution on an embedded platform. Multi-stage
languages already provide significant safety guarantees. For example, a program
generator written in such a language not only is type-safe in the traditional
sense, but we are guaranteed that any generated program will also be type safe.
This provides a noteworthy degree of assurance about the quality of the
generated code. But like most traditional high-level programming techniques,
multi-stage programming was designed to satisfy functional requirements rather
than operational ones, and existing multi-stage languages do not provide any
guarantees about the behavior of programs in the presence of bounded resources.
The focus of this project is ways to address this problem by
strengthening&lt;br/&gt;``traditional'' multi-stage type systems using a number
of state-of-the-art techniques from type theory and functional reactive
programming (FRP) to create resource-aware multi-stage programming. Linear and
alias types (in conjunction with dependent typing) will be used to ensure space-
boundedness, new typing techniques are used to ensure time-boundedness, and
signals and behaviors from FRP allow for a natural style of reactive
programming.&lt;br/&gt;