* 0205766
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of Female Mate Choice in a Coercive Mating System
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Karen Oberhauser, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Greenfield
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Mechanisms of Post-Copulatory Choice in a Coercive Mating System&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Karen S. Oberhauser&lt;br/&gt;Michelle J. Solensy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
sexual coercion, sometimes called forced copulation, is prevalent in a species,
females have limited control over the outcome of individual mating attempts.
However, they may evolve other means of determining the males with which they
mate, or the males that actually fertilize their eggs. Mating attempts in
monarch butterflies typically involve a lengthy ground struggle during which
males sometimes force females to mate. Females may use this struggle to assess
male quality and adjust their level of resistance accordingly (precopulatory
choice), or they may bias sperm use in favor of high quality males
(postcopulatory choice). Postcopulatory mate choice by females could be an
important selective force driving the evolution of male reproductive strategies,
and should be especially important in species in which coercion is a common
mating strategy. In a preliminary study, there was little evidence to support
the existence of precopulatory female choice in monarch butterflies. Studies
addressing this topic will be continued in both laboratory and wild populations.
Studies of postcopulatory choice will address the hypothesis that females use
spermatophore size as an indicator of male mating history, and bias sperm use in
favor of males that have mated previously. Spermatophore size is a reliable,
honest, and detectable signal of male mating success, and previous work has
demonstrated that male mating success is heritable. Thus, females may benefit by
selecting sperm based on this cue since mating success should be transmitted to
their sons. The proposed experimental design separates the effect of biased
sperm use from the potentially confounding effect of sperm
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;