* 0205994
* The Evolution of Globular-Cluster Systems Formed in Galactic Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Francois Schweizer, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2005
* USD 232,551.00

AST 0205994&lt;br/&gt;Schweizer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation and evolution
of galaxies is of central interest in present-day astrophysics.
There&lt;br/&gt;is mounting evidence that many galaxies grew from smaller units,
and that galactic mergers may&lt;br/&gt;have played a major role in determining
the shapes and dynamics of certain remnants, and perhaps&lt;br/&gt;even of
elliptical galaxies. However, the details of this assembly remain unclear, and
there are&lt;br/&gt;several competing hypotheses for the formation of
ellipticals. Fortunately, a few galactic mergers&lt;br/&gt;still occur in the
local universe and o.er valuable clues to the past assembly
process.&lt;br/&gt;The 1992 discovery that globular star clusters form in large
numbers during mergers of gas-rich&lt;br/&gt;galaxies has opened new avenues to
studying the formation and evolution of globular clusters and&lt;br/&gt;of their
host galaxies. Questions of current interest are: Is there an evolutionary link
between&lt;br/&gt;globular clusters formed in mergers and old globular clusters
in giant elliptical galaxies? How&lt;br/&gt;do systems of globular clusters
formed in mergers evolve? Specifically, how do their
luminosity&lt;br/&gt;functions, metallicity distributions, and kinematics
evolve? Do galactic mergers imprint cluster&lt;br/&gt;systems with kinematic
signatures (e.g., fast outer rotation) that can be traced along a
sequence&lt;br/&gt;of merger remnants of increasing age?&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator, Francois Schweizer, proposes carefully designed observational
studies&lt;br/&gt;to address these questions. He points out that-whereas the
birth of young clusters in ongoing&lt;br/&gt;mergers and the properties of old
globular clusters in ellipticals have been studied widely in
recent&lt;br/&gt;years-there is a surprising lack of knowledge about globular-
cluster systems of intermediate age.&lt;br/&gt;Yet, these systems hold great
promise for directly addressing the above issues.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Schweizer and
collaborators were among the .rst to study globular clusters formed in
mergers&lt;br/&gt;with the Hubble Space Telescope and to follow up with ground-
based spectroscopic observations&lt;br/&gt;to determine their ages and chemical
abundances. He will now search for globular clusters of
intermediate&lt;br/&gt;age (1 - 7 Gyr) in about a dozen galaxies thought to be
transition objects between ongoing&lt;br/&gt;mergers (e.g., NGC 4038/39) and old
ellipticals. He will use both the Baade 6.5-m telescope at&lt;br/&gt;Las
Campanas Observatory and the Advanced Survey Camera on the Hubble Space
Telescope to&lt;br/&gt;obtain some of the deepest images ever taken of these
transition objects and their globular-cluster&lt;br/&gt;systems. Photometric
analysis of these images, as well as of Hubble archival images, will yield
the&lt;br/&gt;chronology of these cluster systems from their broad-band
colors.&lt;br/&gt;The same deep images will also be used to study the evolution
of the globular-cluster luminosity&lt;br/&gt;function with time. The luminosity
functions of fresh-born cluster systems are power laws,&lt;br/&gt;while those of
ancient systems are close to lognormal. Theory predicts that as globular-
cluster&lt;br/&gt;systems age, their luminosity functions should evolve from the
.rst to the second shape through&lt;br/&gt;preferential erosion of low-mass
clusters. Deep luminosity functions reaching past the
predicted&lt;br/&gt;turnover magnitudes will be measured from the images to
subject this prediction to a critical test.&lt;br/&gt;A parallel program of
multi-slit spectroscopy mainly with the Magellan 6.5-m telescopes,
but&lt;br/&gt;also with the northern Gemini 8-m telescope, will yield
metallicities and more accurate ages for some&lt;br/&gt;key globular-cluster
systems of intermediate age. Measurements of radial velocities for
typically&lt;br/&gt;40 - 200 clusters per galaxy will permit comparative studies
of the kinematics of metal-poor and&lt;br/&gt;metal-rich globulars within the
same galaxy. This will yield valuable clues about the origins of&lt;br/&gt;what
are thought to be .rst- and 2nd-generation cluster
subpopulations.&lt;br/&gt;These observational studies will test all proposed
formation mechanisms for ellipticals and&lt;br/&gt;will-specifically-focus on
possible evidence for an evolutionary link between 2nd-generation
globulars&lt;br/&gt;formed in mergers and metal-rich globulars in old
ellipticals. The results from this project&lt;br/&gt;will help improve our
understanding not only of globular-cluster formation and evolution, but
also&lt;br/&gt;of galaxy formation and growth and, ultimately, of the origin of
Hubble's morphological sequence&lt;br/&gt;of galaxy
types.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;