* 0205301
* ITR:   Collaborative Research: Putting a Face on Cognitive Tutors:  Bringing Active Inquiry into Active Problem Solving
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* Scott Stevens, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,414,648.00

EIA-0205301&lt;br/&gt;Albert Corbett&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie-Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Collaborative Research: Putting a Face on
Cognitive Tutors:&lt;br/&gt;Bringing Active Inquiry into Active Problem
Solving&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative project
with:&lt;br/&gt;0205506&lt;br/&gt;Michelene Chi&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a growing body of
research concerning effective learning and tutoring strategies. The project
involves constructing and evaluating educational technology that emulates human
tutors by integrating a state-of-the art educational technology called Cognitive
Tutors with a innovative interactive questioning environment called Synthetic
Interviews to produce an inactive learning environment that rivals the
effectiveness of human tutors. Cognitive tutors are built around a cognitive
model of problem solving knowledge and provide precisely the support students
need to complete problems successfully. Used alone, cognitive tutors do not
support the help-seeking and meta-cognitive skills that characterize active
learners. By incorporating a novel interactive communication technology called
Synthetic Interviews, an Active Learning Environment is offered that rivals the
effectiveness of human tutors in supporting deep student learning. Synthetic
Interviews allow learners to engage in active inquiry by providing the means for
conversing in-depth with an individual. Synthetic Interviews permit knowledge
capture in a new form providing utility similar to an expert system but a
development effort approaching the simple video taping of a conversation. The
Active Learning Environment serves as a research tool to examine both
computational and pedagogical challenges and also as an educational environment
in classrooms and homes. In particular, the domains of knowledge that are
constructed around this learning environment are mathematics and biology
courses. The project promises to make important contributions to cognitive
science, computer science and educational practice including the following: 1)
The analysis of student questions during synthetic interviews will contribute to
basic cognitive models of the functional relationship between declarative
conceptual knowledge and procedural problem solving knowledge, 2) This project
will integrate cognitive models of student knowledge and tutorial dialogue
structure. More generally, the project will help define a design and engineering
process for intelligent learning environments, 3) The research will inform the
design of more effective computer-based learning environments. 4) The research
and the active learning environment can support improved professional
development both for pre-service and in-service teachers. The Active Learning
Environments for mathematics and biology that are developed in this project
promise to directly improve educational practice nationally. Current generation
cognitive mathematics tutors are already in use in about 2% of middle schools
and high schools around the country. The demand for effective mathematics and
science education continues to grow. States are increasing mathematics
graduation requirements and instituting assessments that govern student
graduation and school evaluations. If Active Learning Environments are more
effective than current generation Cognitive Tutors, they promise to rapidly
enter widespread classroom use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;