* 0205928
* Animations for Visualization of Earth Processes and History
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Tanya Atwater, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 09/30/2008
* USD 305,000.00

The goals of this project and the goals of my teaching goals are to instill as
much understanding as possible of the way the earth works, and also to convey my
own love of the beauty, excitement and rigor of the scientific endeavor. In
recent years I have experimented with the creation of multi-media visualization
products for the understanding and teaching of earth subjects. My initial
animations and movies have met with great response, and are used in numerous
classrooms at the University of California-Santa Barbara, across the nation and
around the world. I believe a major portion of the human population learns best
from imagery, especially moving images, and I am very excited about the new
multi-media tools that make this form of communication so much more possible.
Moving imagery is especially useful and helpful for the teaching of geology,
since the subject is so visual and is often far outside ordinary human scales of
time and space. I am presently refining regional geological animations and
materials for southern California. Through the current project I am expanding
the geographic reach of this work by creating an Educational Multimedia
Visualization Center for visiting teacher-scholars. The center allows experts in
the geology of their own regions/disciplines to bring their traditional images
and knowledge, and to transform them into animations and presentation packages.
They return home with these products and also with a new array of skills to
share around their own institutions. Their imagery products join my works that
are already out in film, videotape, as freeware on the web and as materials in
the NSF-funded digital libraries of ADEPT and DLESE. Indeed, the ADEPT group is
based at U.C.S.B. and is interested in developing a streamlined process for
transferring content generated at the Educational Multimedia Visualization
Center into their online holdings. The Multimedia Visualization Center is
building upon the long experience and excellent infra-structure of this
organization, extending its services to off-campus visitors. Thus, visitors
return home with their own projects and also with new ideas about instructional
support possibilities. Likewise they share with us the innovations of their home
institutions that we may learn from them and pass them along.