* 0205487
* ITR:    Veterinary Telemedicine - Proactive Herd Health Management for Disease Prevention from Farm to Market
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Daniel Andresen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2004
* USD 107,025.00

&lt;br/&gt;Andresen Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is building
sensor net infrastructure to support intelligent, mobile medical monitoring
devices that continuously assess state of health in concentrated and distributed
cattle herds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research is conducted to develop and
integrate the following areas of information technology:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;-
Receiver systems that manage wireless traffic and prioritize overlapping signal
streams. &lt;br/&gt;- Scheduling algorithms that adaptively determine where data
analysis should occur and which areas require more in-depth
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;- Algorithms that search for data patterns that may indicate
problems.&lt;br/&gt;- Security mechanisms that maintain confidentiality of
economic data and herd health information associated with individual farms,
while providing epidemiological data of statistical validity.&lt;br/&gt;- Low
cost system components (affordable by farmers and producers &lt;br/&gt;who may
have tenuous financial stability).&lt;br/&gt;- Robust packaging and linking
technology for biomedical sensors, GPS receivers, and Bluetooth-enabled devices
for survival in difficult environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental
component of the project uses durable, small sensors (e.g., to report animal
identity, position, temperature, blood pressure, and other physiological data),
with Bluetooth-compliant monitoring stations near cattle congregation points,
such as feed bunks and watering troughs. These stations upload data from nearby
environmental sensors, Bluetooth-enabled devices with global positioning
capability that are worn by the animals, and wearable/remote biomedical sensors.
These results are integrated with previous sensor data, weather reports, weather
forecasts, infrared camera images, and prior health assessments. The project is
developing initial algorithms to perform rapid analysis on local data prior to
uploading summary data for the ranch to regional databases so that these data
can be correlated with data provided by other producers. Significant findings
can then be immediately broadcast to appropriate medical personnel and
producers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring systems will improve the ability of
the animal sciences industry to react to and predict disease onset and its
epidemiological spread (e.g., mad cow disease, hoof and mouth disease), whether
from natural or terrorist events. Trend analysis, information storage, and
health prediction lessons learned from this effort will have immediate
application to distributed medical systems targeted at assessing and predicting
human state of health and the spread of disease in human populations. These
networked embedded sensor systems have implications for homeland security,
veterinary medicine, the agriculture industry, and in the long term, human
medicine and quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;