* 0205178
* ITR/IM: Novel Indexing and Retrieval of Dynamic Brain Images
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Paul Kantor, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 06/30/2008
* USD 2,034,722.00

EIA-0205178&lt;br/&gt;Paul Kantor&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel Modeling of Dynamic Brain Images for
Indexing and Retrieval&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop
new techniques for representation, organization and retrieval of dynamic brain
images. High resolution brain imaging facilities at two sites will conduct
targeted experiments to develop image sequences supporting the research.
Multiple techniques will be used to provide higher time resolution than the
native fMRI format. Images will be archived with web access for the research
team, and for other teams elsewhere around the world. The research will develop
novel models of episodes of brain activity and effective schemes for indexing
and retrieving those episodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A practical research goal
of the project is to support a new kind of "Query by Example" access to archives
of space-time brain images, usable by clinicians and researchers for research
and diagnosis. The project also contributes to clinical applications of
cognitive science, to the advance of scientific knowledge, and to scientific
education, at the undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels. The Rutgers-
Princeton project is a collaboration among cognitive scientists, computer
scientists and engineers, information scientists, applied mathematicians,
statisticians, and cognitive neuroscientists, with guidance from an advisory
committee of clinicians and radiologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms
developed will better approximate judgments that trained humans make when
scanning an array of stored images for ones "similar to" a given image, that is,
"Query by Example". This project will help to make neuro-imaging analysis tools
available to the clinical and industrial investigators who are best positioned
to adapt new methods to applied domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;