* 0205858
* FRG:  Nanoscale Order in Amorphous Solids: Structure, Transformations, and Electronic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Paul Goldbart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2006
* USD 824,932.00

This FRG project is a collaborative effort among five co-PIs, and additional
collaborators with expertise in amorphous materials: preparation and analysis
(Abelson, Bishop), FEM technique (Gibson, Voyles), TEM (Zuo), molecular dynamics
and quantum mechanical simulations (Drabold), and statistical mechanics and
topology of disordered networks (Goldbart). The project goals are to
quantitatively determine the nanostructure in group IV and chalcogenide
amorphous materials, and the relationship of this order with electronic
properties and phase transformations. The approach is based on fluctuation
electron microscopy (FEM)-a new analytical technique with the only purely
structural view of MRO (medium range order) currently available. FEM in-volves a
statistical analysis of the intensity scattered from nanometer-sized volumes of
the sam-ple as a function of the volume, size, and scattering conditions. The
project addresses nanoscale order in representative amorphous and glassy
materials-amor-phous silicon and chalcogenides- which are without long range
order. These materials are known to exhibit medium range order, but little is
known about the nature of this ordering on the na-noscale. Medium-range order
(MRO) is typically a structural correlation at length scales longer than the
diameter of the third coordination shell but shorter than the scale at which
ordering ap-pears as Bragg peaks in the structure factor. For amorphous silicon
(a-Si), that translates to length scales of 1-4 nm. Structure at those length
scales in the presence of disorder has historically been difficult to measure.
Standard diffraction techniques yield little information at medium-range because
of the isotropic nature of most disordered materials. The PIs have shown that
strain affects small topologically crystalline regions in a-Si, rendering them
not detectable in diffraction. %%% The project addresses fundamental research
issues in areas of electronic materials science having technological relevance.
An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. The combined resources, including
experimental and theoretical methods, provide special opportunities for
education and training of post doctoral associates, graduate and undergraduate
students involved in highly interdisciplinary forefront research. ***