* 0205828
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Trajectories of Genetic Change in Populations With Different Founding Sizes:  Time Transects of Daphnia Populations in Two Upstate New York Lakes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Long-term effects of population reductions on genetic diversity are well
understood, but few studies have examined short-term changes in genetic
diversity in populations immediately after they have been founded. The goal of
this project is to compare changes in genetic diversity in three species of the
grazing zooplankter Daphnia that recolonized a lake from a small number of
founding individuals with a fourth population that was founded by a large number
of individuals. Long-lived dormant Daphnia eggs in sediments record annual
changes in populations that can be reconstructed from sediment cores. Genetic
diversity of each of the four "populations" at several time points following
recolonization will be measured to assess changes as the populations recovered
in size.

Daphnia species are a key component of aquatic ecosystems, serving as a control
on algae and a food source for fish. The ability of a population to respond to
environmental changes depends on the level of genetic diversity present. This
study will thus provide important insights into how Daphnia respond to
environmental change and influence community and ecosystem processes. It will
also provide empirical tests of theoretical models and contribute to our
knowledge about how genetic diversity is maintained in natural populations,
which in turn will foster more appropriate management or conservation plans.