* 0205034
* Complex Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Thomas Kurtz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 04/30/2006
* USD 295,422.00

This research program will focus on singular martingale problems and stochastic
differential equations, particle representations for stochastic partial
differential equations and measure-valued processes, and spatial point
processes. The work on singular martingale problems and related stochastic
equations addresses fundamental questions regarding the specification,
transformation and approximation of the models. Applications to controlled
stochastic networks motivate much of the work. Particle representations provide
a powerful tool for understanding the behavior of complex stochastic processes.
Work to be performed will extend the range of applicability of these methods,
develop new constructions of particle representations, and address problems of
existence and uniqueness of solutions of the stochastic equations underlying
these representations. Application of the results to filtering and to
theoretical models in finance will provide both useful intuition and a check on
the appropriateness of the theoretical developments. Spatial point processes
characterized as stationary distributions of Markov birth and death processes
and as solutions of stochastic equations driven by Poisson random measures will
be studied. The work will focus on spatial ergodicity and central limit theorems
with applications to parameter estimation in mind.

The study of stochastic processes is concerned with mathematical descriptions of
natural phenomena governed by "random" or "chance" mechanisms. Mathematical
models of such phenomena may attempt to describe variation in time, in space, or
both. The research to be performed is concerned with developing methods for
specifying these mathematical models, approximating complex models by simpler
ones, obtaining information about the true state of a system from corrupted or
noisy observations, and determining how to influence or "control" the evolution
of the models and the phenomena they represent. Motivating examples include
models for the effects on asset prices of the valuations assigned by a large
number of traders and for communication and computer networks.