* 0205162
* FMS/UMC Meeting on Materials Education: Opportunities over a Lifetime, U of Maryland, College Park, MD, May 20-21, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Katherine Faber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2003
* USD 11,000.00

The University Materials Council (UMC), an organization of department chairs of
materials science and engineering programs, and the Federation of Materials
Societies (FMS), a network of materials-related professional societies, are co-
organizing a meeting on materials education entitled in Materials Education:
Opportunities over a Lifetime. This meeting will involve a thorough interchange
of beneficial ideas and practices in materials science and engineering education
among concerned citizens, professional educators, and "funders"/policy makers at
three levels: grassroots, K-12, and college/university. The goals are for all
groups involved in materials education to learn about the possibilities for
parallel activities and collaboration. Professional educators will become aware
of the broad spectrum of potential sources of support. Funding organizations and
policy makers will become acquainted with the needs, opportunities, and
activities in materials education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one and one-half
day forum will take place at the University of Maryland- College Park on May
20-21, 2002, with a registration fee that will cover all meals and will feature
a presentation by a concerned member of Congress. The meeting is a continuation
of the series of FMS Biennial Meetings. Outside sponsorship is requested in
order to allow participation by a wide and varied group of individuals
interested in materials education.&lt;br/&gt;