* 0205927
* The Wireless Revolution:  Teaching Advanced Techology to Diverse Audiences
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2008
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 04/30/2008
* USD 305,000.00

The penetration of advanced technologies, and in particular information
technologies, into every day life has proceeded at a breathtaking pace over the
past decade. Such technologies will touch and transform the personal and working
lives of current and future generations of students for many decades to come.
This is true not only for students in the SMET disciplines who are developing
this technology, but also for students in the many disciplines spanning the
breadth of academia. A significant fraction of all students need to learn about
such technologies in order to conduct their professional lives and to live as
informed citizens in an age that will be defined by advancing technologies.
Moreover, SMET students need to learn about the non-technical implications of
technology in economics, politics, society, and business, and about the
corresponding influences of such non-technical spheres of activity on
technology. This project addresses these needs by developing pedagogy and
pedagogical materials suitable for teaching advanced technological subject
matter to undergraduate students across a broad spectrum of academic
discliplines, not only within SMET isciplines, but also within the fine arts,
humanities, and social sciences. This approach takes advantage of the greater
computer and mathematical literacy of today's students to offer course material
with technical substance, but also with a view toward the greater role of
technologies in shaping society and commerce. The project focuses particularly
on telecommunications technology, in order to exploit the Principal
Investigator's experiences in teaching such material to Princeton undergraduates
in his recently-developed course, "The Wireless Revolution: Telecommunications
for the 21st Century." This course, which covers the technical, social,
economic, and political aspects of wireless, has been very successful in
attracting a large and diverse audience from across the University. This
holistic approach to the subject, and the teaching of both SMET and non-SMET
students in the same classroom, has resulted in significant educational benefits
for all of the students involved. Although telecommunications is, of course,
widely taught worldwide, there is little available material for the teaching of
the subject in a holistic manner, and particularly to a mixed audience at the
undergraduate level. This makes it difficult to export the model of "The
Wireless Revolution" to other institutions, or even to other instructors. This
is due in part to the very dynamic nature of the field, which renders
conventional textual materials inadequate because it needs to be updated very
quickly. It is also partly due to the breadth of disciplines needed to
adequately address the subject and to uniformly challenge students with very
diverse interests. This difficulty has been addressed in the "Wireless
Revolution" course thus far through the use of guest lecturers, a solution which
is not necessarily portable to other universities or instructors. The principal
goal of this project is to develop useful pedagogical materials that can address
both the breadth an dynamism of this field. These materials combine the
traditional textbook format, where the subject matter is relatively stable, with
Web-based resources for the more dynamic subject matter. The objective of this
development is to allow the successful format of this course to be used in a
sustainable way by other instructors at Princeton, and to be exported to other
institutions. The scope of these materials will reach beyond wireless
communications to the field of telecommunications in general, so that the
subject matter will fit the needs and interests of a greater number of students
and institutions. The updateable and flexible nature of these pedagogical
materials will allow for the content to shift from year to year as new
telecommunications technologies wax and wane. This will further allow for the
content to vary from institution to institution, as different instructors may
wish to emphasize different aspects of the field. Finally, it is hoped that this
development will provide a model for the holistic teaching of other advanced
technologies to broad undergraduate audiences.