* 0205448
* ITR: Mining the Bibliome -- Information Extraction from the Biomedical Literature
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Martha Palmer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,881,757.00

EIA-0205448&lt;br/&gt;Joshi, Aravind&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Mining the Bibliome -- Information
Extraction from the Biomedical&lt;br/&gt;Literature &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major goal is the development of qualitatively better methods for automatically
extracting information from the biomedical literature, relying on recent
research in high-accuracy parsing and shallow semantic analysis. The special
focus will be on information relevant to drug development, in collaboration with
researchers in the Knowledge Integration and Discovery&lt;br/&gt;Systems group
at GlaxoSmithKline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also address several
database research problems, including methods for modeling complex, incomplete
and changing information using semistructured data, and also ways to connect the
text analysis process to an information integration environment that can deal
with the wide variety of extant bioinformatic data models, formats, languages
and interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engine of recent progress in language
processing research has been linguistic data: text corpora, treebanks, lexicons,
test corpora for information retrieval and information extraction, and so on.
Much of this data has been created by Penn researchers and published by Penn's
Linguistic Data Consortium. Hence, one of our major goals is to develop and
publish new linguistic resources in three categories: a large corpus of
biomedical text annotated with syntactic structures `Treebank' and shallow
semantic structures (proposition bank or `Propbank'; several large sets of
biomedical abstracts and full-text articles annotated with entities and
relations of interest to drug developers, such as enzyme inhibition by various
compounds or genotype/phenotype connections `Factbanks'; and broad-coverage
lexicons and tools for the analysis of biomedical texts.&lt;br/&gt;