* 0205146
* Computer Simulation of Classical and Quantum Phenomena in Condensed Molecular Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Michael Klein, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* raima larter
* 04/30/2006
* USD 614,000.00

In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division, Michael Klein of the University of Pennsylvania will use
computer simulation and modeling techniques to investigate structural and
dynamical phenomena in molecular solids and fluids. Ab initio Car-Parrinello
molecular dynamics (CPMD) as well as classical Monte Carlo (MC) and molecular
dynamics (MD) techniques will be used to characterize the behavior of a variety
of condensed-phase molecular systems. CPMD methodology will also be utilized to
explore fundamental chemical reactions in both aqueous and superacid media.
Novel methodologies and algorithms for condensed-phase simulations will be
developed and implemented, with emphasis on using the latest generation of
massively parallel computing platforms.

Computer simulation of molecular systems provides rich insights into chemical
behavior at the molecular level. As computer algorithms and force field models
continue to improve, it is possible to study larger systems and to gain useful
insights regarding more and more physical and chemical properties. Using a
combination of computer simulation techniques Klein is able to perform
calculations on systems consisting of large numbers of molecules, such as
polymer melts and polyatomic fluids, and to bridge regimes of vastly differing
time scales. In this way he is able to study a number of important chemical and
physical properties of interest in, for example, biophysical systems or the
design of new materials.