* 0205422
* Collaborative Research: ITR: Acquiring Accurate Dynamic Field Data Using Lightweight Instrumentation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Richard Lipton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 424,000.00

ABSTRACT 0205422 Harrold, Mary J GA Tech Res Corp - GIT

TITLE: Collaborative Research: ITR: Acquiring Accurate Dynamic Field Data Using
Lightweight Instrumentation

Dynamic analyses, such as testing and profiling, play a key role in state-of-art
approaches to software quality assurance (QA). With rare exception, these
analyses are performed in-house, on developer platforms, using developer-
provided input workloads. Shortcomings of this approach include that the results
simply cannot be trusted to tell us how the software actually performs in the
field.

The project goal is to give developers unprecedented insight into the actual
runtime behavior of their software, allowing developers (and ultimately the
software itself) to change, optimize, and adapt the software based on highly
accurate field data. Lightweight, collaborative dynamic analyses conducted
around-the-world and around-the-clock form the new platform: (1) lightly
instrument fielded software (i.e., each program copy performs a small part of
the analysis) (2) collect the partial data from many instances of the software,
fusing it to conduct the complete analysis, (3) change the running program
instances based on the findings and (4) repeat the process.

Seven critical research challenges form the core of the project: 1. Lightweight
instrumentation--Develop instrumentation that is virtually transparent to
individual users. 2. Compositional analysis techniques--Develop distributed
analysis techniques that decompose traditional analyses into smaller steps,
distribute the steps among multiple users, and then fuse each user's results
into an accurate solution to the original problem. 3. Scalability--Develop
storage and analysis techniques to deal with the high data volumes we expect to
encounter. 4. Anomaly Detection--Define data-driven techniques to automatically
identify anomalous behaviors of deployed software. 5. Privacy and Security--
Incorporate privacy and security safeguards into our data collection and
analysis approaches. 6. Dynamic updating mechanisms--Develop techniques to make
runtime changes to the location and function of instrumentation, and to parts of
the software itself. 7. Validate approach on industrial software.