* 0205188
* Impacts of Extreme Events on Passenger Travel Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Robert Paaswell, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 03/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

This exploratory research focuses on time sensitive data and field research
related to devastating impacts of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade
Center (WTC) in New York City, NY on September 11, 2001. These devastating
events offer a unique opportunity to understand the impacts of extreme events on
passenger travel choice as well as some of the relationships between travel,
job, and residence choice. Since some of these behavioral effects may be of a
transient nature, the data are effectively perishable and requires rapid
investigation. The research aims to investigate and model how this event and
subsequent actions of firms and transportation providers impact travel
decisions. The objectives of the proposed research are to assess the behavioral
changes with respect to transportation that have taken place since the attacks
and to begin to lay the foundation for studying the impacts of extreme events on
travel behavior.

The methodology entails modeling travel behavior using information gleaned from
interviewing people in the areas affected by the WTC attack. The post-attack
sample will be drawn from two different sources: (a) a subset of the Household
Interview Surveys (HIS), which is a transportation survey conducted prior to the
attack; and (b) volunteers from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
and the New York Metropolitan Transportation Council (NYMTC), i.e., survivors at
the WTC. These agencies were housed in the WTC. A control data set will be drawn
from the population that was not directly affected by the WTC attack. The HIS
administered prior to the attack will be used to estimate pre-attack behavioral
models. The NYMTC is supplying backup copies of these data since the originals
were destroyed in the attack. These data will be analyzed to provide information
on the behavioral changes in transportation, job and residence choices. This
research can enable transportation agencies, specifically transit agencies, to
devise policies aimed at restoring the perception of safety. In this regard, the
research will help to answer questions about the future of lower Manhattan. It
would help planners better understand the impact of extreme events on travel
choices.

