* 0205664
* ITR:  The I-Guide Project: Extending Museum Experience Using Portable Devices, Wireless Networks and Web Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert Semper, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2006
* USD 699,950.00

0205664&lt;br/&gt;Robert J. Semper&lt;br/&gt;Exploratorium, San Francisco,
CA&lt;br/&gt;"The I-Guide Project: Extending Museum Experience Using Portable
Devices, Wireless Networks, and Web Technology"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary Information Technology Research project, involving a
collaboration between the San Francisco Exploratorium and Hewlett-Packard
Laboratories, addresses several areas of computing research, including
ubiquitous or pervasive computing, context-aware computing, augmentation of the
real world, human-computer interaction and computer-supported cooperative work.
The goal of this project is to gain a deeper understanding and to disseminate
knowledge about how the use of a ubiquitous computing infrastructure may augment
learning both during and after a visit to an interactive science center. The
project focuses on three research domains: 1. The creation of a functional
wireless nomadic computing infrastructure and on-line personalized delivery
system to gain knowledge about how nomadic technologies can be configured to
support learning in a complex setting in which there are multiple, competing
constraints for a user's attention, 2. The development of an instructional
design framework for creating learning, teaching and community-building
resources capable of delivery on multiple devices using this system in order to
explore which on-line information resources can better promote learner
interests, sustain science learning, and improve science understanding and 3.
Studies that explore the impact of these resources on the learner's use of the
museum to determine the relationship between physical visit activities and post-
visit on-line activities that can be supported by a personalized network
experience. The project involves 1. The design and implementation of points of
information (pi stations) and a data network for 10 museum exhibits, 2. The
design and implementation of free standing kiosks for accessing Web-based
content during the visit (for visitors who do not carry a wireless handheld
device), 3. The design and implementation a dynamic, personalized Web-based
server system for on-site (wireless) and remote (wired) access by visitors, 4.
The develop of Web-based content for the exhibits as a group and for each
exhibit, including a mixture of dynamically, customizable text, audio, and
visual content and interactive discussion-group/bulletin board functions, 5.
Research on the utility of the system with 300 individual and small groups of
learners, 6. The creation of a user-triggered method for capturing user
experience for extending visitor engagement, and 7. The develop of a user model
and instructional design framework for ubiquitous learning and guidance systems.
The project is headquartered in the multimedia Exploratorium Learning Studio
which includes facilities for project staff to engage in project design and
implementation as well as research studies. &lt;br/&gt;