* 0205985
* Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Research Program for Undergraduates
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Carlos Castillo-Chavez, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2004
* USD 357,374.00

The focus of this project is to provide a first-rate research experience to
students who otherwise are extremely unlikely to get get it at their home
institutions or elsewhere. The sequential research experiences focus on the
applications of mathematics to the biological sciences. The Mathematical and
Theoretical Biology Institute (MTBI) scientific undergraduate program is carried
out primarily through consecutive summer research experiences that have been
specifically designed to train, mentor, encourage and support Chicano, Latino,
Native American and African American who have the potential to pursue careers in
applied mathematics or in scientific field where serious quantitative training
is fundamental. MTBI's main goal of increasing the pool of underrepresented
minorities getting advanced degrees in quantitative fields is best achieved
through the selection of participants who come from non-selective universities.
The effectiveness of this NSF funded project is being measured by the number of
students who enroll in graduate school, the number who get advanced degrees and
the ability of some MTBI alumni to gain access to selective graduate programs in
these fields. MTBI promotes its goals and objectives through its intensive
multiple-summer research training program, GRE preparation program and long-term
mentorship and support programs for its alumni. Students receive four weeks of
intensive training in mathematical and computational techniques before
developing their own research project (10 technical reports per year have been
generated, on the average, since 1996). MTBI summer research experiences opens
the doors for underrepresented minorities in fields of genomics, theoretical and
computational biology, bio-statistics, applied mathematics and many others. The
success of the consecutive summer research experiences is based on various
factors that include "unlimited" student access to faculty and support personnel
(12 to 16 hours a day) and a collaborative learning environment that enhances
and nurtures the learning experiences of all participants. Explicit summer
outcomes include: the completion a formal research paper (25-40 pages), a public
oral presentation and the preparation of a poster. The typical activities of
most MTBI alumni include the presentation of their MTBI work in poster sessions
at two national conferences: the SACNAS annual meeting and the joint AMS/MAA
winter meeting.