* 0205105
* Hydrodynamic Simulations of Relativistic Flows:   From Pulsars to Parsec-Scale Jets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Philip Hughes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2005
* USD 264,396.00

AST 0205105&lt;br/&gt;Hughes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jets of gas, flowing at close
to the speed of light, are a common feature of our Universe and are found
wherever compact objects such as black holes capture material. In this project,
computer simulations of these jets will be used to advance our understanding of
such energetic flows. In particular these simulations will be designed to help
us understand how such jets can penetrate their environment without disruption
and also shed light on the nature of the `engines' which produce them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique used in this study incorporates Special
Relativity and uses state-of-the-art methods originally designed for fields such
as aerospace engineering. It enables large computations to be performed with
modest computer resources, thus allowing an exploration of many facets of the
problem. Among these are: how shock waves form in the gas flow, and how the flow
responds to impacting dense surrounding material, or being spun around in space
due to changes in the direction of the engine's nozzle. An important aspect of
the study is that it provides a probe of the poorly understood jets of stellar
binary systems, and should reveal the extent to which these really are mini-
quasars -- scaled down versions of active galaxies. The same technique is
applied to the nebulae that result from pulsar winds, where moving through the
ambient medium causes the nebula to be swept back into a tail of gas, similar to
the galactic and stellar jets. Understanding these `wind nebulae' will provide
insight into the flow from the pulsar itself, which is not directly
observable.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;