* 0205854
* SGER:   Exploring Massive Chip Level Active Deskewing for VLSI Chips Beyond 20GHz
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Thomas Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2003
* USD 28,800.00

During the last several decades, the clock rate and the level of integration of
VLSI chips have reached a level that distributing clocks has become an
increasingly difficult task. The most recently released chips run at more than
2GHz-clock rate. The performance projection for future ULSI chips will be up to
20GHz in the next 5-10 years. This implies that the overall clock skew needs to
be kept under 5ps across the chip in order to control the amount of clock skew
to be within 10% of the total clock cycle. This problem will be further
exacerbated by the steep increase in process variations in future processing
technologies beyond 50nm generations. Furthermore, when chips contain more and
more components (gates), the disparity of switching activities on chip will vary
more widely resulting in greater on-chip variations of temperature and supply
noise, which are time-variant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here
is intended to explore a dramatically different design paradigm for designing
and distributing clock signals for the future where the clocking networks will
be dynamically adapted to chip's operating environment to perform a deskewing
function in real-time. Active deskewing uses on-chip active devices such as
delay-locked loops (DLLs) to detect and reduce skews between any two points on
the chip. The issues the proposed research addresses include: &lt;br/&gt;Given a
chip architecture and the characteristics (switching, leakage, and density) of
the blocks used on the chip, what is the optimal topology of the self-adjusting
deskewing network that must be stable?&lt;br/&gt;Given the performance
requirements for the chip, what is the maximum latency of the deskewing network
the chip can tolerate?&lt;br/&gt;What is the resolution of deskewing circuits?
And how does this affect the overall performance of the clock
network?&lt;br/&gt;Research includes an extensive exploration theoretically to
determine the practicality of such a deskewing approach. A mathematical model
for the entire deskewing system is formulated as a multi-input, multi-output
(MIMO) discrete-time dynamic system. A stability analysis based upon the model
is being developed. This approach uses results from robust control theory that
can guarantee stability even for perturbed systems.&lt;br/&gt;