* 0205671
* ITR: Representations and Algorithms for Deformable Objects
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2010
* Jean-Claude Latombe, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2010
* USD 2,809,668.00

Deformable objects are ubiquitous in the physical world at all scales, from the
molecular to the astrophysical. Many of life's basic functions, from protein
folding and ligand binding at the micro level, to meiosis and mitosis at the
cellular level, to the beating of a heart at the macro level, are best described
as shape deformations in time. Flexible materials are finding increasing
applications in engineering, across areas such as testing and manufacturing, and
especially in biomedical applications, including prosthetic devices and
minimally invasive imaging and surgical procedures. Special effects in the
entertainment industry and haptics-based human-computer interfaces also require
better models for flexible objects. Though deformation in nature can be based on
a variety of underlying physical processes, we believe that there are a number
of unifying principles common to understanding all deformations. Today, however,
we lack a general computational theory of how to sense, represent, simulate,
approximate, actuate, control, and render deformable
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Goals and Methods&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this proposal is to undertake a foundational study of representations and
algorithms for the computational modeling of deformable objects. Such modeling
is challenging because deformations involve representations of shape and motion,
and bring together continuous and discrete phenomena, as well as local and
global constraints. Some of the specific challenges that have to be addressed
are:&lt;br/&gt;1. the behavior of deformable objects is defined by both geometry
and physics and characterized by complex high-dimensional energy landscapes that
need to be compactly encoded and efficiently interrogated for actuation,
control, and planning;&lt;br/&gt;2. physically accurate simulation of
deformations is of-ten computationally expensive; we must find ways to
approximate the full physics, while still guaranteeing the correctness, or at
least appropriateness, of the solution that we compute in the parts of the
system we care about;&lt;br/&gt;3. discrete events, such as collisions and self-
collisions, alter the continuous evolution law of the system; these events must
be efficiently predicted or detected, and processed;&lt;br/&gt;4. contact and
self-contact must be modeled across rapid changes in the contact manifold,
including its dimensionality (e.g., cloth draping over a rigid
object);&lt;br/&gt;5. deformations are often associated with changes in the
shape topology (e.g., the surgeon's scalpel cutting the patient's skin tissue);
such topology modifications must be smoothly accommodated in our
models.&lt;br/&gt;Towards this goal we have put together a team of PIs and
consultants/advisors that combines expertise in scientific computing and
physical simulation, geometric modeling and computation, motion planning and
control, local and distributed sensing and actuation, model parameter
estimation, as well as extensive experience in the computational modeling of
specific deformable objects, from molecules to textiles, and in applications
from medicine to entertainment &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;