* 0205974
* Collaborative Research:  Arecibo Radar Studies of Zodiacal and Interstellar Dust in the Solar System
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* David Meisel, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2005
* USD 84,221.00

AST 0205974 Meisel

Dr. David Meisel, at State University of New York at Geneseo, in collaboration
with Dr. John Mathews, at Penn State University, will conduct a 3-year
observational and analysis/modeling study of small particles in the Solar System
based on radar micrometeor observations performed at the Arecibo Observatory.
Knowledge of the distribution, sources, and gravitational, electrodynamical
evolution of interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) in the ~0.2-100 micron size
range is critical to the planetary sciences and-as extrasolar and interstellar
particles are also present-to local galactic science.

The Arecibo Observatory (AO) UHF radar has proven to be uniquely suited for
ground-based micrometeor observations that yield velocity, deceleration, and
radiant information-and thus orbits-of large numbers of interplanetary and
hyperbolic dust particles. Observational results now extend from 1997 through
the present with a steadily evolving technique that now yields meteoroid Doppler
speeds with instantaneous accuracies of as small as 10 m/sec (with meteoroid
speeds ranging over 10-90 km/sec thus far). This combined with a sorting
mechanism based on classical, in-atmosphere meteoroid dynamics, clearly
distinguishes down-the-beam particles from those meteoroids with a significant
across-the-beam velocity component. The new effort extends these studies to
details of IDP distribution/evolution in the solar system and considers the role
of the interstellar particle flux to the solar system as well as local galactic
processes/features illuminated by this flux.

The new observational/analysis/modeling study funded with this award will
continue providing routine sampling of IDPs including the expected earth-
crossing asteroidal-orbit particles, interstellar particles (ISPs), Jovian
perturbed and/or derived particles, and low-mass b particles ejected by
radiation pressure from the inner solar system. As the database of ISPs grows,
these researchers will continue theoretical/modeling studies of the flux and
origins of the largest of the interstellar particles. Thus far they can account
for all AO ISPs as being products of the same supernova that produced the
Geminga pulsar. This effort has involved and will continue to involve
undergraduates from SUNY-Geneseo, Penn State, and other institutions and
graduate students from Penn State as well as the staff of Arecibo Observatory
and other organizations. Results from these efforts appear in several courses
including electromagnetics, astrophysics, and plasmas at both Geneseo and Penn
State. ***

