* 0205523
* ITR:    Scalable Molecular Electronics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Bruce Maggs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,500,000.00

PROPOSAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalable Molecular
Electronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We are approaching the end of a remarkably
successful era in computing: The era where Moore's Law reigns, where processing
power per dollar doubles every year. This success is based in large part on
advances in complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS)-based integrated
circuits. Although we have come to expect, and plan for, the exponential
increase in processing power in our everyday lives, today Moore's Law faces
imminent challenges both from the physics of deep-submicron CMOS devices and
from the enormous costs of chip masks and next-generation fabrication
plants.&lt;br/&gt; A promising alternative to CMOS-based computing being
investigated is chemically assembled electronic nanotechnology (CAEN).
Electronic nanotechnology (EN) constructs electronic circuits out of nanometer-
scale devices that take advantage of quantum-mechanical effects. The fundamental
strategy of CAEN is to substitute compilation time (which is inexpensive) for
manufacturing precision (which is ex-pensive). The research will be directed at
integrating defect measurements with computer architecture and compiler
technology to create circuits from chemically assembled structures.&lt;br/&gt;
Using EN to build computer systems requires new ways of thinking about computing
devices; spanning everything from circuits to compilers. Unlike conventional
CMOS, CAEN cannot be used to construct complex structures. Instead, one
fabricates dense regular (but potentially defective) structures, which we call
nanoFabrics, that can be programmed after fabrication to implement complex
circuits. The proposed research investigates how to scale CAEN to create useful
computational devices with more than 10^10 gate-equivalents per cm^2 by
developing new circuit technology, reconfigurable computing, defect tolerance,
architectural abstractions and innovative compiler technology While the
researchers will not be designing the EN devices themselves, their goal is to
show how they can be used to create computing devices and guide EN scientists in
their development of the underlying technology. The investigators approach this
problem at four levels:&lt;br/&gt; Logical Building Blocks: The researchers will
develop models of EN devices and new circuit simulation technology that will
allow predictions of performance across important metrics such as power, speed,
density, area, and delay. These models will be used to design and determine the
characteristics of logical circuit building blocks, nanoBlocks, for computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt; Manufacturing: Due to the nature of EN and specifically CAEN
fabrication, the devices will have defects. The investigators will develop
methods which will allow systems based on EN devices to transparently work in
the presence of such defects.&lt;br/&gt; Computer Architecture: The researchers
will develop a hierarchy of abstract machines that support re-configurable
computing and hide complexity. A split-phase abstract machine (SAM) will be used
to partition programs into processes, which will be mapped to an abstract
machine composed of tiles arranged on a 2-D grid. Each tile will contain four
components: a finite state machine, a data path segment, a local memory, and a
router. Tiles may be grouped together into a complete pipelined datapath. The
tiles themselves will be implemented in nanoBlocks, the basic unit of the
nanoFabric.&lt;br/&gt; Compilation: Compilation technology will be developed to
map programs written in general-purpose programming languages, e.g. C or Java,
to nanoFabrics. The research will focus on ensuring that the compiler will scale
to nanoFabrics, which can have hundreds of millions of components. The compiler
decomposes an application into a series of independent SAMs based on control
flow and memory access patterns. They are developing a new intermediate
representation with a precise semantics that turns all control flow into data
flow. The IR unifies predication, speculation and static-single assignment and
makes explicit data flow, control flow, and synchronization. This leads to an
enormous simplification of many optimizations and provides the framework for
formal translation and optimization validation of the compiler. &lt;br/&gt; This
research has the potential to utilize, and guide the development of, electronic
nanotechnology to inexpensively produce low-power circuits a million times more
dense than conventional CMOS circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;