* 0205791
* Sharp Inequalities for Sums and Functions of Dependent Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Victor de  la Pena, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Wen Chen Masters
* 07/31/2005
* USD 261,300.00

0205791&lt;br/&gt;de la Pena&lt;br/&gt; In this project the Principal
Investigator (PI) introduces three related problem areas of key importance in
the study of the probabilistic and statistical properties of sums and functions
of independent and dependent random variables. In particular, the PI proposes to
develop sharp inequalities for the moments of self-normalized processes, as well
as for sums of multilinear forms and U-statistics (unbiased statistics) in
independent and dependent variables. In addition, the PI intends to further
develop a novel approach to approximating the expected time it takes a process
(with a general dependence structure) to hit a given boundary. The interest in
the study of self-normalized processes stems from their use as key quantities in
the development of non-parametric estimators, as well as for their use as
pivotal quantities for the creation of confidence intervals and tests of
hypothesis. For example, the t-statistic is a self-normalized and unit-less
estimator commonly used in the testing of hypotheses about the mean of a
distribution with unknown variance. The interest on sharp results for self-
normalized estimators is based in part in the need for approximating p-values
and the power of tests in situations when the assumptions on the variables need
to be relaxed (e.g. independence, normality and/or identical distribution). The
study of results related to sums of multilinear forms and U-statistics is
related to their use as building blocks in the development of certain stochastic
integrals, as well as for their use as the typical unbiased estimators in
statistics. Moreover, sums of multilinear forms in independent random variables
are frequently used in approximating non-linear estimators of moving averages,
which are of fundamental importance in econometric studies. &lt;br/&gt; The
proposed work concerning the development of new and improved tools (under
relaxed assumptions) for the study of statistical estimators is important for
the assessment of hypotheses with direct implications in medical and social
sciences as well as engineering through its connection to the comparison of
competing treatments and technologies under a wider set of scenarios than is
currently possible. The study on how long it takes for a random process to hit a
boundary, on the basis of historical evidence, has potential important
implications in the physical sciences and economics including in the study of
how long it will take for 1) a tornado to hit a city, 2) a person to develop
cancer, 3) an earthquake to occur or 4) the stock market to crash&lt;br/&gt;