* 0205328
* ITR: Modelling and Simulations of Quantum Phenomena in Semiconductor Structures of Reduced Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Xiao-Qian Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 2,800,000.00

This award is made under the Information Technology Research initiative. The
Division of Materials Research funds this award with cofunding from the
Chemistry Division.

A collaboration involving Georgia Tech, Clark Atlanta, and Cornell Universities
will carry out a comprehensive investigation of the structural and electronic
properties of one-dimensional nanowires. State-of-the-art atomistic simulation
and electronic-structure methods will be used, including density functional
theory, ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, quantum Monte Carlo methods,
and many-body perturbation theory. These methods are complementary; each focuses
on different aspects of nanowire quantum properties. The goal of the study is to
understand the determining factors in growth processes and the effect of
dimensionality and size on various physical properties, and to explore possible
novel phenomena exhibited in these systems.

This study of nanowires is enabled by information technology and impacts
information technology in two ways. First new algorithms and parallelization
schemes will be developed to properly handle the geometry of these systems and
to increase computational efficiency. Second, the influence of theoretical and
computational work on fundamental experimental research may provide the
foundation for future information technologies.

Educational and outreach activities will introduce young students, especially
minority students in Atlanta, to forefront scientific research using information
technology. Other activities include a special monthly seminar series on
applications of information technology, a new course on computational approaches
to scientific and engineering problems, and scientific workshops to train new
users to use codes developed in the course of the research.

%%% This award is made under the Information Technology Research initiative. The
Division of Materials Research funds this award with cofunding from the
Chemistry Division.

A collaboration involving Georgia Tech, Clark Atlanta, and Cornell Universities
will carry out a comprehensive investigation of physical properties and growth
processes of one-dimensional nanowires. State-of-the-art computational condensed
matter and materials physics methods will be used. The goal of this study is to
understand the determining factors in the growth process and the effect of low
dimensionality and size on various physical properties, and to explore possible
novel phenomena exhibited in these systems. Nanowires are one-dimensional
nanometer scale atomic structures. They can be at once, functional devices and
the wires that access them. Controlled doping and assembly of freestanding
single-crystal semiconductor nanowires has been achieved within the last few
years. Prototype structures have already been constructed that function as
nanoscale devices, such as light-emitting diodes, bipolar transistors, logic
gates, photodetectors, and biological and chemical sensors.

This study of nanowires is enabled by information technology and impacts
information technology in two ways. First new algorithms and computational
techniques will be developed. Second through information technology enabled or
catalyzed fundamental scientific advances that may provide the foundation for
future information technologies.

Educational and outreach activities will introduce young students, especially
minority students in Atlanta, to forefront scientific research using information
technology. Other activities include a special monthly seminar series on
applications of information technology, a new course on computational approaches
to scientific and engineering problems, and scientific workshops to train new
users to use codes developed in the course of the research. ***











