* 0205843
* Assessing the Impact of a Visit to a Zoo or Aquarium:  A Multi-institutional Research Project
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Cynthia Vernon, American Zoo & Aquarium Association
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2010
* USD 901,686.00

"Assessing the Impact of a Visit to a Zoo or Aquarium: A Multi-institutional
Research Project" will create a functional taxonomy of zoo/aquarium visitors'
entering knowledge, attitudes and behaviors. This taxonomy, in conjunction with
data about the specific experiences visitors have during their visit, will
enable investigators to understand and predict the contribution of zoos and
aquariums to the public understanding of animals and their conservation. The
results will clarify the role of zoos and aquariums as centers of informal
learning and point to ways to strengthen their educational
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AZA convened a national advisory committee that
commissioned and completed a thorough review, confirming a critical need to
conduct more research, particularly research that attempts to ask broad
questions, collect data systematically, and includes sufficient number and types
of institutions to permit community-wide generalizations. Twelve AZA
institutions of various sizes, geographic regions and types will participate in
the study. The net result of the study will be a descriptive model of zoo and
aquarium visitor learning experiences and development of a set of diagnostic
tools to help zoo and aquaria staff understand and enhance the nature and extent
of their public impact.