* 0205265
* Collaborative Research: ITR: Acquiring Accurate Dynamic Field Data Using Lightweight Instrumentation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2009
* Adam Porter, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 606,001.00

0205625,0205118, 0205429, 0205627 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Collaborative
Research: ITR: Acquiring Accurate Dynamic Field&lt;br/&gt;Data Using Lightweight
Instrumentation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic analyses, such as testing and
profiling, play a key role in state-of-art approaches to software quality
assurance (QA). With rare exception, these analyses are performed in-house, on
developer&lt;br/&gt;platforms, using developer-provided input workloads.
Shortcomings of this approach include that the results simply cannot be trusted
to tell us how the software actually performs in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to give developers unprecedented
insight into the actual runtime behavior of their software, allowing developers
(and ultimately the software itself) to change, optimize, and adapt the software
based on highly accurate field data. Lightweight, collaborative dynamic analyses
conducted around-the-world and around-the-clock form the new platform: (1)
lightly instrument fielded software (i.e., each program copy performs a small
part of the analysis) (2) collect the partial data from many instances of the
software, fusing it to conduct the complete analysis, (3) change the running
program instances based on the findings and (4) repeat the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seven critical research challenges form the core
of the project: &lt;br/&gt;1. Lightweight instrumentation--Develop
instrumentation that is virtually transparent to individual users. 2.
Compositional analysis techniques--Develop distributed analysis techniques that
decompose&lt;br/&gt;traditional analyses into smaller steps, distribute the
steps among multiple users, and then fuse each user's results into an accurate
solution to the original problem. 3. Scalability--Develop storage&lt;br/&gt;and
analysis techniques to deal with the high data volumes we expect to encounter.
4. Anomaly Detection--Define data-driven techniques to automatically identify
anomalous behaviors of deployed&lt;br/&gt;software. 5. Privacy and Security--
Incorporate privacy and security safeguards into our data collection and
analysis approaches. 6. Dynamic updating mechanisms--Develop techniques to make
runtime changes to the location and function of instrumentation, and to parts of
the software itself. 7. Validate approach on
industrial&lt;br/&gt;software.&lt;br/&gt;