* 0205733
* ITR: Deployment-Oriented Security and Content Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2007
* Dan Boneh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,870,000.00

One of the difficulties facing computer security systems is getting users and
administrators to adopt them. The project studies a new approach to deploying
security services called Deployment-Oriented&lt;br/&gt;Security. The first
question is how to deploy security services in a viral-like fashion. The idea is
that once a small set of users adopt a security system, they gradually get their
friends to adopt the&lt;br/&gt;system and as a result the service propagates
through the population. The project studies how this meme-like strategy applies
to various security services such as secure e-mail, anonymity
mechanisms,&lt;br/&gt;electronic voting, secure file systems, e-cash, etc.
Another approach to promoting the deployment of security systems is to deploy
the required infrastructure on the fly. For example, can one deploy
an&lt;br/&gt;anonymizing server or a fair-exchange service on the fly to enable
that service? How does one identify trusted hosts to deploy the service and how
does one revoke corrupt or misbehaving hosts? The&lt;br/&gt;third topic studied
in this project is how to deploy protection mechanisms in environments where
information is being shared. The project will use new cryptographic tools to
develop efficient key &lt;br/&gt;management techniques for broadcast
data.&lt;br/&gt;