* 0205124
* Laboratory Spectroscopy for Studies of Metal-Poor Halo Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Lawler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 207,494.00

AST 0205124 Lawler

The study of abundances of the heavy elements in metal-poor halo stars is
contributing to a more quantitative understanding of stellar nucleosynthesis and
Galactic chronometry. The odd-even sawtooth pattern of abundances throughout the
lanthanides is examined to separate out the contributions of the r- and s-
processes (synthesis by rapid and slow neutron capture) throughout the evolution
of the Galaxy. The abundances of the radioactive chronometers Th and U are
measured along with abundances of other near-lying r-process elements such as
Os, Ir and Pt to determine stellar age and thereby put a lower limit on the
Galactic age.

Abundance accuracy is key in these studies, and yet the database of transition
probabilities on which the abundance determination depends is sorely lacking for
many of the heavy elements. Often astronomers must make use of solar gf-values
which have many sources of uncertainty, particularly for heavy elements which
are relatively weak in comparison to the Fe group in the solar spectrum. Old
laboratory measurements and semi-empirical results are also often used, although
they are known to have large errors for weaker lines. With modern beam-laser
techniques, gf-values can be eliminated as the major source of uncertainty in
solar and stellar abundance determinations.

Dr. James Lawler and colleagues, at the University of Wisconsin, will conduct
laboratory measurements of large sets of accurate, absolute transition
probabilities. Transition probabilities will be determined by combining
radiative lifetimes with branching fractions. The radiative lifetimes will be
measured using time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence on a slow beam of
atoms/ions. Branching fractions will be measured using Fourier transform
spectroradiometry. Priority will be given to the lanthanide spectrum Nd II, as
well as spectra of important chronometers Th II and U II. The gf-values of these
spectra have been identified as the most in need of improvement, and as critical
in studies of halo stars. As time and resources allow, measurements will
continue on the spectra Os I, Pt I and Ir I, which have also been identified as
needing improved gf-values, and as important in studies of halo stars. ****

