* 0206169
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Breathing Mechanisms in the Archosauria
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Farish Jenkins, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 11/30/2004
* USD 9,986.00

Dissertation Research: Evolutions of Breathing Mechanisms in the Archosauria
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Farish Jenkins &amp; Leon
Claessens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the origin of vertebrate
respiratory systems- how very different lung structures and breathing mechanisms
evolved- has been constrained by the rarity of soft-tissue preservation in the
fossil record. The problem may be circumvented by taking an integrative approach
that employs both observations on living animals and a survey of hard tissue
structures preserved in extinct forms. The project will focus on the evolution
of lung ventilation in the Archosauria, a group of animals that includes
dinosaurs, crocodilians and birds. The two living archosaurian groups, birds and
crocodilians, exhibit distinct and seemingly unique respiratory mechanisms. Bird
lungs are interconnected with non-respiratory air sacs, and air 'circulates'
unidirectionally through lungs of fixed size; crocodilians have two-way flow and
an accessory muscle that moves the lungs. The skeletal movements of the
respiratory cycle (inhalation and exhalation) in birds and crocodilians have not
been studied in detail. This work will represent the first attempt to correlate
the mechanics of respiration with a detailed analysis of bony features,
especially those that are indicators of specific movements and those that
constrain movement. This combined approach represents the most promising basis
on which to trace the evolution of diverse respiratory systems that is
represented with the Archosauria.&lt;br/&gt; Specifically, this investigation
will:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Analyze the respiratory kinematics of the trunk skeleton of
birds and crocodilians through cineradiography (x-ray recording of living
animals);&lt;br/&gt; 2. Identify and trace osteological (bony) characters and
their functional implications within the archosaurian fossil record;&lt;br/&gt;
3. Assess the functional and structural data in a phylogenetic context (that is,
in terms of evolutionary relationships inferred from other evidence) to
understand evolutionary patterns. &lt;br/&gt;