* 0206596
* Dissertation Research: Comparative Phylogeography of Six Philippine Fruit Bats &amp;lt;Pteropodidae&amp;gt;
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Lawrence Heaney, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

This project will investigate patterns of genetic variation across the
geographic ranges of six Philippine fruit bat species, examining how
distribution, geologic history, and ecology contribute to these patterns and how
continued divergence is occurring in this group. These species represent the
three major ways in which Philippine mammals are distributed: two are widespread
in Southeast Asia, two are found throughout the Philippines, and two are found
only in single subregions within the Philippines. The ancestral relationships
among individuals and populations in each species will be determined using DNA
sequences from two genes. Statistical methods based on these relationships and
on population genetic theory will be used to infer and compare the demographic
histories of these species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative approaches have
become powerful tools in the study of regional patterns of biodiversity. A study
of six closely related species will allow the rigorous analysis of evolutionary
processes in the Philippines, an archipelago with a complex history. It will
help identify the processes generating species richness in this area, which has
some of the world's highest levels of biodiversity. Studying the processes
driving evolution in places like the Philippines is necessary in order to
understand current biogeographic patterns worldwide. Understanding the
particular ways in which evolution acts on islands and archipelagoes is also
crucial for conserving species in increasingly fragmented, island-like
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;