* 0206584
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Functional Significance of Elaborate Plumage Characters when Expressed in both Sexes: A Case Study of the Turquoise-Browed Motmot (Eumomota superciliosa)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Stephen Emlen, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Functional significance of elaborate plumage characters when expressed in both
sexes: a case study of the turquoise-browed motmot (Eumomota superciliosa)

Stephen T. Emlen - Professor Troy G. Murphy - Graduate Student



Elaborate plumage is generally found in sexually dimorphic species of birds and
is thought to be the product of sexual selection. When found in both males and
females, this presents a paradox because females generally do not compete for
access to males. Such elaborate, monomorphic characters may be products of
natural selection acting equally on the sexes, or they may be products of mutual
sexual selection acting equally on the sexes. The latter may occur in cases
where both males and females compete for access to mates.

This project is designed to test the adaptive function of extreme avian plumage
elaboration when expressed equally in each sex. The focal species is the
monomorphic and brilliantly plumed turquoise-browed motmot (Coraciiformes:
Momotidae: Eumomota superciliosa) which breeds at colonial breeding grounds in
Northern Yucatan, Mexico. Both males and females of this socially monogamous
species have a number of equally exaggerated plumage characters, most notably of
which is an elongate tail that terminates in large oval-shaped rackets that
extend far below the body of the bird. This investigation will address whether
the elaborate racket-tipped tail functions as a sexual signal used in
competition for mates, or if it functions in a utilitarian context driven by
natural selection.

Five hypotheses for the function of the elaborate plumage will be tested using
behavioral observations and experimental manipulations. Information gathered
from this study will increase the scientific knowledge on the selective forces
that maintain elaborate characters in monomorphic species.

