* 0206403
* Technoquest
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Jan Dabrowski, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,821,569.00

The Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) will design, develop, evaluate
and install "Technoquest," a permanent 6,000 square foot interactive technology
exhibition for families, underrepresented groups, school groups and OMSI's
general audience. "Technoquest" will fill OMSI's Technology Hall with a suite of
highly interactive, exciting and engaging hands-on educational exhibits,
computer simulations, audio and video components, text, graphics and artifacts.
The exhibition hall will be divided into five thematic areas: industrial
technology (robotics), medical technology, transportation technology, computer
technology and communications technology. Other experiences will include a
quick-change area for rapidly exhibiting emerging technologies and a Technology
Lab where activities conveying a deeper understanding of the general principles
of technology will be presented. Ancillary educational materials will be
disseminated to the general public and to educators via print, the exhibition
website, teacher workshops and professional development workshops for informal
science educators. Content of the exhibition and ancillary materials will focus
on general educational principles established by the International Technology
Education Association (ITEA) that emphasize the processes common to all forms of
technology and that align with state and national science standards. Principal
concepts include The Nature of Technology, Technology and Society, Design,
Abilities in a Technological World, and The Designed World. These principles
will be reinforced throughout the exhibition. Each thematic area will highlight
all five key principles of technology as defined by the ITEA.