* 0206761
* Dissertation Research: Diversity, Specificity, and Dynamics of Rhizobia-legumes Associations in Canyons of the Sonoran Desert
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Judith Bronstein, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Recently, there has been growing interest in legume-
rhizobia associations as&lt;br/&gt;model systems for studying mutualisms, but a
central obstacle is that little is known about&lt;br/&gt;the genetic structure
of native communities. We know that associations can be specific&lt;br/&gt;or
promiscuous, but very few studies have described spatial or temporal variation
in&lt;br/&gt;native rhizobia-legume communities. We intent to examine levels of
spatial and&lt;br/&gt;temporal variation in communities of rhizobia and legumes
in natural environments. We&lt;br/&gt;will compare associations at various
geographic scales, from within nodules to between&lt;br/&gt;canyons. We will
measure how associations change over time, considering
variation&lt;br/&gt;between months, seasons, and years. By considering
specificity of associations and the&lt;br/&gt;genetic structure of a native
community, our goal is to better understand the potential
for&lt;br/&gt;coevolution to shape this mutualism. The proposed work uses
sequences from 1329&lt;br/&gt;strains from 15 plant species to characterize the
effect of plant taxa, microhabitat&lt;br/&gt;differences, and seasonal
differences on rhizobial genetic variation and specificity
of&lt;br/&gt;associations. We will contribute to the understanding of this
imporant mutualism by&lt;br/&gt;seeking to describe natural systems in detail,
characterizing rhizobial genetic diversity,&lt;br/&gt;and measuring the extent
that specialization and generalization is achieved in
naturally&lt;br/&gt;evolving populations.