* 0206448
* Dissertation Research: Resistance to Herbicide and Susceptibility to Herbivores: Testing the Mechanistic Basis of a Trade-off and its Population-level Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Douglas Futuyma, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2003
* USD 5,250.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Futuyma 0206448&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will test the mechanisms by which herbivorous insects affect the
cost of resistance to the herbicide triazine in pigweed Amaranthus hybridus
(Amaranthaceae). The triazine-resistance mutation imposes a cost by slowing
photosynthesis. Mutant plants are preferentially eaten by herbivores, are less
tolerant of feeding damage, and suffer an increased fitness cost when exposed to
herbivores. &lt;br/&gt;This work will address how the availability of light and
nutrients affects a mutant plant's allocation to carbon-based defenses and its
susceptibility to herbivores. The potential for herbivores to impose frequency-
dependent selection will be tested. Additionally, the researchers will test if a
mutant plant's increased allocation to carbon acquisition (i.e. leaves) at the
expense of nutrient and water acquisition (i.e. roots) causes its reduced
tolerance. &lt;br/&gt;This research will provide an independent test of how
photosynthetic rate shapes patterns of defense and tolerance, and it will
contribute to future strategies for managing resistance to
herbicide.&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will test the mechanisms by which
herbivorous insects affect the cost of resistance to the herbicide triazine in
pigweed Amaranthus hybridus (Amaranthaceae). The triazine-resistance mutation
imposes a cost by slowing photosynthesis. Mutant plants are preferentially eaten
by herbivores, are less tolerant of feeding damage, and suffer an increased
fitness cost when exposed to herbivores. &lt;br/&gt;This work will address how
the availability of light and nutrients affects a mutant plant's allocation to
carbon-based defenses and its susceptibility to herbivores. The potential for
herbivores to impose frequency-dependent selection will be tested. Additionally,
the researchers will test if a mutant plant's increased allocation to carbon
acquisition (i.e. leaves) at the expense of nutrient and water acquisition (i.e.
roots) causes its reduced tolerance. &lt;br/&gt;This research will provide an
independent test of how photosynthetic rate shapes patterns of defense and
tolerance, and it will contribute to future strategies for managing resistance
to herbicide.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;