* 0206549
* Dissertation Research: Examining the Effects of Large Scale Migration on Local Population and Community Dynamics in Larval Odonates
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Patrick Crumrine, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 11/30/2003
* USD 3,709.00

&lt;br/&gt;Large scale movement patterns can influence the spatio-temporal
occurrence of&lt;br/&gt;size-structure within and between populations but few
studies explicitly address how&lt;br/&gt;these patterns affect interactions such
as cannibalism and intraguild predation (IGP). The&lt;br/&gt;dragonfly Anax
junius is a species that migrates and often assumes the role of
top-&lt;br/&gt;predator in fishless ponds. These attributes make A. junius an
ideal species for&lt;br/&gt;addressing the influence of migration on population
size structure and local&lt;br/&gt;population/community dynamics. We outline
experiments with A. junius and other co-&lt;br/&gt;occurring odonate larvae
evaluating these effects.&lt;br/&gt;Section I tests: a) the effects of size
variation on cannibalism in paired A. junius&lt;br/&gt;larvae and the likelihood
of cannibalism within and between cohorts of A. junius;&lt;br/&gt;and b) the
effects of size-structure and temperature, two seasonally
variable&lt;br/&gt;factors, on cannibalism in populations of A. junius
larvae.&lt;br/&gt;Section II tests the effects of population size-structure in a
top predator (A. junius)&lt;br/&gt;on: a) the survival of intermediate predators
and shared prey in a three species&lt;br/&gt;IGP system; and b) the relative
contributions of density mediated interactions and&lt;br/&gt;trait mediated
interactions on risk reduction in a three species IGP system.