* 0206439
* Dissertation Research: Genetic Differentiation Among Populations Of Euphydryas Editha
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Michael Singer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed work is a sequel to a long-term study of the influence of logging
on populations of Euphydryas editha butterfly in Sequoia National Forest,
California. Prior work showed that logging influenced the evolution of diet in
the butterflies. They acquired a novel hostplant in habitat patches that had
been logged, but retained their traditional diet in undisturbed patches.
Population growth was faster in the disturbed patches, but insects emigrated
disproportionately from those patches, partly because they retained a preference
for their traditional habitat and hostplant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will examine genetic differentiation both within this disturbed system and
between this system and other populations of the same species within a distance
of 50 km. The investigators will conduct an equivalent study on an unlogged
system in Yosemite National Park and environs. These two studies will ask what
genetic differentiation naturally existed among populations of this butterfly
and how human activities might be affecting it. The work will also examine how
much genetic differentiation among populations is associated with the distance
between habitats, the nature of the landscape in the intervening terrain, and
the adaptations of the insects to particular host plant
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human intervention in the landscape affects
herbivorous insects in dramatic ways. Introduction of exotic plants alters the
range of plant species available as food. Ranching and logging techniques also
change the relative qualities of existing native plants. For example, in the
current study system logging removed the insects' principal hostplant but
incidentally provided a novel host by improving the quality (from the insects'
perspective) of a native plant species. Changes in the insects' environment
influence their patterns of movement among habitats and their likelihoods of
successfully reproducing when they do move. These effects on movement will in
turn affect the tendency for populations to differ from each other genetically.
This genetic differentiation among populations is the focus of the proposed
work, which will illuminate both the natural patterns that exist and the
influence that human activities are having upon those
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;