* 0206687
* Dissertation Research:  Effects of Behavior on Predator-prey Interactions in Heterogeneous Space
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Gregory Dwyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 05/31/2003
* USD 5,595.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Spatial heterogeneity and movement behavior can
greatly influence predator-prey population dynamics. Much progress has been made
in understanding the consequences of spatial structure and exploiter behavior
using experiments and models. However, despite overwhelming experimental
evidence that many prey modify their behavior in the face of predation risk, few
models include this important feature. Monarch butterfly larvae exist in a
system that is well suited to exploring the effects of both predator and prey
behavior in a spatially heterogeneous landscape. Experiments will be performed
involving monarch caterpillars and predatory wasps that will reveal the ability
of predators to generate positive spatial covariance with prey. Similarly, the
ability of prey to generate negative covariance with predators will be measured.
Computer simulations and mathematical models will then be built that use this
information in order to explore the consequences of incremental changes in
spatial structure and predator and prey behavior (e.g., movement rate and
distance). Because many species migrate (e.g., birds, fish, ungulates, and
monarch butterflies) or immigrate (e.g., corn ear worms and other crop pests)
into patchy habitats, the focus is on the consequences of these important
components of biological systems to single season dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;