* 0206614
* Dissertation Research:  Thermal Acclimation as a Tool for the Investigation of Membrane Raft Structure and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2004
* Jeffrey Hazel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 04/30/2004
* USD 8,654.00

Dissertation Research: Thermal Acclimation as a Tool for the Investigation of
Membrane Raft Structure and Function&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jeffrey R. Hazel
&amp; John Zehmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells are bounded by an outer envelope,
the plasma membrane, made up of lipid and protein molecules. Evidence has
accumulated in the last ten years that specific lipids and proteins are
organized into clusters, called rafts, which help organize the molecular
machinery of cellular communication. The cells of cold-blooded animals make
substantial lipid compositional changes to the plasma membrane during
acclimation to a new temperature. These changes allow the cells to continue to
function properly despite the temperature change. An increase in temperature
should overcome the forces holding rafts together. Therefore, some of the
compositional changes made in response to a change in temperature probably serve
to strengthen rafts. Examining this acclimation response in trout liver cells
should help elucidate the means by which rafts are held together and how rafts
assist in cellular communication. This research will determine 1) if the
clustering of raft molecules is maintained during thermal acclimation, 2) what
lipid compositional changes account for this maintenance, 3) if membrane
viscosity, an important membrane property, is conserved in rafts during
acclimation, and 4) if cellular communication is dependent on raft clustering.