* 0206943
* Assessing Student Transfer and Retention of Learning in Mathematics, Physics, and Engineering Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This project is based on the theme that assessment is most useful when it is
closest to instruction, in both form and time. Summative assessments at the end
of a program provide necessary feedback, but are often of limited value in
guiding improved achievement. Such assessment takes place several years after
instruction in basic concepts and changes in instructors and instruction during
the intervening time may make the feedback appear irrelevant. In addition,
faculty members are often distrustful of reports where the faculty members lack
first hand knowledge of the assessment procedure. To be most effective in
improving design and conduct of actual courses, the instructors in the course
should use the assessment tools themselves, preferably during the conduct of the
course. Because the main reason for STEM majors taking core engineering science
courses is to prepare them for future courses, the most important aspect of
assessment is the ability of students to transfer their learning to new contexts
in later courses. Assessment should not only serve the purpose of the instructor
or the institution it should also aid the students in recognizing their own
achievements and in guiding the students to improve their understanding. The
goal of this project is to design online assessment tools that can be easily
integrated into core engineering science courses and that are capable of
answering the following questions:&lt;br/&gt; What specific material have the
students learned in core engineering science courses in mathematics and
physics?&lt;br/&gt; What understanding do the students have of the material they
have learned? Is it just disconnected facts and procedures, a broad conceptual
picture informed by careful understanding of the details, or something in
between? If it is something in between, can we describe more exactly what
understanding they have gained?&lt;br/&gt; How much (and what type of) knowledge
do the students retain after specific classes have ended.&lt;br/&gt; Can the
students use the material they have learned in new situations in their
professional courses? How consistently do they use the understanding developed
in core engineering science courses when encountering these ideas in new
contexts? In the best case, can we predict in advance whether students have
gained the necessary understanding to successfully apply their knowledge in new
contexts?&lt;br/&gt;Early versions of the sought after assessment tools have
been developed under an earlier grant: "Technology &amp; Model- Based Conceptual
Assessment: Research on Students Applications of Models in Physics and
Mathematics" funded by the NSF ROLE program (REC-0087788). Model Analysis is
being used to develop and validate the tools. These tools are providing great
insight into student conceptual understanding and learning styles, and this
project is expanding their use to more core classes, and extending the focus
from basic research on student learning to assessment of learning and conceptual
understanding. The assessment tools we are developing are providing real-time
feedback to both instructors and students, enabling both to adjust the teaching
and learning process to improve student achievement in terms of conceptual
understanding and the ability to transfer learning to new contexts.