* 0206237
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Pre-Copulatory Reproductive Cannibalism: The Ecology of an Extreme Reproductive Conflict
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Andrew Sih, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 9,612.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Pre-copulatory reproductive cannibalism: the ecology of
an extreme reproductive conflict&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David F.
Westneat&lt;br/&gt;James Chadwick Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reproductive
cannibalism, specifically female consumption of the male prior to, during, or
immediately following copulation, occurs in several organisms and is a dramatic
example of how ecology can shape behavior. Of particular interest are species
exhibiting pre-copulatory reproductive cannibalism, or predation of the male by
the female during courtship but prior to sperm transfer. In such cases, the
costs of the behavior to males (death) and females (loss of a mate) are readily
apparent. In contrast, the benefits of pre-copulatory reproductive cannibalism
remain poorly understood. This research program is designed to uncover the
functional significance of pre-copulatory reproductive cannibalism in the North
American fishing spider (Dolomedes triton). Four hypotheses for pre-copulatory
reproductive cannibalism will be tested. First, males may be a source of food
for the predatory, adult female. Second, female attacks of males before mating
may be an extreme form of mate rejection behavior. Third, pre-copulatory attacks
may be the incidental by-product of selection for highly voracious predatory
behavior in a multitude of other contexts. Finally, pre-copulatory attacks may
occur because males simulate prey items in order to attract the female's
attention. If these attacks fail sufficiently often, then such males may mate
more often than males who court females in a less risky fashion. The study will
thus enhance our understanding of how ecology influences the evolution of
extreme behavior between the sexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;