* 0206456
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanical Properties and Functional Morphology of Mammalian Footpads
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2004
* Steven Vogel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2004
* USD 9,996.00

Dr. Virginia L. Roth &amp; Kai-Jung Chi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Footpads are found
universally in terrestrial mammals; however, how footpads function during
locomotion is poorly understood. At each step, footpads are believed to cushion
impact, stabilize the foot, and return elastic energy. To perform all these
roles, the pad must have the paradoxical properties of being compliant and
stiff, resilient and damped. This study proposes a solution to this apparent
paradox- the footpad has mechanical anisotropy. This hypothesis has been
supported by results on plantigrade footpads in the context of locomotion, and
will be tested on two lineages that evolved digitigrady separately: cats and
dogs. Furthermore, this study also proposes to identify the morphological
determinants that explain footpads' mechanical variation observed both intra-
and interspecifically. Mechanical and morphological parameters measured on each
species will be compared to examine whether footpad properties reflect locomotor
habits as suggested in previous studies. The goals of this study will be
achieved by three approaches: (1) Investigation of foot kinematics and
mechanical roles of footpads in moving digitigrade mammals, (2) Measurement of
compressive and shear properties of isolated footpads both statically and
dynamically, and (3) Examination of the compositional and structural morphology
of footpads. This study will provide the first experimental and comparative
analysis of mechanisms of footpad function, especially in the context of
locomotion. Such an integrative study will lay the framework for future work
focused on structure and function of pads in animals less tolerant of laboratory
conditions, and on scaling, adaptation, diversity, and evolution of mammalian
feet and footpads.