* 0206488
* Dissertation Research:  The Evolution of Specialized Floral Phenotypes in a Generalist Pollination Environment:  Fitness Trade-offs in a Dudleya Species Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Nickolas Waser, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 3,845.00

Plants that are pollinated by several different types of animal nevertheless
often have features which appear to adapt them to one particular type. The
proposed research explores how such specialized adaptations can arise in a
generalized "pollination environment", using several related plant species
native to the southwestern US. Experiments in natural populations and in a
flight cage will determine which pollinators (hummingbirds or bumblebees) are
most important in selecting for particular features of flowers (flower length
and width), and the degree to which flowers better adapted to one pollinator
still can make use of the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring how floral
adaptation arises, the research furthers our understanding of the evolution of
distinct plant species, and thus the generation of biodiversity. An accelerating
"biodiversity crisis", caused by extinction of species from human activities, is
central to the science of conservation biology. Conservation biologists must
understand how to prevent extinctions, but equally must understand the
conditions that allow new species to evolve to replace extinct ones. The
proposed experiments with a model plant-pollinator system will help us
understand how the great diversity of flowering plant species has evolved, and
thus how to promote ongoing evolution of new species and maintenance of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;