* 0206046
* The Brain:  The Final Frontier (Production Proposal)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* JoAnna Baldwin-Mallory, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,836,683.00

Massachusetts General Hospital, representing Partners HealthCare System, Inc.,
is producing a large format film on the brain that is designed to increase the
popular understanding of brain biology and recent advances in neuroscience.
Framed within the larger question of the unique abilities of the human mind, the
project will take an interdisciplinary look at brain science and raise questions
about the nature and biological basis of diverse aspects of human experience
including consciousness. By following a rider in the Tour de France, the film
will illustrate how the brain functions in both normal and stressful situations.
Major sequences will explore vision, memory and emotion. Slightly shorter
sequences will delve into imagination and creativity, language, dreams and pain.
Brief "interludes" will allow the film to reflect on the brain as it is
represented in a range of human capabilities. Finally, the film turns it
attention to consciousness, self-awareness and the totality of experiencing life
as a human. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach components of the project
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A weeklong national symposium for museum
educators, teachers, and community organizations from all regions of the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Follow up regional "Brain Workshops" designed to
provide more focused project support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The Brain:
Exploratory Trips Into the Final Frontier" -- An Educator/Student Activity
Guide&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fun Facts Family Guide to "The Brain"
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Educational Lobby Kiosk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Head
Trip: A Voyage Through the Young Human Mind" -- An illustrated instructional
brochure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Brain Website&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The film will
be directed by Bayley Silleck whose prior large format films include "Cosmic
Voyage" and "Lost Worlds: Life in the Balance." The lead scientific advisors are
Dr. Dennis Selkow, Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience at Harvard Medical
School, and Dr. Anne Young, Julieanne Dorn Professor of Neurology at Harvard
Medical School. There also will be a seven-member advisory committee composed of
neuroscientists, psychologists and philosophers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;