* 0206645
* The Compositae in the Flora of North America North of Mexico (CFNA)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Theodore Barkley, Botanical Research Institute of Texas
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 12/31/2005
* USD 309,000.00

The Compositae in the Flora of North America north of Mexico (CFNA) is a project
to account for all members of the plant family Compositae (also called the
Asteraceae) that occur outside of cultivation in North America north of Mexico.
There are some 2,600 species distributed among 425 genera in North America north
of Mexico, making it by far the largest family of plants in the region. The CFNA
incorporates the work of some 70 contributing authors, who are recognized as
experts in their groups. Their contributions are based on their own field
studies, plus herbarium, laboratory, and library work. The CFNA is associated
with the Flora of North America (FNA) program, whose goal is to account for all
of the vascular plants and the bryophytes that occur in the continent north of
Mexico. Curiously, no continent-wide consideration of the whole flora has ever
been done. The products of the CFNA are being presented in three volumes in a
style and format compatible with the FNA. The work is being published in hard
copy by the Oxford University Press, but as sections are completed they are
posted on the FNA website (www.fna.org). A future goal is to make all materials
available in electronic format, so that the information can be both easily
managed and revised, as needed. The CFNA is managed at the Botanical Research
Institute of Texas (BRIT) in Fort Worth, and the work is coordinated by the
Compositae Editorial Committee (CompEd) consisting of T. Barkley at BRIT, L.
Brouillet at the University of Montreal, and J. Strother at the Univeristy of
California - Berkeley. In addition, there is a technical editor and assistants,
plus the services of botanical artists. &lt;br/&gt;Members of the family
Compositae are both abundant and conspicuous in North America, and among them
are the sagebrushes, ragweeds, goldenrods, and of course, sunflowers. Many
members of the family are serious weeds, some are toxic, and some are of
positive economic significance. The family is of great concern to
environmentalists, ecologists, agronomists, horticulturalists, weed scientists,
and others, and ultimately to the general public. The traditional concepts of
the family, i.e., the concepts employed in standard American and Canadian
regional floristic works (e.g., The Jepson Manual of the Higher Plants of
California) stem from the middle of the 19th century. Research of the past
quarter century has shown that these concepts require extensive revision so as
to depict natural affinities and lineages. This is not mere ivory-towerism, for
it has been made abundantly clear that an accurate knowledge of
interrelationships among organisms is essential to understanding both how to
manage our environment and what kinds of things may happen in the future. The
products of these sophisticated studies usually circulate only among other
botanists, but it is the goal of floristic studies such as the CFNA to translate
these findings into works that are useful to the consumers of botanical
information. The contributing authors are obliged to make their treatments
reflect current understanding. Respect is given to the 19th century botanists
who created a useful understanding of the family, and it is hoped that the
schemes being incorporated into the CFNA will be equally useful for years to
come. The treatments include keys, botanical descriptions, and considerations of
nomenclature for all entities, plus statements of range and habitat, small
distribution maps, and information on legal status, toxicity, usefulness,
weediness, etc. About a quarter of the species are illustrated by line drawings
prepared for the CFNA. The goal is to present the three volumes treating the
Compositae in North America north of Mexico at the end of 2004.