* 0206350
* Skyscraper:  Achievement and Impact -- A Permanent Exhibition
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Wayne LaBar, Liberty Science Center, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,674,618.00

The Liberty Science Center, located across the Hudson River from the former
World Trade Center, will develop, evaluate and install an 8,000 square foot,
five-story permanent exhibition about the architectural design and engineering,
physics, and urban-related environmental science of skyscrapers. The exhibit
will use a vertical space that includes a view overlooking southern Manhatten,
the former World Trade Center, and one of the most famous urban skylines in the
world. The exhibition is organized around three basic theme areas and is
balanced between the advantages and disadvantages of skyscrapers. Visitors enter
the exhibit through SKYSCRAPER WORLD, an advance organizer that sets the stage
for the exhibit and identifies possible wayfinding pathways through other areas.
BUILDING THE BUILDING (second and third levels) addresses principles in the
design and construction of skyscrapers, while HABITAT AND IMPACT (fourth level)
describes patterns of adaptation in the ecosystems created by skyscrapers. An
outdoor observation deck (fifth level) facing the Manhattan skyline and the
former World Trade Center, provides the opportunity for skyline programming.
What is a Rooftop, Rooftop Garden, and Skyline Clock, assisted by binocular
telescopes for observing detail, are interactive programs that use the skyline
as a teaching tool. Taking advantage of the dramatic skyline seen from the
Science Center, the project will document changing public attitudes about
skyscrapers and analyze patterns of visitor traffic and wayfinding in a five-
story exhibition tower. The exhibit is supported by mediated public programs in
LSC and by experiences for school audiences, both at LSC and in local schools.
Although "Skyscraper" is primarily an informal learning experience, it has
significant linkages to formal in-school
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;