* 0206677
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Neuroendocrine Mechanisms Underlying Rapid Change in Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2003
* John Godwin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Greenfield
* 10/31/2003
* USD 9,680.00

Neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying rapid change in social behavior
(0206677)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: John Robert
Godwin&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Student: Katharine Anne
Semsar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both environmental and internal physiological
influences affect the expression of sexual and aggressive behavior by animals
including humans. For species that live in unpredictable environments, the
appropriateness of displaying sexual and/or aggressive behavior can change
quickly. A good deal of research has focused on adaptations to changes in the
physical environment, but social environments can be equally unpredictable and
it is therefore important that animals be able to adapt their behavior quickly
in the face of social change as well. &lt;br/&gt;A large body of work over the
past twenty years has documented important roles for neuropeptide hormones in
mediating social behaviors ranging from mating and parental care to mate
guarding and territorial defense. Two neuropeptide hormones found to play
especially prominent roles are arginine vasotocin (AVT) in non-mammalian
vertebrates and the very similar arginine vasopressin found in mammals (AVP).
These hormones are released in the brain and act to alter neural function in
areas known to be associated with social behavior. While many studies have shown
effects of these hormones on behavior in the laboratory, there are still
relatively few studies that have examined the detailed mechanisms by which AVT
or AVP affect sexual and aggressive behavior in the full complexity of the
natural environment. &lt;br/&gt;This study would explore mechanisms by which AVT
affects sexual and aggressive behavior and the social and hormonal conditions
that determine the nature of the effects of this hormone on these behaviors. The
experimental model is the bluehead wrasse (Thalassoma bifasciatum), a well
studied sex- and role-changing coral reef fish. Bluehead wrasses exhibit
socially controlled female-to-male sex change in which females can become
functional males within approximately ten days of becoming socially dominant.
This model species has two principal advantages for the type of study proposed.
First, the dependence of the sex change process on cues from the social
environment makes it a very good system for understanding social influences on
neural function and the interaction of environmental and internal hormonal cues
in controlling behavior. Second, because of large populations in shallow,
protected waters and extraordinary ease of capture for marking and experimental
manipulations, bluehead wrasses allow the mechanisms underlying neuropeptide
actions to be studied in nature. &lt;br/&gt;Previous work by John Godwin has
shown that AVT expression increases in the hypothalamus as females begin to
exhibit male behavior and their ovaries become testis during sex change. Studies
by Katharine Semsar and John Godwin have shown that AVT can induce territorial
aggression and courtship behavior in large males who do not hold territories
while an AVT receptor blocker can reduce these behaviors in territory-holding
males. The studies outlined in this proposal would determine: i) whether AVT is
necessary for females to become males behaviorally and whether augmenting AVT
can accelerate this process, ii) whether the ability to respond to AVT, as
measured by receptors for this hormone, changes during sex change, and iii) what
the effects of a potent androgenic hormone that rises during sex change
(11-ketotestosterone) are on the expression of AVT and its receptor in the
brain. &lt;br/&gt;This work should improve our understanding of behavioral
adaptation and the role of neuropeptide hormones in these processes. These
mechanisms are of strong basic interest, but also important more generally
because of the societal costs of aggressive behavior. &lt;br/&gt;