* 0206115
* Calibrating Stellar Chromospheric Activity and the Galaxy's Dark Matter Content Using White Dwarf Cooling Times
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Terry Oswalt, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 08/31/2007
* USD 177,026.00

AST 0206115&lt;br/&gt;Oswalt &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Terry Oswalt, at the
Florida Institute of Technology, will carry out a spectroscopic study of wide
binary star pairs that contain normal cool main sequence stars with distant non-
interacting white dwarf companions. White dwarfs are the slowly cooling remnants
of all previous generations of stars in the Galaxy. The wide binary sample
contains white dwarfs whose cooling ages span the entire history of the Solar
neighborhood (~10 billion years). Some may be members of the Galaxy's halo
component. Dr. Oswalt's study has two main objectives: (1) How far beyond the
Sun's age of ~4.6 billion years does the strong correlation between
chromospheric activity and age in lower main sequence stars extend? What
variables other than age (e.g. mass, metallicity) affect chromospheric activity?
(2) What is the space density of cool white dwarfs stars, and how much does it
contribute to the dark matter content of the Galaxy? What are the ages of the
disk and/or halo derived from the white dwarf cooling times?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For several decades it has been known that stellar
chromospheric activity strongly &lt;br/&gt;depends upon stellar age in Solar-
type stars. Recently, it has been recognized that this &lt;br/&gt;relationship
breaks down, or at least depends on additional variables, in cool M-type stars
less massive than about one fourth that of the Sun. However, all this prior work
has been calibrated using stars in several nearby clusters whose ages were
estimated from stellar evolutionary models. None are much older than the Sun.
Stellar ages are among the most difficult to determine fundamental properties of
stars. Cooling times for the white dwarfs in wide binaries, corrected for their
progenitors' main sequence lifetimes, provide relatively robust estimates for
the ages of their main sequence companions. In the course of a prior
investigation Dr. Oswalt has determined cooling ages for several hundred white
dwarfs in wide binaries. The uncertainty in age can be as small as 10-20% in
pairs older than about 3-4 billion years, when the white dwarf mass is known.
The recent discovery of a few halo white dwarfs has spurred intense interest
because they are the remnants of the first generation of stars in the Solar
neighborhood and may be a large component of the Galaxy's dark matter. Wide
binaries may help to resolve the current dispute over the population membership
of the candidates found to date. A main sequence companion provides a unique
benchmark for the determination of the mass (via gravitational redshift),
kinematics (via radial velocity) and chemical abundance (metallicity) that
cannot be obtained from the near featureless spectra of single white dwarfs.
&lt;br/&gt;***