* 0206753
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Social and Ecological Influences on the Anti-Predator Defenses of Black-Tailed Prairie Dogs: A Role for Behavior in Conservation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Donald Owings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 03/31/2004
* USD 9,950.00

Social and ecological influences on the anti-predator defenses of black-tailed
prairie dogs: a role for behavior in conservation

Donald H. Owings, Ph.D. and Debra M. Shier

This project integrates the study of animal behavior and conservation biology by
investigating how black-tailed prairie dogs become skillful at dealing with
danger from predators. It has long been hypothesized that animals reared in
captivity and released into the wild suffer exceptionally high mortality from
predation, but to date little organized research has addressed this topic. If
this hypothesis receives support, then the conditions that support development
of skillful response to predators need to be provided to prairie dogs and other
threatened species who are reared in captivity for release and re-establishment
of wild populations. Research will test the hypothesis that experience with
predators is needed for prairie dogs to learn to be effective in evading
predation, and that other family members are an especially important source of
that learning in this highly social species. Though an animal's social
environment has been shown to affect the development of behaviors such as novel
foraging strategies, the impact of social inputs on the development of defensive
behavior has received little attention. Over the course of four field seasons,
three experiments will be conducted to examine 1) whether animals trapped and
moved in family groups show a higher survival rate following release to a new
site than animals trapped and moved without regard to family composition; 2) if
repeated exposure to predators during the first few weeks of life affects the
development of effective antipredator behavior; and 3) how the presence of the
mother, other experienced relatives, and/or inexperienced siblings affect the
development of defensive behavior.