* 0206241
* A Survey of High and Low Galactic Latitude Polarization at a Wavelength of Two Centimeters
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Joshua Gundersen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2005
* USD 301,164.00

AST-0206241&lt;br/&gt;Gunderson, Joshua O.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
will build a new survey instrument to measure galactic polarization at
wavelengths near two centimeters. The Ku-band Polarization Identifier (KUPID)
will integrate a very low noise, correlation polarimeter onto the Crawford Hill
seven meter, millimeter-wave antenna. The primary components of the polarimeter
will be built at the University of Miami and other key components, including the
microwave horn and data acquisition system will be built at the University of
Chicago and Princeton University. This project will measure the Q and U Stokes
parameters in regions near the north celestial pole, in regions of low galactic
contamination, and in regions near the galactic plane. The goals of this survey
are multifold and span the studies of the interstellar medium to cosmology. The
primary goals are to: (1) Measure the structure of both high and low galactic
latitude synchrotron radiation; (2) Identify the source of the "anomalous
emission" that is predicted to peak near a wavelength of two centimeters; (3)
Measure cosmic microwave background (CMB) polarization in the event that the
galactic foregrounds are subdominant; (4) Perform complementary, follow-up
surveys of interesting regions identified by the Microwave Anisotropy Probe
(MAP) and other Cosmic Microwave Background polarization
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;