* 0206775
* Dissertation Research:  Dynamics of Fertilization: Ecological Consequences of Flow on Sperm-egg Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Richard Zimmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 05/31/2004
* USD 8,650.00

Dissertation Research: Dynamics of Fertilizations: Ecoological Consequences of
Flow on Sperm-egg Interactions

Dr. Richard K. Zimmer & Jeffrey A. Riffell

For marine animals that broadcast spawn, the turbulent nature of the ocean
environment into which the gametes are released can drastically influence
successful fertilization. Water motion can transport and mix the gametes
together, facilitating commingling between sperm and eggs, or it can have a
detrimental effect by causing rapid dilution and prevention of sperm-egg
encounters. Although flow has long been recognized as a critical factor
influencing fertilization, at the scale of the gametes, little is known about
the influence of sperm behavior and fluid motion on mediating gamete encounters.
To understand the importance of gamete behavior and fluid motion on
fertilization, controlled laboratory studies under simulated natural
environmental conditions are necessary and vital. Using the red abalone
(Haliotis rufescens) as the model organism for exploring fertilization dynamics,
this study will establish the influence of gamete behavior, concentration, and
fluid motion on sperm-egg interactions. This will be accomplished through three
phases of this project: (i) Subtidal surveys will census adult abalone
populations and flow measurements will be taken to characterize aspects of the
hydrodynamic environment within typical abalone habitat (subtidal kelp beds),
allowing us to scale our laboratory flow-tank experiments, (ii) laboratory flow
tank experiments will examine the influence of turbulence (shear) and gamete
concentration on fertilization, and (iii) sperm chemosensory-mediated behavior
will be examined under simulated natural flow conditions. Fertilization has been
implicated as an important factor regulating population dynamics in many
animals, particularly in marine organisms that broadcast their sperm and eggs
into the sea. Along the western coast of the United States, abalones are
commercially valuable but ecologically endangered resource. By providing new
information on physical and behavioral mechanisms mediating fertilization
success, this study should have significant implications for managing and
restoring threatened abalone populations.