* 0206002
* RUI: Studies of Powerful Radio Sources
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Ruth Daly, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

AST-0206002&lt;br/&gt;Daly, Ruth A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Powerful radio sources
play an important role in our understanding of galaxy evolution and the
phenomenon of activity in the nuclei of galaxies. It is important to define,
quantify, and understand the properties and structure of these radio sources.
This will lead to a better understanding of the physics of the radio sources and
the relationship of the radio sources to (1) the active galactic nuclei that
power the large-scale radio emission, (2) their host galaxies, and (3) their
gaseous and galactic environments. This work will involve studies that are aimed
at improving and extending our knowledge and understanding of the radio sources
in order to quantify, evaluate, and understand their properties. Powerful
extended radio sources are observed to relatively high redshift, and the sample
that will be used includes 28 sources out to redshifts of two. The studies will
begin with an analysis of the radio bridge structure of each source at two or
more radio frequencies. Results will be compared with predictions of numerical
simulations run with a variety of input parameters, and with predictions from
several different analytical models proposed to describe the properties of these
sources. There will be substantial undergraduate student involvement in the
work. Experience working with undergraduate students at the Berks-Lehigh Valley
College of Penn State University indicates that students can contribute in a
variety of ways.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;