* 0206676
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics and Historical Biogeography of the Holarctic Fish Genus Cottus (Scorpaeniformes: Cottidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Robert Wood, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 7,592.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Wood and Mr. Andrew Kinziger of Saint
Louis University to study the genus Cottus; a group of small benthic fishes with
flattened heads and enlarged pectoral fins. Cottus is comprised of approximately
42 total species inhabiting both freshwater and marine environments in North
America, Japan, and Eurasia. The genus is one of the most poorly studied
components of the North American fish fauna. Major problems preventing a more
complete understanding of Cottus evolutionary biology include: (1) lack of a
hypothesis of relationships among members of the genus; (2) uncertainty
concerning the exact number of species in the genus; and (3) questions as to
whether the members of the genus form a cohesive or logical group. To address
these problems the investigators propose to generate a hypothesis of
relationships among Cottus species using 2619 bases of DNA sequence data.

The hypothesis of relationships will provide a foundation to address the three
major problems discussed above and allow for the evaluation of two interesting
evolutionary questions. First, the hypothesis can be used to reconstruct the
evolutionary history of transitions between marine and freshwater environments,
a fascinating evolutionary phenomenon because it involves modification of
several physiological mechanisms that allow organisms to cope with extremely
different environments. Second, the phylogenetic hypothesis can be used to
assess hypotheses responsible for the speciation and the distribution of members
of the genus: (1) the break up of the supercontinent Pangea; (2) connections
created by land bridges; and (3) dispersal between freshwater and marine
environments. Further, the investigators proposed work will provide the
framework for future research on Cottus evolutionary biology and furnish
important information concerning those Cottus species of conservation concern.