* 0206275
* ITR:   Collaborative Research:  An Integrated Framework for Health Monitoring of Highway Bridges and Civil Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Novel health monitoring strategies for Highway Bridges and Constructed
Facilities are of&lt;br/&gt;primary significance to the vitality of our economy.
Using latest enabling technologies, the objectives of health monitoring are to
detect and assess the level of damage to the civil infrastructure due to severe
loading events (caused by natural loads or man-made events) and/or progressive
environmental deterioration. Damage identification is performed based on changes
in salient response features of the structure, as measured by deployed sensor
arrays. Due to the challenging nature of the technical problems associated with
this topic, substantial research efforts during the past thirty years were
undertaken by many researchers in many areas related to this broad
interdisciplinary topic. The proposed research will build on these developments,
and address a number of fundamental and basic research challenges towards a
next-generation, versatile, efficient, and practical health monitoring strategy.
In such a strategy, data from thousands of sensors will be analyzed with long-
term and real-time assessment decisionmaking implications. A flexible and
scalable software architecture/framework will be developed to integrate real-
time heterogeneous sensor data, database and archiving systems, computer vision,
data analysis and interpretation, numerical simulation of complex structural
systems, visualization, probabilistic risk analysis, and rational statistical
decision making procedures. This development will be undertaken in a concerted
and focused comprehensive approach by an inter-disciplinary team of Computer
Scientists (CS) and Structural Engineers (SE). It is believed that this inter-
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;approach will synergize the resolution of basic technical
challenges and allow development of the&lt;br/&gt;framework for future
applications in this field. The new framework will also speed up the discovery
of new knowledge related to the progressive or sudden deterioration of civil
infrastructure systems and the corresponding damage mechanisms. The planned
research activities will not only culminate in the deployment of a robust,
field-implementable monitoring system, but it will also advance the research
frontiers in several active, cutting-edge research areas involving grid storage
(curated databases, filesystems, database systems), knowledge-based data
integration and advanced query processing, information extraction (data mining,
modeling, analysis and visualization), knowledge extraction (reliability/risk
analysis, structural health assessment, physics-based model development), and
decision support systems (e.g., emergency response, preventive maintenance,
rehabilitation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The entire project will be developed
around actual Bridge Testbeds in cooperation with the&lt;br/&gt;California
Department of Transportation (Caltrans), and Industry Partners. These Testbeds
will be&lt;br/&gt;densely instrumented and continuously monitored, and the
recorded response databases will be made available for maximum possible use by
interested researchers and engineers worldwide. The actual recorded data streams
from both laboratory models and bridge testbeds will be a major component for
all phases of this research effort. An Internet Portal will integrate all
elements and act as a Gateway for the Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
5 year project duration will allow the opportunity for resolving key basic
research issues of relevance to Structural Health Monitoring, and collaboration
between CS and SE&lt;br/&gt;is simply a necessity. State-of-the-art data
acquisition, transmission, and management, involvement of computer vision,
refinement of nonlinear system identification and modeling, and
practical&lt;br/&gt;implementation constitute the basic research framework.
Applications include long-term condition&lt;br/&gt;assessment and emergency
response after natural or man-made disasters and acts of terrorism for
all&lt;br/&gt;types of large constructed facilities. From a broader perspective,
the proposed effort will be a major boost in defining and shaping additional
long-term interaction and collaboration opportunities between CS and SE, with
wide national and international implications, as well as strongly benefiting
from leveraging resources and ongoing monitoring activities.