* 0206139
* Globular Cluster Sub-Populations: Understanding Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jean Brodie, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 07/31/2006
* USD 479,394.00

AST-0206139 Brodie

Globular clusters (GCs) are relatively simple stellar populations consisting of
10,000 to 1,000,000 stars and characterized, to first order, by a single age and
chemical composition (metallicity). They are thought to be the oldest radiant
objects in the universe, and they orbit, usually in large numbers, around
galaxies of all morphological types. As fossil remnants of the early
environments out of which galaxies formed they are powerful probes of the
processes of galaxy formation and evolution. GCs appear to be good tracers of
the major star forming episodes in their host galaxies and, unlike single stars,
they can be observed far beyond our Local Group of galaxies, providing clues
about the early histories of different types of galaxies. Because they are
relatively simple stellar populations, GCs are more easily modeled and
understood than the unknown mix of stars of different ages and metallicities
that make up the diffuse stellar population of galaxies.

In the last decade two results have had a major impact on the field of
extragalactic GC research. First, young massive clusters (YMCs), perhaps GCs
caught in the very process of forming, have been detected in interacting
galaxies (two galaxies in the throes of merging together). This suggests that
major galaxy interactions induce the formation of new star clusters. If these
objects are really "protoglobulars", two populations of GCs should be present
after a merger event; the old population from the progenitor galaxies and the
new population actually formed in the galaxy-galaxy interaction. Second, optical
colors have revealed evidence for blue and red sub-populations in the GC systems
of most, but not all galaxies. The color differences are due to metallicity and
probably age differences, in combinations still to be determined. It is not yet
clear whether one of the sub-populations was produced in a merger event or
whether the sub-populations might be due to multiple epochs or mechanisms of
formation. However, answering these questions is pivotal to understanding the
formation history of galaxies.

Building on a very successful current program, the objectives of this project,
lead by Dr. Jean Brodie at the University of California at Santa Cruz, are now
to understand GC sub-populations by determining exact properties such as ages,
element abundances and kinematics for large samples of extragalactic GCs. These
properties are the key to discriminating between various GC and galaxy formation
scenarios. Observations of young clusters in star-forming galaxies offer an
intriguing opportunity to gain first-hand insight into the processes by which
GCs formed in the early universe but it is first necessary to establish whether
YMCs will survive for long periods of time and can thus be rightly regarded as
"young globulars". Specifically, high signal-to-noise spectra of ~50 GCs in each
of 12 to18 galaxies will yield accurate individual ages and metallicities. The
sample covers a wide range of galaxy masses, morphologies and environments.
Kinematic information will be obtained for larger numbers (> 100) of clusters
and near-infrared (NIR) photometry will provide somewhat cruder, but essentially
age-independent, metallicity estimates for up to 1000 GCs in each galaxy. High-
dispersion spectroscopy for 10 to 15 YMCs in nearby star-forming galaxies will
be used to determine their virial masses and explore the universality of the
stellar initial mass function. A NIR imaging survey in 4 to 6 spirals will
detect hundreds of YMCs in their earliest stages of formation. The data will be
obtained from several ground-based facilities, including the Keck 10m telescopes
equipped with new, powerful multiplexing spectrographs, and high-resolution
optical and NIR spectrographs, and the MMT and Magellan telescopes with their
wide-field NIR imagers. The data volumes will be large and students and post-
docs will play a major role in all stages of the research from observations,
data reduction and analysis, to publication. ***