* 0206951
* Sampled Data Stabilization and Tracking for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Richard Rebarber, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 75,176.00

0206951&lt;br/&gt;Rebarber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
developing techniques for sampled-data &lt;br/&gt;feedback for infinite
dimensional systems. A discrete time controller can &lt;br/&gt;operator with
only limited frequency response, and infinite dimensional &lt;br/&gt;systems
often have high frequency effects which cannot be ignored, so &lt;br/&gt;there
is not only interest in what can be done with sampled-data control
&lt;br/&gt;design, but also in its limitations. The following question is basic:
can a &lt;br/&gt;given continuous-time controller be replaced by a related
sampled-data &lt;br/&gt;controller, while maintaining the desired response of
the closed-loop &lt;br/&gt;system? Both idealized and generalized sample-and-
hold will be &lt;br/&gt;considered. Generalized hold can be used as a design
parameter, and &lt;br/&gt;generalized sampling can be used when the output is
not sufficiently &lt;br/&gt;smooth to accommodate point evaluations in time. The
PI will &lt;br/&gt;characterize as completely as possible those continuous-time
feedback &lt;br/&gt;systems which do not lose their closed-loop stability when a
sampled data &lt;br/&gt;scheme (with sufficiently small sampling time) is
applied to the feedback, &lt;br/&gt;and will determine whether the performance
of the sampled-data system &lt;br/&gt;can approximate the continuous time
performance. The performance &lt;br/&gt;measures considered are closed-loop
growth rate and stability radius. &lt;br/&gt;Tracking techniques for infinite
dimensional systems will also be studied &lt;br/&gt;and developed. Suppose a
system has an external disturbance term which &lt;br/&gt;is to be rejected, or
an external reference term to be tracked. One common &lt;br/&gt;approach to
doing this is by a low-gain controller suggested by the internal
&lt;br/&gt;model principle. The effectiveness of such a controller for a wide
class of &lt;br/&gt;systems will be studied, as well as its sensitivity to
frequency variations in &lt;br/&gt;the external signal. Sampled-data versions of
tracking controllers will also &lt;br/&gt;be considered. These sampled-data and
tracking results will be applied to &lt;br/&gt;PDEs in more than one space
variable, especially coupled PDE models &lt;br/&gt;with at least one hyperbolic
component. Due to the fact that these models &lt;br/&gt;involve two different of
PDEs, coupled via highly unbounded operators, &lt;br/&gt;the analysis has
features which are distinct from the analysis for &lt;br/&gt;uncoupled systems.
For this problem a central concern for output &lt;br/&gt;feedback design is the
analysis of the input-output map, i.e. the map from &lt;br/&gt;the control to
the observation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in digital technology have led to
an emphasis on sampled-data &lt;br/&gt;design in control engineering, but the
development of sampled data &lt;br/&gt;control for infinite-dimensional systems
such as PDEs has been limited. &lt;br/&gt;In many applications output data is
available in discrete time rather than &lt;br/&gt;continuous time, and a
feedback controller for such a system should be &lt;br/&gt;designed to take
discrete data as its input, but act in continuous time. &lt;br/&gt;Since there
is already an enormous literature on continuous time &lt;br/&gt;stabilization of
PDEs, the project will involve the investigation of how to &lt;br/&gt;modify
continuous time controllers to obtain sampled data controllers, &lt;br/&gt;while
maintaining system performance. Also of interest are techniques for
&lt;br/&gt;designing effective sampled-data controllers without reference to
&lt;br/&gt;continuous time design. Another topic to be considered is the design
of &lt;br/&gt;active feedback control tracking external signals and rejecting
noise. As an &lt;br/&gt;application, these methods will be used to design a
controller to reject &lt;br/&gt;noise in a PDE model which describes the
interaction between sound &lt;br/&gt;waves in a cavity (for instance, an
airplane cockpit) and the motion of a &lt;br/&gt;flexible wall of the cavity.
Suppose that there is an external noise source, &lt;br/&gt;such as engine noise,
which is to be rejected, and active feedback control &lt;br/&gt;is to be applied
to smart material actuators on the cavity walls. Then a &lt;br/&gt;properly
designed low-gain controller (either continuous time feedback or
&lt;br/&gt;sampled-data) will attenuate the sound pressure at and near finitely
many &lt;br/&gt;points of the cavity.&lt;br/&gt;