* 0206200
* CREST - Center for Tropical Applied Ecology and Conservation at the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2010
* Carla Restrepo, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 02/28/2010
* USD 4,999,999.00

The CREST Center for Applied Ecology and Conservation is designed to create a
research environment where multidisciplinary groups work together to solve the
complex environmental problems facing the Neotropics. The major goal of the
Center is to utilize our unique position within the Caribbean and strong ties
with Central and South America to become a dominant research center in applied
tropical ecology and conservation. To achieve this goal, we will promote
research programs that synthesize multiple levels of biological organization,
from genes to landscapes. Specifically, the Center will 1) increase the research
productivity of our faculty in the field in applied ecology and conservation, 2)
strengthen the participation of our undergraduate and graduate students in
research activities, 3) expand the research infrastructure of the University, 4)
foster long-term research collaborations among scientists within Puerto Rico and
with national and international government and academic institutions, and 5)
ensure that funding continues after the CREST funding period. The research
activities of the Center will focus on four levels of biological organization:
individuals and their genes, populations, ecosystems, and landscapes. Research
in Molecular Ecology, Evolution, and Genetics (MEEG) group will integrate high-
definition molecular markers with field ecological research to address key
questions about the mating systems, reproductive success, and population biology
of endangered or fragmented populations. The Species Population Management (SPM)
group will focus on the impact of exotic species on the native flora and fauna
of Caribbean islands. Initially the SPM group will concentrate research efforts
on two key projects that focus on biological introductions of global relevance:
introduced feral ungulates and Africanized bees. Research in the Landscape
Ecology Group (LEG) will investigate the differential responses of species to
landscape variation. The group will initially use two animal assemblages,
Caribbean frogs and Andean birds, to examine how body size reflects spatial and
temporal discontinuities in ecosystems at large-scales (textural discontinuity
hypothesis). Finally, critical to the future development of the CREST Center is
an Ecosystem Processes Group (EPG). This group will be established with the
addition of new Center faculty members. Their research will initially be funded
through University of Puerto Rico matching funds but in year 4 and 5 they will
receive full funding through the CREST Center. The Center will take a series of
concrete steps to foster cross-disciplinary collaborations and ensure research
productivity. There will be bi-monthly scientific meetings and a yearly Center
conference with invited and Center speakers. These meetings are designed to
encourage group member productivity, and stimulate interactions and
collaborations within the group and with researchers from other institutions. In
addition, the Center director will create a research environment conducive to
the production of high quality research and training. The director will hold
quarterly meetings with the CoPIs, administrative assistant, and system
administrator to discuss logistic, administrative and financial issues related
to the Center. Participants are expected to meet project milestones, publish one
to two peer-reviewed manuscripts per year, and incorporate at least two graduate
and two undergraduate students during the period of the project. Funding for the
initial group of CoPIs will be reduced in years 4 and 5, and shifted to new
faculty members. An external scientific advisory panel will monitor progress of
all Center researchers. The continuation of the Center, after CREST funding
expires, is a key goal of this project. To realize this goal, the director and
CoPIs will apply for external funding that builds on research and collaborations
established during the initial funding cycle. The administration of the
University of Puerto Rico has also demonstrated their commitment to the
continuation of the Center by returning 18.75% of overhead on all grants
submitted through the Center. The ultimate goal of the Center is to train a new
generation of scientists with strong education and research experience in
applied ecology and conservation, and to better integrate university research
activities with societal needs.