* 0206598
* Dissertation Research: Regulation of Species Diversity by Assembly History in Ecological Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* James Drake, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Spatial scale poses a fundamental problem in understanding species diversity
because mechanisms creating variation in diversity change with scale. Ecological
communities are structured over time as well as patterned across space.
Community assembly, how species join communities over time, not only poses
another problem, but also is responsible for observed spatial patterns. It is
not well known how species diversity, community assembly, and spatial scale
relate. This project examines three factors that may determine the degree to
which assembly contributes to diversity at different spatial scales. The number
of species in the regional species pool, the amount of nutrients available to
communities, and the number of disturbance types imposed on communities may all
play important roles. Hypotheses addressing these factors will be developed
through computer simulations and tested through laboratory experiments using
bacteria, protists, and rotifers. These approaches, unlike most field studies,
ensure rigorous control over invasion sequence and environmental conditions and
monitor community dynamics over many generations. Overall, this project will
provide an assembly- based model explaining species diversity. Adding temporal
dynamics of community assembly to our perspective will enable ecologists to
better understand how and when spatial scale is critical in assessing the
regulation of species diversity.