* 0206947
* Assessing Implementation of Collaborative Learning Strategies
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

In recent years, problems in American science education, from elementary schools
to universities, have been widely publicized and have aroused great concern. It
has been repeatedly established that students often fail to master key concepts
under the lecture approach that is commonly used in high school and
undergraduate science courses. Some progress has been made in developing
alternative pedagogies based on more active forms of learning, which are more
effective in producing student learning. However, such pedagogies are still not
widespread. A number of strategies have been developed to improve the teaching
of introductory science courses, several of which can be used in a variety of
disciplines, and extensive assessment has demonstrated the effectiveness of
these strategies. Over the past ten years, Peer Instruction has been established
as one effective way to improve student learning in undergraduate science
courses by including collaborative exercises within the context of traditional
lectures. Peer Instruction is presently used by hundreds of instructors around
the world, and the majority of those instructors testify to its effectiveness
and ease of implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
assess the effectiveness of Peer Instruction at a variety of institutions and to
determine the implementation factors that contribute to its success. The results
will improve understanding of what makes Peer Instruction work and, thus, allow
for more effective implementation of Peer Instruction. In addition, the work
serves to increase the body of research on collaborative learning and to
stimulate additional faculty to begin using collaborative teaching methods such
as Peer Instruction. Assessment tools are being developed and enhanced to
efficiently assess student achievement on standard conceptual instruments. The
project involves a number of collaborating faculty from across the country whose
courses are participating in the focused study of Peer Instruction. The results
will enable science faculty around the nation to teach more effectively with
Peer Instruction. The results thus have the potential to impact not only the
50,000 students who are currently taught using Peer Instruction, but also the
more than 150,000 students of faculty who have expressed interest in using Peer
Instruction in their classes.