* 0206185
* Dissertation Research: Fossil History of the Saxifragaceae sensu stricto and their Woody Relatives, Cretaceous to Pleistocene
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* William Crepet, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 9,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. William Crepet and Ms. Elizabeth Hermsen of
Cornell University to review the fossil history of the angiosperm (flowering
plant) family Saxifragaceae (rockfoils and other ornamentals) and the related
genera Ribes (currants and gooseberries) and Itea (Virginia willow). Today,
these plants occur primarily in temperate, arctic, and alpine zones of the
Northern Hemisphere. Published reports of fossil saxifrages will be reevaluated
and new fossil saxifrages from New Jersey will be described. Some of these
fossils possess details of floral structure that will allow them to be analyzed
using cladistics, a mathematical technique for determining evolutionary
relationships, which is of great significance as it allows for more precise
analysis of these relationships than many other methods. This will aid in the
attainment of the immediate goal of this project, compilation of an accurate
record of fossil saxifrages. This record will be used to study questions such as
when and where saxifrages originated, when they diversified, how their
reproductive biology has changed over time, and how they have acheived their
current geographical distribution. It will also affect our present understanding
of saxifragoid relationships, especially in light of recent DNA evidence that
indicates fewer plants are true saxifrages than previously thought. One of the
greatest remaining evolutionary mysteries concerns the origin, relationships,
and success of the angiosperms. The vital importance of this group, demonstrated
by their numerical abundance and their economic, medicinal, and ecological
significance, makes solving this mystery a significant priority. This project is
important in the context of the overall mystery because 1) many of the processes
targeted within can be generalized to historical aspects of the angiosperm
proliferation and rise to dominance and 2) because the saxifrages have been
considered by some earlier workers as ancestral to many more advanced flowering
plant groups.