* 0206637
* L-Functions and Automorphic Forms Conference, May 16 - 19, 2002, The Johns Hopkins University
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Dinakar Ramakrishnan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 03/31/2003
* USD 8,000.00

Zeta and L-functions provide an extremely powerful method for studying difficult
and fundamental problems in Number theory. Moreover, analogous functions are
propping up in other parts of Mathematics as well as in Physics, for example to
provide regularizations of seemingly divergent data. The dynamic field of
Automorphic Forms is an excellent source of important zeta functions, and in
fact a far-reaching conjecture of Langlands says that all zeta functions
admitting an Euler product are modular, i.e., associated to automorphic forms on
GL(n). This conference will review and examine the positive results and
techniques which have come about in the past few years, with a special eye
towards the L-function methods leading to various instances of transfer of
automorphic forms from one group to another.

This award partially supports a conference in number theory. Number theory is
that branch of mathematics that studies properties of numbers, such as the
distribution of prime numbers. This particular conference focuses on certain
types of continuous functions, called automorphic functions, that encode deep
symmetries which occur in nature, analogous to waveforms on a small pond. The
discrete tones which occur have interesting number theoretic meanings. Instead
of starting with the functions and looking for their discrete tones,
mathematicians and physicists can start with discrete collections of numbers and
from which they construct continuous functions. Then the central problem is to
know if these functions admit hidden symmetries. When they do, then still more
special properties must be present as well. Exploiting this kind of information
is a pressing endeavor and there are many gold mines yet to be discovered.