* 0206331
* Stellar Alpha-Element and CNO Abundances in the Galactic Center
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Solange Ramirez, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

AST 0206331 Sellgren

Stellar abundances have been critical to understanding the formation and
chemical evolution of the halo, disk, and bulge of the Galaxy. With the advent
of infrared imaging and spectroscopy on large telescopes, it is now possible to
explore the stellar population within 100 pc of the Galactic center in detail.
The Galactic center contains many young, luminous, massive stars, which are
concentrated in three separate clusters within the central 60 parsecs of the
Galaxy. These are the Central Cluster, the Arches Cluster, and the Quintuplet
Cluster, with respective ages for the youngest stars of 3-9 Myr, 1-4.5 Myr, and
3-4 Myr. The Central Cluster, located at the dynamical center of the Galaxy, has
a striking excess of young, luminous stars compared to the bulge stellar
population in Baade's window. These young stars co-exist in the Central Cluster
with older stars whose ages range up to a few 100 Myr or more. The relatively
young ages (1 - 100 Myr) of the brightest stars in the Galactic center support
the idea that the Galaxy's central bar has driven disk gas into the Galactic
center to fuel star formation throughout the Galaxy's history, continuously or
in bursts of star formation.

Previous work by Dr. Kristen Sellgren, at Ohio State University, on differential
stellar abundance measurements of [Fe/H] within the Central Cluster and the
Quintuplet Cluster have found that the distribution and mean value of stellar
[Fe/H] in the central 60 parsec of the Galaxy is indistinguishable from the
values they derive for stars of similar temperature and luminosity in the solar
neighborhood. This result is surprising, because gas-phase abundance
measurements of H II regions show a significant increase in the alpha-elements O
and S between the solar neighborhood and the Galactic center. One explanation
for this is that the alpha-capture elements compared to Fe, [alpha/Fe], are
enhanced in the Galactic center. The star formation conditions in the Galactic
center are very different from those in the solar neighborhood, and are
predicted to result in an initial mass function (IMF) weighted toward massive
stars. Furthermore, models of supernova enrichment in an environment dominated
by massive stars predict a high value of [alpha/Fe]. The current project
directed by Dr. Sellgren will test this hypothesis by obtaining spectra to
determine [alpha/H] in Galactic center stars for which [Fe/H] has been already
derived from previous work. A key part of this study will be to perform a
differential analysis of Galactic center stars compared to solar-neighborhood
stars with a similar range in effective temperature and surface gravity. The
observation and analysis of comparison stars in the solar neighborhood is
critically important in Galactic center abundance studies in order to reduce the
effects of systematic errors. The abundance analysis itself involves the
computation of the synthetic spectrum of each star, using the spectral synthesis
program MOOG and model atmospheres for late type giants and supergiants. This
project expects to obtain spectra and derive CNO abundances of more solar
neighborhood M supergiants and more Galactic Center M supergiants to determine
whether the anomalous CNO abundances in the source IRS 7 are due to the unique
star-forming environment in the Galactic Center compared to the solar
neighborhood, the presence of the black hole in the Central Cluster, or the
initial CNO abundances from which solar neighborhood and Galactic center stars
formed. The study of alpha-elements in a sample of Galactic center stars will
answer fundamental questions about the nature of star formation, gas infall and
outflow, and chemical evolution in the nucleus of the Galaxy. ***

