* 0206654
* Dissertation Research:  Biotic Interactions and Mycorrhizal Dynamics in Drought-Stressed Pinyon Pine
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Catherine Gehring, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 09/30/2003
* USD 9,950.00

Project Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Current global climate change models predict
increases in the frequency and intensity of&lt;br/&gt;drought in the
southwestern U.S. In pinyon-juniper woodlands, we hypothesize that drought
stress&lt;br/&gt;leads to increased competition between pinyon and juniper,
greater dependence of pinyon on&lt;br/&gt;facilitative nurse plants, and changes
in pinyon ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungal abundance and&lt;br/&gt;community
structure. Because EM fungi can alleviate environmental stress by increasing
water and&lt;br/&gt;nutrient uptake by the host plant, it is important to
understand factors that affect these mutualists.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to examine how competition and facilitation affect pinyon survival
and&lt;br/&gt;growth, as well as their EM fungi. We will use a combination of
field experiments, greenhouse&lt;br/&gt;studies, and molecular tools (RFLP
analysis and DNA sequencing) to identify EM fungal species.&lt;br/&gt;The
results of our study will 1) quantify EM fungal diversity and distribution in
pinyon-juniper&lt;br/&gt;woodlands, 2) provide data on plant responses and EM
fungal community shifts in response to&lt;br/&gt;competition and facilitation,
and 3) contribute to the current library of EM fungal
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;Because many of these fungi can only be identified with
molecular tools, the latter objective is&lt;br/&gt;necessary to allow
comparisons of ecological data on fungi from different locations to begin
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the factors that affect their abundance and
distribution.