* 0206216
* High-Resolution Simulations of Galaxy and Cluster Formation:   Towards a Self-Consistent Modelling of Stellar Feedback
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Andrey Kravtsov, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2006
* USD 253,654.00

AST 0206216&lt;br/&gt;Kravtsov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest
challenges of modern astrophysics is understanding how galaxies such as our own
Milky Way form within the framework of the Big Bang cosmology. The current
theory of structure formation (called the Cold Dark Matter (CDM) scenario)
predicts that massive galaxies were built from smaller galaxies that collided
and merged, inducing bursts of star formation and resulting in the different
types of galaxies observed today. This entire sequence of events is thought to
be seeded by quantum fluctuations in the very early Universe and governed by
mysterious "dark matter" which constitutes about 85% of all matter in the
universe. While the CDM theory is successful in explaining many observations, it
faces an increasing number of problems which may lead us to revise or even
abandon this paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the fundamental, unanswered
questions is whether realistic galaxies with properties similar to those of
observed galaxies can be formed in the CDM model. This project will specifically
focus on stellar feedback and heavy element enrichment and their role in the
evolution of galaxies. Dr. Kravtsov and his collaborators will address this
question by using very high-resolution, state-of-the-art computer simulations
which include all the main processes thought to be important in galaxy. In
particular, the simulations will account for the release of enormous amounts of
energy and heavy elements into the surrounding gas by the explosions of young,
massive stars. This energy release, or "feedback", is thought to play a critical
role in controlling the rate at which interstellar gas is turned into stars and
in shaping the overall properties of galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;