* 0206085
* Dissertation Research:  Geographic Range Limits of Monkeyflowers (Mimulus):  Testing the Roles of Gene flow, Trade-offs and Population Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Douglas Schemske, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2004
* USD 8,884.00

Every species survives and reproduces in a limited geographic area. Although
distribution limits are universal, little is known about the evolutionary
constraints that hinder range expansion. This study will examine range limits of
monkey-flowers (Mimulus lewisii and M. cardinalis) across their elevation ranges
in California's Sierra Nevada Mountains. Project goals are to identify life
stages, traits, and environmental factors that decrease survival and
reproduction at range limits and to conduct empirical tests of models of range
limits. Range boundaries may arise because matings between central and edge
populations create offspring unfit for the edge environment. To test this model,
the survival and reproduction of central-edge versus edge-edge offspring will be
compared in the edge environment. Alternatively, correlations among traits may
constrain the direction of adaptation, creating range limits where a set of
traits appropriate for the edge environment is not produced. This model will be
tested by comparing optimum trait values at the range limit to species' actual
trait values. &lt;br/&gt; The origin and maintenance of geographic range limits
are evolutionary riddles first discussed by Darwin, yet 150 years later
experimental data are limited. Range limits are also a topic of importance to
conservationists because species' distributions are forecasted to shift towards
the poles and to higher elevations in response to global climate change.
However, without knowledge of the processes operating at range boundaries,
accurate predictions about the magnitude of such distribution shifts are
difficult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;