* 0206610
* Dissertation Research:  A Genetic Analysis of Seed Coat Polymorphism Within Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Alan Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;To understand the genetic and developmental bases of naturally-
occurring&lt;br/&gt;organismal variation is to understand the raw material of
evolution itself.&lt;br/&gt;Natural variation in seed coat morphology will be
genetically and&lt;br/&gt;developmentally dissected in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. A&lt;br/&gt;thorough description of seed coat development
for a reference strain (this&lt;br/&gt;is the most commonly-used among many
available strains) of Arabidopsis will&lt;br/&gt;be completed and will serve as
the standard to which the development and&lt;br/&gt;underlying genetics of both
chemically-induced and naturally-occurring&lt;br/&gt;(field-collected) mutants
will be compared. Both artificial and natural&lt;br/&gt;mutants will be
developmentally characterized and genetically mapped. These&lt;br/&gt;data, in
addition to traditional complementation tests (crossing
individuals&lt;br/&gt;and analyzing their progeny), will be utilized to identify
the number of&lt;br/&gt;loci affecting variation in this developmental pathway
and the frequency and&lt;br/&gt;origins of natural seed coat
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seed coat serves as the interface between
the plant embryo and its&lt;br/&gt;environment and its roles are many and
varied. This relatively simple, yet&lt;br/&gt;highly differentiated structure
provides a unique opportunity to investigate&lt;br/&gt;evolutionarily important
issues and the potential to identify genes&lt;br/&gt;responsible for the
development of a commercially important organ&lt;br/&gt;responsible for such
crops as cotton fiber and mucilage, (e.g.,
Metamucil).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;