* 0206617
* High Resolution Mid-Infrared Imaging of Seyfert Nuclei: Testing the Evolutionary Hypothesis
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Robert Pina, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2006
* USD 80,678.00

PROPOSAL NO: AST 0206617 PI: Pina, R K It is widely accepted that the power
source in the 'central engine' of active galactic nuclei (AGN) arises from
accretion of gas and dust onto a super massive black hole (SMBH). So-called
"Unified Schemes" hold that the featureless continuum produced by the central
engine is shrouded in a geometrically and optically thick torus of material,
obscuring the central engine from some lines-of-sight. Unified models suggest
that multiple classes of AGN result not from different physical characteristics,
but rather arise from different lines-of-sight to the central engine, revealing
varied physical conditions leading to the existing classification scheme.
However, the idea that AGN classification depends solely on the line-of-sight to
the central engine has been called into question by recent surveys of Seyfert
(Sy) Types 1 and 2 galaxies. These surveys reveal that Sy-2 host galaxies
typically have an increased level of star formation as compared to Sy-1. One
hypothesis is that Seyfert central engines evolve over time from a Sy-2 to Sy-1.
A key prediction of this theory is that Seyfert galaxies will display a
decreasing amount of central star formation and/or warm dust throughout the
evolution from Sy-2 to Sy-1. In order to test this theory an unbiased sample of
various Seyfert in the mid-IR will be observed using the twin Gemini 8-meter
class telescopes located in Hawaii and Chile.

