* 0206243
* Constraining Bias via Clustering in Galaxy Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Istvan Szapudi, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2007
* USD 258,791.00

AST 0206243&lt;br/&gt;Szapudi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current cosmological theories
imply that the stars, galaxies and clusters of galaxies that we can see
represent only a relatively small fraction of the matter content of the
universe. Most of the matter is in a form unknown to us, and can be detected
only through its gravitational pull. The nature of this ``Dark Matter'' is the
single most interesting problem in contemporary theoretical physics, and its
study involves the amalgamation of information from different disciplines, such
as particle physics, astronomy, and cosmology. The present project aims to
constrain the properties of this elusive dark matter by looking at ``bias'', the
difference between the statistical properties of visible and dark
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to current theories of structure
formation, small initial fluctuations in the early Universe grew under the
influence of gravity until the large-scale structures which, we see at the
present day, formed. It appears that galaxies formed where the underlying dark
matter concentrated in clumps (called halos). Thus, the present distribution of
galaxies depends both on the distribution of dark matter and on the efficiency
with which dark matter halos turn into galaxies. Novel statistical measures
developed by Dr. Szapudi and his collaborators will be used to characterize the
present-day distribution of galaxies using data from on-going wide field surveys
(e.g., the Sloan Digital Sky Survey) which encompass up to a million objects.
Then the theory of bias will be applied to these measured distributions to
constrain the distribution of the underlying dark matter. This distribution, in
turn can be used to test predictions from the various phenomenological and
fundamental theories which have been developed to describe the "Dark
Matter".&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;