* 0206093
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny and Evolution of Host Associations and Fighting Behavior in Neotropical Derelomine Weevils (Coleoptera: Curculionidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Bryan Danforth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,880.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Bryan Danforth and Mr. Nico Franz of Cornell
University to study the evolutionary history of derelomine flower weevils and
their diverse interactions with palms and other related plants in the New World
tropics. The principal objective of this research is to facilitate an
understanding of the evolution of highly specialized behaviors in the weevils,
including host plant use, pollination, and seed predation. It will be achieved
by synthesizing evidence from a variety of sources in order to reconstruct the
relationships among the major weevil groups within the association. The complex
fighting behaviors among the males in one particular group of species will be
filmed in the field and analyzed in the light of their previously studied
structural adaptations for fighting.

In addition to establishing the necessary framework for tests of various
intriguing hypotheses about the evolutionary history of this insect-plant
interaction, the proposed research has several practical implications.
Derelomine flower weevils are the primary pollinators of hundreds of palms
throughout the tropics, including the African oil palm and many other
economically important species that are cultivated for fiber, food, medicine,
oil, and ornament. Controlled introductions of specialized weevil pollinators
have resulted in substantial increments in crop production in the past. By
providing the first comprehensive classification and illustrated identification
keys for these weevil groups, the present study constitutes the basis for
subsequent field work by any researcher interested in the biology of their host
plants.