* 0206805
* RUI: The Role of Solvent Density and Solvation on the Enol-Keto Tautomerism in Supercritical Fluid Solvents.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Yoonkook Park, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/2006
* USD 134,081.00

The overall objective of the proposed project is to understand the molecular
interaction between solute and supercritical fluid (SCFs) solvents. Both
experimental techniques and a theoretical approach will be applied to
investigate the role of solvent density and solvation in enol-keto tautomerism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this work are:&lt;br/&gt;1) The enol-
keto tautomeric equilibrium constant in supercritical carbon dioxide and ethane
will be estimated by using Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy. The density
of solvent will be adjusted by varying the temperature and pressure to
investigate the effect of density on enol-keto
tautomerism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The role of solvation will also be
investigated by comparing the tautomeric equilibrium constants in supercritical
carbon dioxide with those in supercritical ethane. The quadrapole moment for
carbon dioxide may lead to a chemical interaction with solutes (mono- and
bicarbonyl compounds).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Theoretical tautomeric
equilibrium constants in SCF solvent will be determined by using the lattice
fluid hydrogen bonding model. The modeling work will reflect the interactions
between solute and solvent in a quantitative manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of this proposed research is that it is likely to produce an
expansion of the potential uses of SCFs as a means of reaction and as extraction
media. This is based on increasing our understanding of the molecular
interactions between solute and solvent, which is critical for the application
of SCF solvents towards biotechnology, nano-particle and composite materials,
remediation of waste materials, and the design and synthesis of multi-functional
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;