* 0206678
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effect of Body Size and Development on Gas Exchange Mechanisms in Insects:  Diffusion vs. Convection
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 9,952.00

DISSERTATION RESEAERCH: Effect of Body Size and Development on Gas Exchange
Mechanisms in Insects: Diffusion vs. Convection&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jon F.
Harrison&lt;br/&gt;Kendra J. Greenlee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delivery of oxygen in
organisms occurs by two basic mechanisms, convection and diffusion. Determining
the relative importance of these mechanisms is fundamental to understanding gas
exchange in any organism. Convection occurs when pressure generated by
respiratory muscles causes bulk movement of air. Diffusion occurs by passive
movement of oxygen molecules from areas of high concentration to areas of lower
concentration. For insects, the relative role of convection and diffusion in gas
exchange is highly controversial. Past evidence supports the notion that some
insects can sustain their energy demands through diffusion of oxygen alone.
However, many insects exhibit pressure-generating behaviors, such as abdominal
pumping in grasshoppers. In particular, it is thought that the relative
importance of convection may increase with insect body size. In this study, the
relative importance of diffusion and convection to insect gas exchange will be
quantified by manipulating the ability of oxygen to diffuse using different
carrier gases. Generally, air contains 21% oxygen and 79% nitrogen. Substituting
helium or sulfur hexaflouride for nitrogen alters the oxygen diffusion
coefficient, making it easier or more difficult, respectively, for oxygen to
move by diffusion. The grasshoppers' metabolic response to lowered oxygen levels
will be measured in all three carrier gases. If grasshoppers are breathing by
diffusion, their metabolic responses should be strongly affected by these
manipulations. Conversely, if grasshoppers breathe by convection, their
metabolic responses to hypoxia will not be affected by variations in carrier
gas. To test whether the relative importance of diffusion and convection varies
with size, these experiments will be performed with juvenile (small) and adult
(large) grasshoppers. To further test the importance of diffusion and convection
in insects, grasshoppers will be anesthetized with ketamine to prevent abdominal
pumping movements. If convection does become increasingly important in larger
insects, ketamine is predicted to have a much stronger effect on metabolic
responses to hypoxia in larger grasshoppers. Together, these experiments will
provide the first empirical tests of the relative importance of diffusion and
convection in insects of different sizes. &lt;br/&gt;