* 0206023
* Lichens of the Ozarks: Floristics and Implications for Biodiversity Conservation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Kevin Indoe, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 325,275.00

Lichens are organisms that are composed of a fungus and an alga, in a symbiotic
relationship that allows both to occupy habitats that would be inhospitable to
the separate components. They include a significant percentage of all fungi.
Lichens are critical components of many terrestrial ecosystems yet they remain
largely understudied. There are immense gaps in our knowledge regarding lichen
diversity, and these gaps impede efforts to devise and implement unified
strategies for sustainable biodiversity conservation. In North America, the only
comprehensive regional treatments of lichens are outdated and cover areas in the
glaciated regions of the northern United States and Canada. It has been
estimated that 10-20% of the North American lichen biota is unknown to science
and preliminary work indicates that in the Ozarks alone about 75 species of
lichens seem to be previously unknown. To help remedy this, Richard Harris (New
York Botanical Garden) and Doug Ladd (The Nature Conservancy, Missouri Chapter)
will prepare a comprehensive treatment of the lichens of the Ozark Highlands of
central North America, known to be a center of biological richness for diverse
groups of plants and animals. The area is primarily within southern Missouri and
northern Arkansas, but also includes portions of Oklahoma, Illinois, and Kansas.
The Ozarks include the oldest continuously exposed rock in North America,
contain the largest contiguous woodland remaining in the midcontinent, and are
the subject of increasing conservation interest and activity. Within the Ozarks,
many habitats are dominated by lichens, and they have the potential to be
effective for ecological monitoring and assessment. Building on initial work
completed during the past 15 years, Harris and Ladd will produce a
comprehensive, illustrated account of the Ozark lichen biodiversity.
&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed work will be directly relevant to ongoing
conservation planning and implementation, and will serve to increase the
effectiveness of conservation efforts by multiple agencies and organizations.
This would include updated proposals for rare and endangered lichens within
Missouri and Arkansas for use by conservation agencies, both private and
governmental. Additionally, two educational components will help increase the
visibility of this very diverse, but little-studied group. These are an
educational workshop primarily geared toward amateurs, and a graduate student
opportunity in lichenology. The accessibility of this knowledge on lichens will
be available to both academic and industrial scientists. Because of the
antiquity of the Ozark lichens they are often of special interest to academic
biologists because they help resolve phylogenetic relationships within the
lichens as a whole. Because of the large and diverse assemblage of chemical
compounds produced by lichens, including those with antibiotic properties, they
are of special interest to industrial biologists.&lt;br/&gt;