* 0206952
* Assessing, Understanding and Improving the Transfer of Learning in Undergraduate Math, Science and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* William Siegmann, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 09/30/2007
* USD 350,173.00

This project is examining students ability to transfer knowledge and skills
within the engineering curriculum. It is focused on how much knowledge is
transferred from Calculus, Differential Equations, and Physics to subsequent
engineering courses. We are developing a series of diagnostic exams that measure
the degree of transfer of basic skills and concepts from these areas into
Engineering Dynamics, and Fields and Waves. These two courses were chosen
because of their wide application in engineering and because of their extensive
use of concepts from these earlier courses. We are also exploring the strength
of relationship between high grades and a student's ability to transfer
knowledge from Calculus, Differential Equations, and Physics. We are evaluating
classroom practices that strengthen transfer of skills. Among the products of
this project is the "Transfer Environment and Student Readiness Instrument"
being developed at RPI's Anderson Center for Innovation in Undergraduate
Education. This instrument assesses a range of environmental and affective
variables known to correlate with improved transfer capability. It is meant to
help students evaluate their own perception about their courses as being
integrated or disconnected and fragmented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;