* 0206733
* Models of One-Dimensional Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Thomas Chou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 169,016.00

Proposal #0206733&lt;br/&gt;PI: Thomas Chou&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
California at Los Angeles&lt;br/&gt;Title: Models of One-Dimensional
Transport&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research explores the mathematical and physical aspects of particle transport in
one-dimensional channels. Mean-field analysis of Asymmetric Exclusion Processes
(ASEP) will be studied analytically and extended to include spatially varying
pore-particle interactions and time-dependent behavior. A three-state ASEP will
also be developed for modeling proton conduction along water wires. Mean-field
and Monte Carlo simulations will be used to obtain steady-state proton currents
as functions of both proton concentration and electric potential differences
across the pore. Finally, an analysis of interacting particle transport across
periodically structured pores will be performed. Analogies with
&lt;br/&gt;commensurate-incommensurate phase transitions will be explored within
Frenkel-Kontorowa type models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pore transport is a general
process vital for separations and catalysis technologies, electrochemical
applications, and cell function. In the limit of small, molecular-sized pores
connecting two particle reservoirs, the motions of the transported species can
be restricted to one dimension. One-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;pores are reasonable
models for an enormous number of systems including ion channels in cells (which
mediate electrolyte balance) and zeolites (minerals that are used to separate
hydrocarbon products and mediate chemical reactions). Therefore, theoretical
models that can predict the rate at which molecules &lt;br/&gt;enter and react
within structured one-dimensional channels will aid in the design of molecularly
tailored pores in both the industrial and biological settings. Computational
simulations will be used to validate the proposed theoretical models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;