* 0206279
* Dissertation Research: Comparing Prezygotic Isolating Mechanisms in Unimodal and Bimodal Plant Hybrid Zones.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Diane Campbell, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,901.00

This study assesses the relative importance of ecological and genetic mechanisms
that restrict natural hybridization in plants. Two closely related species of
Ipomopsis plants grow in close proximity in several sites in the mountains of
the western U.S. By comparing contact sites where hybrids are common with a
contact site where the same two species do not hybridize successfully and
instead form a bimodal distribution of morphologies, it is possible to
investigate the importance of different isolating mechanisms to the rate of
hybridization. Sites with low versus high frequencies of hybrids will be
compared with respect to the degree of introgression of genes using molecular
methods. Behavior of bird and insect pollinators will be examined at each site
to test for differences in gene flow induced by behavioral choices or ability of
pollinators to transfer pollen. Experimental pollinations will test for
differences in the competitive ability of pollen from another
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybridization rates vary tremendously across
different taxonomic groups. Understanding the reasons why will contribute to an
understanding of the fundamental problem of how species differences and
biological diversity are maintained. It could also help in predicting impacts of
hybridization with genetically engineered crops or with invasive plant species.
&lt;br/&gt;