* 0206711
* Prokaryotic Diversity of Biological Soil Crusts in Aridlands of North America
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2009
* Jean Schmidt, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2009
* USD 491,341.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Ferran Garcia-Pichel and Jean M. Schmidt at
Arizona State University, in collaboration with Dr. Richard M. Keller at NASA
Ames Research Center to conduct a survey of the microbial diversity present in
biological soil crusts of North America. In arid lands, where plant cover is
restricted, a half-inch thick live mantle of microbes develops in the topsoil
that traps soil particles together and enriches the soils with organic carbon
and nitrogen. Known as biological desert crusts, they cover spaces between
plants, stabilizing the soil against wind erosion and preventing formation of
blow-sands. There is presently a lack of knowledge regarding the microbial
species inhabiting these important and widespread topsoil habitats. In a variety
of sites of North American deserts and semi-deserts, the investigators will
embark in an effort to detect and document local bacteria important in terms of
abundance or novelty. For this, they will use modern DNA technology. They will
also attempt to cultivate those microbes in the laboratory. Two repositories
will be established. A DNA database will enable the future recognition of crust
microbes by other investigators. Cultivated bacteria will be characterized with
respect to their ecological role and properties, and will be deposited in public
culture collections for the benefit of the scientific and biotechnology
community at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that these
documentation and repositories will constitute the base for improved knowledge
of desert bacterial communities, complementing our understanding of desert
ecology, facilitating sound rangeland management, and enabling bioremediation
attempts in heavily impacted arid areas. &lt;br/&gt;