* 0206537
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Opsin Evolution in Mysid Shrimp:  A Model for Spectral Tuning
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Keith Crandall, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,800.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Keith Crandall and Ms. Megan Porter at Brigham
Young University to study the visual pigment gene in mysid shrimp
(Mysidacea:Mysidae). Visual pigments consist of an opsin protein and associated
receptors responsible for the detection of light, making vision possible. The
wavelengths of light that visual pigments can detect differ between species,
where differences in wavelength detection are due to changes in the opsin gene.
This provides an opportunity for organisms to 'tune' visual pigments to the
light present in the environment. Mysid shrimp, where species occur in different
aquatic habitats with respect to light, are an appropriate model system to
investigate this spectral tuning. The goal of this research is to evaluate the
relationship among environment, the sequences of the opsin gene, and the
wavelengths of light mysid species from different habitats are capable of
detecting. This will be accomplished by constructing the phylogenetic
relationships among the mysid species being studied, determining the sequence of
the opsin gene found in each species, and measuring the wavelengths of light
that each visual pigment absorbs. &lt;br/&gt;Visual pigments are proteins that
belong to a large family of receptors that have been identified as critical in
cellular communication systems, including the detection of hormones,
neurotransmitters, odorants, and photons. However, very little is understood
about invertebrate opsins. By elucidating the mechanisms controlling the tuning
of visual pigments to different wavelengths in mysid shrimp, this study will
provide a framework for testing opsin evolution in other organisms.
Additionally, the mysid shrimps are an important crustacean group ecologically,
providing a large food base for many species in both freshwater and marine
ecosystems. Mysid species are also commonly used as aquatic bioindicators. This
study will be the first to construct the phylogenetic relationships within a
large group of mysid species and will provide the necessary framework for future
studies in ecology, toxicology, and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;