* 0206758
* Dissertation Research: Relating Biogeochemical Model Parameters to Climatic Gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2003
* David Turner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kelman Wieder
* 11/30/2003
* USD 8,037.00

Biogeochemical models are critical for our understanding of global net primary
production (NPP), a key piece of the carbon cycle. Because such models require
more input parameters than can be readily measured over large areas, a subset of
those parameters are assigned according land surface vegetative type (landcover
type). Because this simplification masks variability within landcover types, it
leads to potential error in NPP output. The existing PhD project utilizes a
probabilistic approach to examine the potential error, focusing on the BiomeBGC
process model. The three parameters of interest are foliar carbon:nitrogen
ratio, specific leaf area, and leaf retention time. The proposed study will use
field sampling across a climatic gradient to examine possible links between
these parameters and climate within the conifer landcover class in Oregon. Lack
of correlation would support current modeling strategies, while existence of
correlation would be used to construct improved maps of input parameters. NPP
modeled using these maps will be compared against output derived using single
values within the conifer class. These numerical experiments, in combination
with a variety of on-going field NPP measurements, will significantly improve
our ability to simulate NPP over a broad area of coniferous forest in the
Pacific Northwest.