* 0206207
* U.S.-Chile Program:   Advancing Human Language Technology in the U.S. and Chile through Collaborative Research on Advanced Dialogue Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Ronald Cole, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2004
* USD 61,178.00

0206207&lt;br/&gt;Cole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
provide support for a cooperative research project between Drs. Ronald A. Cole
and Bryan Pellom, University of Colorado, and Dr. Nestor B. Yoma at the
University of Chile, in Santiago, Chile. Co-support is provided by the Digital
Government Program and the NSF-CNPq Collaborative Research Opportunities
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of their project is to provide a
foundation for collaborative research and development of advanced dialogue
systems in the U.S. and Chile, resulting in the deployment of working systems as
test beds for research. Advanced dialogue systems are human computer interfaces
that support natural, unconstrained conversational interaction in specific task
domains. Researchers from both sides will collaborate on topics such as dialogue
engineering, large vocabulary continuous speech recognition systems and text-to-
speech engines. The main idea is to set up the Colorado University Communicator
system as test bed at LPTV for advanced joint research. This will be the basis
for research that will enable people in the Americas to access online
information over telephone networks, and will thus provide real data from real
users to evaluate system components. Advanced dialogue systems will be developed
and deployed in Santiago enabling access to useful information via telephones
and cellular phones.&lt;br/&gt;