* 0206582
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolutionary Physiology of Heat-Shock Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Martin Feder, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2003
* USD 9,859.00

Dissertation Research: Evolutionary Physiology of Heat-Shock Gene
Experession&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Martin E. Feder &amp; Daniel
Lerman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate a remarkable
case in which transposable elements [TEs, pieces of DNA that have the ability to
move from one place to another within the genome] have repeatedly but
independently disrupted the promoter [region controlling transcription] of a
gene encoding an inducible molecular chaperone [a protein that prevents or
alleviates damage to other proteins; e.g., Hsp70], which in turn should affect
tolerance of environmental stress and fitness. This system has great promise as
a model for investigating how large-scale differences in physiological traits
arise from minor variation among individuals within populations. Prior research
has discovered 3 independent instances in which, in natural populations of the
fruit fly Drosophila, TE insertions disrupt the spacing between heat-shock
response elements in the hsp70Ba proximal promoter; each such population
exhibits distinctive Hsp70 protein levels. For each population, the proposed
research will develop replicate lines with which to: (1) Quantify Hsp70 protein
levels to test whether flies with TE-disrupted promoters express less Hsp70; (2)
Determine whether TE-driven differences in Hsp70 expression affect inducible
thermotolerance, a principle organism-level phenotype of Hsp70; (3) Determine,
via specific ribonuclease protection assays, whether the TEs disrupt hsp70
transactivation [transcription of the Hsp70-encoding gene]; (4) Measure whether,
as predicted, TE-disruption of the hsp70Ba promoter enhances fitness in
Drosophila not undergoing heat stress. The proposed research will integrate
molecular genetic, biochemical and physiological approaches, and be among the
first to elucidate the link between intrapopulation regulatory sequence
variation and phenotypic diversification.