* 0206351
* A High Dynamic Range Polarimetric Survey of Circumstellar Disks with Adaptive Optics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Daniel Potter, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 309,933.00

AST 0206351&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Close&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the
bulk of our understanding of dust in circumstellar disks comes indirectly
through unresolved observations (i.e. observations that spatially confuse light
from the disk and the star) where there is little or no information as to the
morphological and physical processes that the disks are undergoing. The high
contrast between the central starlight and the light scattered from the disk
poses a difficult technical challenge, and, until now, this has prevented the
efficient resolved detection of large numbers of disks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The investigators will take advantage of a novel high-dynamic range imaging
technique (Adaptive Optics aided Wollaston polarimetry), highly sensitive to the
polarized light scattered from a disk (eliminating the contaminating unpolarized
thermal emission from the star), developed by the group, to create a database of
60 high angular resolution, high sensitivity polarimetric observations of
circumstellar disks around young stars from a variety of nearby star forming
regions equally sampled over the age range of 100,000 -100,000,000 years. This
data will be expertly analyzed with help from the experienced and knowledgeable
star formation group at the University of Arizona to extract physical disk
parameters from the polarimetric data, such as the disk inclination, scale
height, radial extent, density estimates, and dust size distribution. With this
new wealth of information, questions regarding the relationship between
circumstellar disks and their environment, for example the parent star mass, the
effects of a companion star, and the initial conditions for planetary formation,
may be answered. This project also includes the commissioning of a dual imaging
polarimeter in the new University of Arizona near-infrared camera, to work in
tandem with the adoptive optics system currently being developed for the 6.5
meter telescope on Mount Hopkins.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;