* 0206722
* Dissertation Research:  Exploring the Temporal &amp; Geographical Origins of Neotropical Diversity: Comparison of 32 Superspecies Groups in the Avian Families Galbulidae and Buccon
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Frederick Sheldon, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 6,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Frederick Sheldon and Mr. Christopher Witt at
Louisiana State University to study the evolutionary origins of the
exceptionally high species diversity of birds found in the Neotropics. Although
biologists have known for centuries that the global distribution of biodiversity
is skewed towards the tropics, little is understood about the phylogenetic
relationships of tropical organisms and the historical events that may have led
to their extensive diversification. This study will use museum collections to
make DNA comparisons among every available species and population of two
families of Neotropical birds, the puffbirds and jacamars. Trees of evolutionary
lineages will be reconstructed using analyses that incorporate models of
molecular evolution into measurements of DNA similarity. Patterns of new species
formation and genetic differentiation will be compared among related groups that
share common distributions. In this way, evolutionary trees will be used to
infer the ages of evolutionary lineages and to identify the geological and
climatic factors that have contributed to modern day diversity at all taxonomic
levels. The results will have implications for the ongoing debate regarding
relative contributions of long-term geological stability versus recent climatic
tumult to the disparity in diversity between temperate and tropical bird faunas.
&lt;br/&gt;This study will involve collection of DNA data from many related
organisms across a broad geographic region. The results will have two primary
benefits: (1) inference of evolutionary causes of species diversification; and
(2) identification of conservation priorities. Current classifications almost
certainly do not adequately represent true genetic diversity in tropical
organisms. Genetic studies such as this one are needed to identify cryptic or
overlooked species, to recognize areas that harbor significant genetic
diversity, and to suggest strategies for protecting both the products and the
process of evolution. &lt;br/&gt;