* 0206309
* Collaborative Research:  Through the Gas Darkly:  Birth and Death in the Milky Way
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Robert Becker, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 283,146.00

AST 0206309 Becker

The majority of stellar births and stellar deaths in the Milky Way take place
shrouded from the view of optical telescopes. Centimeter radio waves and hard
X-rays can penetrate the gas and dust which obscure our vision, but the limited
angular resolution and sensitivity of all previous searches has left us peering
through the gas darkly in an attempt to construct a census of star formation and
demise in the Galaxy. Drs. David Helfand, at Columbia University, and Robert
Becker, at the University of California at Davis, will carry out a new survey of
the Galactic Plane with the Very Large Array (VLA), as well as extensive optical
and near-infrared follow up observations, to complement a new hard X-ray
Galactic plane survey now underway using the XMM-Newton satellite.

All of this group's observations (approved and proposed, at X-ray and radio
wavelengths) are nonproprietary, and they intend to follow the FIRST survey
model in creating a public website which will make available all reduced images
as soon as they are constructed and verified. Thus, the survey will provide
databases of use to any astronomer working in Galactic astronomy. However, these
researchers have identified a number of specific problems on which they intend
to focus: a complete census of Galactic supernova remnants, a census of massive
star formation, and the definition of complete samples of accretion-powered
binary systems. The surveys will open a new window on massive star formation in
the Milky Way. All HII regions powered by stars more massive than B0 will be
clearly visible to the solar circle on the opposite side of the Galaxy as radio
sources coincident with infrared emission detected in the MSX satellite mid-
infrared maps of the plane; in addition, many of these star formation complexes
will be detectable in the XMM-Newton maps, providing a distance estimate from
the X-ray absorption column density. This group will follow up all HII region
candidates with a new infrared camera on the MDM 2.4m telescope. The result will
be the most complete census yet of massive star formation in the Galaxy.
Luminosity functions for several classes of X-ray transients and steady
binaries, derived from extensive optical and near-infrared follow up of selected
samples of X-ray point sources from the XMM Newton images, will extend 2-3
orders of magnitude fainter than existing data allow, providing important new
constraints on close-binary evolution and models for accretion. With both X-ray
and radio observing time already allocated, with a new 8K optical camera and a
near-infrared imager/spectrometer on the MDM 2.4m telescope and access to the
Lick and Keck Observatories, these researchers have the resources in place to
provide a striking new view of the Milky Way. ***

