* 0206512
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of the Neotropical Plant Genus Alloplectus (Gesneriaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Patrick Herendeen, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 9,062.00

0206512&lt;br/&gt;Herendeen and Clark&lt;br/&gt; The genus Alloplectus, a common
shrub from the northwestern Andes, has flowers that may be viewed as an upside
down version of those of the Florists' Gloxinia. Alloplectus and the Florists'
Gloxinia both belong to the same group, but the flowers are resupinate
(inverted) in some species of Alloplectus. This project will look at the pattern
of diversification in Alloplectus and related members of the family Gesneriaceae
and the evolution of flower resupination in this group. The Neotropical members
of Gesneriaceae are problematic because morphological details are poorly
documented, closely related taxa exhibit a wide range of flower forms,
pollinators are poorly known, and molecular phylogenies have insufficient
species sampling to clarify the wide range of morphological variation. One of
the least understood groups of Neotropical gesneriads is the genus Alloplectus.
This project will generate phylogenetic hypotheses to test competing theories of
gesneriad evolution, to resolve phylogenetic relationships within the tribe
Episcieae, and to complete a taxonomic revision of the genus. Field expeditions
will be carried out in Bolivia and Panama to study the plants and their
pollinators and collect material for study in the laboratory and herbarium.
Visits to European herbaria will be conducted to study historical and recent
plant collections. Molecular sequence data will be collected for the nuclear ITS
region and the chloroplast trnL intron and spacer. Morphological characters will
be studied and scored for phylogenetic analyses. &lt;br/&gt;Although tropical
ecosystems are attracting increasing attention from biologists and
conservationists interested in understanding and managing the earth's biological
resources, there is much that is not understood about the diversity of plants
and other organisms that make up these ecosystems. For example, there are at
least five species of Alloplectus that are new to science and many members of
this group are geographically restricted and live in forests that are threatened
by logging and agricultural conversion. Results from this project will provide a
robust phylogenetic hypothesis and data that may be used to address questions
about plant diversity and conservation, morphological evolution, and pollination
biology in this poorly known group of tropical plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;