* 0206125
* TICOLICHEN - The Costa Rican Biodiversity Inventory
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Robert Luecking, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 232,467.00

Lichens, colorful plant-like beings that commonly grow on rock, bark, and other
surfaces, are perceived as individual organisms, but in fact comprise a
symbiotic system, consisting of a fungal and an algal component. The lichen
symbiosis is thus a particular nutritional association, just as mushrooms form
underground root connections, called mycorrhizas, with trees, but lichens are
much more complex in biological features. Most lichenized fungi belong to the
Ascomycota, a large group that includes many economically important species. New
scientific evidence shows that the lichenized life style significantly
contributed to the evolution and diversification of Ascomycota. Some 15,000
species are currently accepted, but comparatively little is known about tropical
lichens, which are considered key elements in the evolution of lichenized
Ascomycota. TICOLICHEN is a major tropical lichen biodiversity inventory,
forming part of the Costa Rican Sustainable Biodiversity Development Initiative,
an international effort to unravel Costa Rica's organismic diversity. As a
collaborative project between the Field Museum in Chicago, the National
Institute of Biodiversity in Costa Rica, and the Botanical Museum in Berlin,
TICOLICHEN combines well-developed local scientific infrastructure with
international taxonomic expertise. Dr Robert Luecking has assembled a team of
specialists, local taxonomists, and national and international students, to
document the lichen flora of this biologically diverse country, suspected to
comprise some 3000 species. Methods include field work to gather representative
collections and measure ecologically relevant parameters, museum revisions of
thousands of type specimens to clarify the names of known species and the
relationships of the many new species to be expected, electronic databasing and
image-based documentation, creation of publicly accessible websites, and field
workshops to train students and local professionals in tropical lichen taxonomy
and biology. One final outcome, a printed lichen flora of Costa Rica for species
description and identification, shall endeavor to match the high standards set
by floras covering temperate regions, such as the recently published Lichens of
North America. The results of this project will serve as a model for
lichenological survey work in other tropical countries, help to develop local
scientific expertise, and greatly facilitate studies of tropical lichens beyond
taxonomy and biodiversity, such as their evolution within the Ascomycota, their
biogeography and ecology, their functional role in tropical ecosystems, their
use as bioindicators of tropical forest degradation, land use change, and
conservation, and their potential medical and industrial applications based on
their rich secondary chemistry.

