* 0206748
* Dissertation Research: Understanding the Differential Success of Invasive and Naturalized Populations of Bromus tectorum L. (Cheatgrass, downy brome)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Richard Mack, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2003
* USD 4,320.00

Plants introduced into new ranges are often more vigorous and invasive than they
are native ranges. To explain these differences, several hypotheses relating to
new environments have been proposed. This research tests an alternative
hypothesis: that differences in vigor and seed production may be due to genetic
differences in the plants themselves. The annual cheatgrass was introduced into
New Zealand and North America over 100 years ago with radically different
results. In the southern part of New Zealand's South Island, it persists at low
levels; in western North America, it dominates vast areas. In four greenhouse
environments, 62 populations from native areas in Europe and the introduced
regions were compared. North American populations were most vigorous (tallest,
greatest vegetative and reproductive weights), followed by European, then New
Zealand populations. This supports the hypothesis that invasive or non-invasive
performance can be genetically based and differ from region to region. Seed
germination trials are planned, as is DNA fingerprinting to directly compare
introduced populations and their native relatives.

The question of what makes a species invasive has been critical in agriculture
and natural resource management for decades, but is still not well-understood.
This research addresses that question and has important implications for
screening potential invaders and controlling cheatgrass and other weeds.