* 0206505
* Dissertation: Phylogeny of Ephemeroptera:Evolution of the Subimago and Nymphal Gills With Implications on the Origin of Flight
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Michael Whiting, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,845.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Michael Whiting and Mr. T. Ogden at Brigham
Young University to study the relationships and specific adaptations of
mayflies. The Ephemeroptera (mayflies) is a relatively small insect order of
about 3000 species distributed throughout the world. These insects are
considered by many to be the first organisms to have taken flight. Despite this
interesting characteristic, relationships among this group and between other
insect groups are virtually unknown. The three goals of this research are to (1)
determine ordinal position with respect to the other insect orders, (2) estimate
higher-level relationships of mayflies at the familial level, and (3)
investigate hypotheses concerning adaptation of flight. This will be
accomplished by: (a) Selecting numerous examples of mayfly and other related
insects from throughout the world for morphological and molecular analysis; (b)
Generating informative morphological and molecular characters from five
independent genes in each these insects; (c) Subjecting these data to a rigorous
analyses in order to establish a robust estimate of relationships (genealogies),
which can be used to address questions concerning the adaptation of
flight.&lt;br/&gt;The genealogical pattern produced through this study could be
used for a variety of other purposes. For example, the results may also
contribute to the sport of fly fishing, as mayfly larvae, which are aquatic, are
the major trout food in river systems . In addition mayflies are one of the most
important indicators of water quality. Results from this study could be used to
improve project design and execution. Finally, this information will assist to
make better and more informed decisions concerning biological diversity and
conservation. Knowledge of the relationships of mayflies is important not only
to science but also may be applied to a number of other areas of
concern.&lt;br/&gt;