* 0206095
* Dissertation Research:  Patterns, Mechanisms and Consequences of Oviposition Behavior for Recruitment of the Mayfly, Baetis Bicaudatus
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Barbara Peckarsky, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Recruitment determines the initial density of populations, and may thereby
critically influence their abundance. Little is known about recruitment of
aquatic insects and its influence on the abundance of larvae. We combine
surveys, mechanistic and large-scale experiments in natural streams to determine
the patterns and mechanisms of recruitment of new individuals to populations of
the mayfly Baetis bicaudatus, and how small and large scale variation in
recruitment interact to influence abundance of larvae. Methods include
observations of patterns of oviposition, and field experiments to understand the
mechanisms and fitness consequences of oviposition behavior. Extensive surveys
relate patterns of recruitment to temporal and spatial variation in mayfly
larval abundance. A large-scale field experiment manipulating the availability
of oviposition sites in 12 natural streams will test whether populations of
Baetis larvae are recruitment limited. This proposal will make significant and
unique contributions to the understanding of recruitment of aquatic insect
populations, and its influence on subsequent insect abundance. Proposed research
will also generate models for predicting how mechanisms (i.e. oviposition
behavior) affect patterns of populations at local and regional scales.
Furthermore, it will provide a foundation for understanding population dynamics
of aquatic insects important to designing realistic and relevant conservation
programs.