* 0206977
* The Statistical Concepts Inventory (SCI): A Cognitive Achievment Tool in Engineering Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Teri Murphy, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2007
* USD 499,999.00

This project focuses on the development of a new assessment instrument,
applicable to multiple undergraduate engineering programs, to measure students'
understanding of statistics and its applications. The statistical understanding
measure developed under this research, called the Statistical Concepts Inventory
(SCI), provides score profiles that specifically describe students' abilities to
design and conduct experiments as well as to analyze and interpret
data.&lt;br/&gt;This project is timely because an increasing number of post-
secondary engineering programs are endorsing "outcome requirements" that depend
on statistical thinking and problem-solving skills. Within engineering, these
requirements are precipitating major changes in engineering education in general
and engineering statistics education specifically. Engineering curricular
objectives in many respects are being driven by the ABET EC 2000 criteria. Of
special relevance to the proposed project are:&lt;br/&gt;- Criterion 3, Programs
Outcomes and Assessment, which states that "Engineering programs must
demonstrate that their graduates have: (a) an ability to apply knowledge of
mathematics, science, and engineering, and (b) an ability to design and conduct
experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret
data."&lt;br/&gt;and&lt;br/&gt;- Criterion 8, Program Criteria, in which 16 of
the 24 listed programs directly indicate the need to demonstrate that students
have acquired facility with statistics. &lt;br/&gt;Industrial Engineering has
historically taught statistics as a service course to other engineering programs
and continues to use statistics as a foundation for much of its own curriculum.
Recently approved are the Criteria for Accrediting Computing Programs (Computing
Accreditation Commission, December 30, 2000), which covers Computer Science
programs and states in its curriculum standards that "Course work in mathematics
must include probability and statistics." &lt;br/&gt;This project is also
exploring the links between cognitive and attitudinal aspects of introductory
statistics courses. In its second phase, this project is gathering SCI profile
scores from students in combination with an existing affective instrument, the
Survey of Attitudes Toward Statistics (SATS). &lt;br/&gt;