* 0206036
* Neutron Stars, Electron Density Turbulence and Interstellar/Intergalactic Seeing
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Cordes, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

AST 0206036 Cordes

Dr. James Cordes of Cornell University will lead a multi-faceted project
involving neutron stars, pulsar physics and populations, and probing of the
interstellar and intergalactic media. The main areas of investigation are: *
Pulsar astrometry using the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA), the Arecibo
Telescope, and the Green Bank Telescope (GBT). The intent is to obtain new
proper motions and parallaxes of a few dozen pulsars. The ultimate goal is to
use such measurements to understand Galactic structure in electron density and
magnetic field, and also to use pulsar velocities to constrain the physics of
core collapse and attendant asymmetries that give pulsars `kicks.' * Searches
for new pulsars in the Galactic center and searches for individual dispersed
pulses from the nearby galaxies M33 (using Arecibo) and M31 (using the GBT).
Detection of multiple pulsars in these galaxies allows probing of the
intergalactic medium once contributions to line-of-sight measures from our
Galaxy and the host galaxy are removed. * Improving Galactic electron density
models and the pulsar distance scale is also a major activity in this project.
Dr. Cordes will build upon an earlier model by using new astrometry results and
multi-wavelength observations that allow more detailed modeling. Fluctuations in
electron density are also to be modeled, based on radio scattering measurements
and emission measures. The combined model for the mean and fluctuating electron
density allows predictions to be made for a wide range of observables, including
those that describe interstellar scintillations and scattering. The new models
will have particular application to interpretations of observations of gamma-ray
burst afterglows and intra-day variable active galactic nuclear sources. *
Through measurements of pulse broadening of distant pulsars, Dr. Cordes will
explore detailed aspects of the microstructure in the electron density
fluctuations. Evidence of `anomalous' frequency scaling suggest that the
microstructure is anisotropic and patchy. * Analogous to interstellar
scattering, propagation effects from the intergalactic medium and intervening
galaxies looking toward high redshift active galactic nuclei (AGN) are within
reach of VLBI observations. Dr. Cordes will model possible effects and test
their presence in observations. In particular, enhanced scattering during the
epoch of reionization from HII region shocks may be detectable. * Dr. Cordes
will study giant pulses and possibly other radio transients with both
theoretical and observational components. A comprehensive survey of known
pulsars for giant pulses like those seen from the Crab pulsar will be made. He
will pursue a model that ties giant-pulse emission to the outer magnetospheres
of certain pulsars where a cyclotron resonance condition can be satisfied and
which links giant radio pulses to high energy emission in the X-and--ray bands.
***

