* 0206081
* Collaborative Research:  A New Era of Mapping Dark Matter in Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Mario Mateo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 08/31/2006
* USD 223,516.00

AST 0206081&lt;br/&gt;Mateo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dwarf spheroidal galaxies
(dSph) are likely to be the smallest systems in the Universe which contain both
dark matter and luminous matter. The dark matter content and distribution in
dSph&lt;br/&gt;galaxies can be studied in detail if one can collect enough
kinematic data to constrain models. Dr. Mario Mateo, at the University of
Michigan, and Dr. Edward Olszewski, at the University of Arizona, will use three
new technologies to make a factor of 10-30 advance in the number of stellar
velocities measured per galaxy. The goal is no longer to weigh the dSph's, but
to derive the distribution of mass, thus the distribution of the dark matter.
While small steps have been &lt;br/&gt;taken towards that goal to date, with
heroically collected samples of up to 200 stars, it is only
with&lt;br/&gt;substantially larger samples that reasonable models will be
distinguished from each other. Such&lt;br/&gt;mapping of the mass within dSph
galaxies is required to critically compare their dark-matter
halos&lt;br/&gt;with the many - sometimes contradictory - predictions of models
of galaxy and large-scale structure formation in the Universe. These researchers
will use a new telescope - the Magellan 6.5-meter telescope of Las Campanas
Observatory in Chile - a new echelle spectrograph - the Magellan-Inamori-Kyocera
Echelle (MIKE) spectrograph - and a new 256-fiber system to feed this
spectrograph a large number of stars simultaneously. This instrumental
combination will allow the collection of 750-1500 kinematic samples per galaxy.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;