* 0206885
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Skill Investment and Resource Acquisition Among the Maku-Nadeb of Northwest Amazonas, Brazil
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Kim Hill, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The human foraging niche is often interpreted as playing a central role in the
evolution of human behavior and life history. This study seeks to systematically
examine the development and senescence of the strength and skill components of
specific food production activities in a traditional Amazonian society. Careful
documentation of traditional lifeways is crucial for examining issues of human
origins, especially given the rapid trend of acculturation of traditional
societies into neighboring state-level societies. This project is the
commencement of a long-term research program with approximately 287 Maku-Nadeb
living in three villages in northwest Amazonas, Brazil. The objective of this
research is to evaluate whether returns on high investments in foraging skill
acquisition are an important selective force in the evolution of large brains,
long lifespans and extended juvenile periods in humans. This will be
accomplished by the following: 1) decomposing task-specific production ability
into strength and skill components; 2) analyzing how these components vary
across the lifespan, between the sexes, and among individuals; 3) establishing
the level of investment, and potentially the critical learning period, needed to
obtain proficiency in important subsistence activities; and 4) evaluating the
costs to skill investment versus the benefits to elevated production later in
life.

The principal study questions of this research are the following: What are the
skill components of hunting and gathering activities? How do foragers invest in
skill acquisition? What are the benefits of skill acquisition on food returns
later in life? What are the differences in investment between males and females,
and are the payoffs to investments different? To test hypotheses concerning if
and why human evolution is characterized by increases in skill investment, it
will be necessary to measure both the costs and benefits of skill investment in
the economy. The research will focus on patterns of resource acquisition,
children's activities, and physical growth and performance. Proposed methods
with the Maku-Nadeb are to weigh food returns, follow focal individuals,
interview informants daily concerning their activities, and perform a battery of
physical performance, skill, and production ability tests on individuals of all
ages and both sexes. These data can facilitate cross-cultural comparisons with
other foraging and/or tribal horticultural groups where ages, anthropometrics
and resource return rate data are available.