* 0206458
* Dissertation Research: Habitat Fragmentation Effects on the Stopover Biology of Migratory Landbirds along the Northern Coast of the Gulf of Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Frank Moore, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 03/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Habitat fragmentation and its associated effects on
the breeding and wintering grounds have been&lt;br/&gt;implicated as major
factors contributing to the declines of many Nearctic-Neotropical migratory
landbird populations. However, we know little about how fragmentation may affect
the accessibility, use and quality of stopover habitats for birds during
migration. We advance the hypothesis that fragmentation of stopover habitats
imposes constraints on the ability of migrants to survive migration and to
arrive at their destination in good nutritional condition. We will investigate
the degree to which habitat fragmentation influences bird movement, choice of
available stopover habitats, and the intrinsic suitability of stopover habitats
when migrants stopover along the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico during
spring passage. Habitat availability will be characterized using remotely-sensed
data, while habitat use by migrants during stopover will be studied by releasing
radio-tagged Wood Thrushes (Hylocichla mustelina ) within habitat patches of
different composition, size, and isolation. The results will improve our
understanding of the stopover ecology of landbird migrants and the determinants
of suitable stopover habitat. They will also further our ability to determine
the relative importance of the migratory period for population
limitation.&lt;br/&gt;Populations of intercontinental migrants will continue to
decline unless habitat requirements during&lt;br/&gt;migration are factored into
the conservation equation.