* 0206586
* SGER:  Sedimentologic and Geomorphic Response of a Tidal Flat System to Hurricane Michelle: Andros Island, Bahamas
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2002,08/31/2002
* Eugene Rankey, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2002
* USD 8,652.00

This proposal requests funds for a Small Exploratory Research (SGER) proposal to
support a rapid-response study to isolate and evaluate the sedimentologic and
geomorphic impact of Hurricane Michelle on the coastal systems of Andros Island,
Bahamas using ultra-high resolution remote sensing data calibrated by field
observations. Pre-storm ultra-high resolution remote sensing data are available
to the PI and serve as a baseline for comparison. Differences between the pre-
storm data and the post-storm data acquired through this funding will serve as
focal points for a week of field work that will characterize the geomorphic and
sedimentologic attributes of the changes. By integrating the map patterns of
change and their sedimentologic characteristics, we will develop models for the
impact of major storms on the stability of coastal systems, including but not
limited to the shoreline. These changes will also be compared with historical
changes (~60 year) recently documented by the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
of this study will have implications for the stability of shorelines and entire
coastal systems landward of the shoreline, the parameters that control the
evolution of these systems, and the interpretation of the geologic record of
tidal flats. The need for rapid acquisition of the ultra-high resolution remote
sensing data and the field validation to assess the hurricane's impact make this
proposal appropriate for an SGER.&lt;br/&gt;