* 0206349
* RUI: Emission Line Studies of High-Velocity Interstellar Clouds using the WHAM Spectrometer
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Stephen Tufte, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 05/31/2006
* USD 122,841.00

AST 0206349&lt;br/&gt;Tufte&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-Velocity Clouds (HVCs) are
an important component of the Milky Way's interstellar medium, covering a
significant fraction of the sky and containing considerable mass and kinetic
energy. HVCs are by definition peculiar; they are the material with velocities
not explainable by the differential rotation of the galaxy. Despite over thirty-
five years of study, their origin and nature remain a mystery. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Proposed explanations of HVCs span a broad range. One picture
envisions a galactic fountain. In this model, powerful supernova explosions in
the disk of the galaxy vent hot material into regions high above the plane. The
gas then cools, condenses into clouds, and then rains back down upon the disk.
Another prominent model purports that the HVCs are dispersed throughout the
Local Group of galaxies, the remnants of its creation. It appears that some of
the high-velocity material was tidally torn from the Magallenic clouds, and now
streams behind them in their orbit around our galaxy. Recent evidence suggests
that one major complex of high-velocity material has low metallicity and is
accreting onto the disk from high in the halo. This is especially interesting
because such fresh fuel for star formation has long been required by models of
the chemical evolution of the Galaxy. Current observational efforts to
distinguish between these models will enhance present understandings of the
formation of the Milky Way galaxy and its subsequent chemical evolution, as well
as illuminate long debated issues concerning the connection of processes in the
disk of our Galaxy to the halo. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The vast majority of
previous investigations of HVCs have used radio telescopes to study the 21- cm
line, and thus only probe the neutral hydrogen present in the clouds. Dr.
Stephen Tufte, at Lewis and Clark College, will investigate ionized material
associated with HVCs by making measurements of optical emission lines using the
Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM) Observatory. WHAM is a Fabry-Perot based
spectroscopic instrument that sits atop Kitt Peak in Arizona and is completely
remote-operable. The observations will take place from the principal
investigator's laboratory on the campus of Lewis &amp; Clark College, by way of
the Internet. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will measure the intensities
of emission lines of hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, and oxygen from various HVCs.
The observations will provide information on the locations and metal abundances
of HVCs, will yield new insights into the nature of compact HVCs, and will
reveal the physical conditions present in the clouds such as their temperature
and ionization state. The principal investigator has already proven WHAM to be a
uniquely powerful instrument for these studies. The new measurements have the
ability to distinguish between the vastly different models that have been
proposed to explain HVCs, and therefore significantly advance our understanding
of their origin and nature. This award is made under the auspices of the
Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;