* 0206189
* Observations and Analysis of Exotic Gravitational Microlensing Events
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* David Bennett, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

AST 0206189 Bennett

This award supports the investigations of Dr. David Bennett and Dr. Sun Hong
Rhie, at Notre Dame University, into "exotic" gravitational microlensing events.
Exotic events deviate from the standard gravitational microlensing light curve
which assumes a point source, and single point lens, and constant velocities for
the source, lens, and observer. These exotic events are particularly useful
because they yield much more information about the distance and mass of the lens
object than standard microlensing light curves. The study of these exotic
microlensing events will address such issues as the possibility that a
substantial fraction of the Milky Way's dark matter is composed of very old and
cool white dwarfs, the abundance of isolated stellar mass black holes in the
Milky Way disk, mass measurements of single stars at distances of kiloparsecs
from Earth, and the abundance of low-mass giant planets in Jupiter-like orbits
about stars in the Galactic disk and bulge. The work will have a significant
impact on our understanding of the structure and composition of our Galaxy, the
fundamental properties of stars and stellar remnants, and the basic mechanism of
planet formation.

This project will involve observations, data analysis, and some theoretical
work. The observational effort will focus primarily on microlensing follow-up
observations that will take advantage of the tremendous increase in real-time
microlensing event discoveries expected from the OGLE-III and Super-MACHO
projects which have just begun taking data. The observations will be done with
the Boyden Observatory 1.5m telescope in South Africa, which has recently been
refurbished for this observing program, as well as with the Mt. Stromlo 1.9m
telescope, in Australia that has been used previously. The follow-up program
will be done in cooperation with an Ohio State University group which will make
a substantial contribution to the Mt. Stromlo 1.9m observations, and has near
dedicated access to the CTIO 1.5m telescope in Chile. The combined resources of
the Notre Dame and Ohio State groups will yield 24-hour coverage of microlensing
events. This is necessary in order to mount a microlensing planet search program
that will be sensitive to planets down to the mass of Neptune in Jupiter-like
orbits. The observations will enable a stringent test of the "core accretion"
model for planet formation. This microlensing follow-up program will also focus
on the study of microlensing parallax events which can reveal isolated black
holes. Follow-up observations of Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) microlensing
events discovered primarily by the Super-MACHO Project will yield "exotic"
microlensing event features which will allow the determination of the lens
distances for a statistically significant subset of events. This will determine
if most of the LMC microlensing events are due to a part of the Milky Way's dark
matter, or whether they are due to lensing by ordinary stars in the LMC. This
award will also support a theoretical effort to evaluate potential future
microlensing programs which might study dark matter in distance galaxies or
terrestrial planets in our own Galaxy. ***