* 0206431
* Collaborative Research: Biotic Inventory of the Reptiles and Amphibians of Sulawesi, Indonesia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Jimmy McGuire, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Lipscomb
* 04/30/2003
* USD 240,050.00

Collaborative Research: Biotic Inventory of the Reptiles &lt;br/&gt;and
Amphibians of Sulawesi, Indonesia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
document the biodiversity of the reptile and amphibian fauna of the Indonesian
island of Sulawesi. The island is part of Wallacea, a region that is one of 25
biodiversity "hotspots" listed by Conservation International. The reptiles and
amphibians remain poorly known because the area has received very little
attention. A recent survey has doubled the known species of amphibians and there
is reason to believe that the number of indigenous species will double
again&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between the
University of Texas, Louisiana State University, the Bandung Institute of
Technology, the University of Indonesia and the Museum Zoologicum Bogoriense.
The co-investigators and their Indonesian collaborators will survey selected
forested regions of Sulawesi over three years. Sites were selected to allow
thorough sampling of the four arms of Sulawesi as well as the island's central
core, in both dry and wet seasons. By emphasizing elevational transects, the
sites also maximize the diversity of sampled vegetational types. In addition to
specimens, collections will include frog calls, tissue samples for DNA analysis,
photographs, and extensive habitat and ecological data. Selected endoparasites
and ectoparasites will be sampled also. This collaboration includes a training
program that will introduce Indonesian students to methods of biodiversity
study, including computer cataloguing, specimen preservation, and field
inventory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The significance of Sulawesi's role in the
history of biogeography cannot be overstated. The field of biogeography was born
from Wallace's attempts to understand faunal breaks between Borneo and Sulawesi
in the north and Bali and Lombok in the south. Recent knowledge about the
region's geological history has begun to illuminate the complementary roles of
vicariance and dispersal in shaping biogeographic patterns. The data collected
during the course of this project will be the foundation for fine-scale
biogeographical studies of the Southeast Asian herpetofauna and its
diversification in one of the geologically most complex regions. This
information is crucial for decisions about management and conservation of
resources in this region.