* 0206028
* Center for Systems Science Research
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Yong Tao, Tennessee State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Patrick F. Mensah
* 08/31/2007
* USD 4,146,582.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last four years, Tennessee State University has
established an interdisciplinary NSF CREST center, the Center for Systems
Science Research (CSSR), which consists of components from mathematics,
physics/astronomy, and electrical/mechanical engineering. Research niches have
been firmly established in each of these areas and, at present, the existing
research base has matured enough to permit continued significant contributions
to the body of scientific knowledge. These science/engineering niches form the
four research thrust components of this renewal proposal: (1) optimal and robust
control (electrical engineering), (2) modeling of complex astrophysical systems
(physics/astronomy), (3) large-scale stochastic dynamic systems (mathematics),
and (4) modeling of complex flows (mechanical
engineering).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These four research components from diverse
science/engineering disciplines seek to understand the behavior of complex
physical systems by utilizing mathematical models. CSSR researchers in each
thrust component have worked independently and side by side for the last four
years, and fruitful collaborative interactions have resulted in cross discipline
approaches to problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Systems
Science Research has as its primary goals (1) the establishment of a permanent
research base at Tennessee State University which produces new knowledge and
quality, publishable, peer-reviewed research relevant to NSF research goals and
(2) the enhancement of participation and substantial involvement of minority
students and faculty in SMET research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In reference
to Goal 1, the TSU CREST Center has published 171 articles, 139 of these in
refereed journals or conference proceedings, during its first four years. Each
thrust area has produced significant new knowledge, e.g. the control systems
group introduced the concept of controller "fragility" which resulted in a
special session at the 1999 American Control Conference, the astrophysics group
confirmed the existence of extra solar planets by discovering the first planet
in the star system HD 20945,the applied math group has expanded the
probabilistic analysis and computational methods for large-scale stochastic
dynamic systems, and the CFD groups collaboration with the NSF ERC at
Mississippi State University has resulted in a model which predicts the effects
of icing on the aerodynamics and structural characteristics of
aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the same time period, the pursuit of Goal
2 has resulted in the support and participation of 35 undergraduate and 7
graduate African-American students on average per year. During the past four
years, support for both graduates and undergraduates has averaged over $200,000
per year for various combinations of tuition, fees, room and board, and
stipends, and this same level of support is requested for the renewal period.
The CREST Student Program Coordinator matches student participants with CREST
researchers. Students present their work at the TSU University Wide Research
Symposium and at the NSF/NASA/TSU Student Research Symposium. Students have also
been co-authors with CREST researchers on journal/conference
papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus far eight underrepresented minority students
have received their MS degrees, five of whom are now pursuing a Ph.D. In the
Fall Semester, 2001 the university began enrollment of students in the newly
established Ph.D. program in Computer Information Systems Engineering which is
housed in the College of Engineering, Technology, and Computer Science. The NSF
HRD CREST program was the catalyst that "fast-tracked" this initiative through
the university, the Tennessee Board of Regents, and the Tennessee Higher
Education Commission.&lt;br/&gt;