* 0207777
* Variability of Metamorphic P-T-t Paths in Compressional Magmatic Arcs and the Relationship Between Magmatism, Metamorphism, and Crustal Loading: Example from the North Cascades, WA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Harold Stowell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2007
* USD 186,555.00

Proposed research will provide critical constraints on the nature of
loading/high pressure metamorphism in contractional magmatic arcs, and greatly
enhance data available for deciphering the tectonic history of the North
Cascades. Research will integrate new high precision geochronologic,
thermobarometric, and metamorphic phase equilibria data from theWenatchee Block
(WB), Cascades Crystalline Core (CCC) of Washington. Published thermobarometric,
geochronologic, and structural data for the WB have been used to propose
tectonic models; however, the metamorphic data are largely inadequate to resolve
some of the&lt;br/&gt;important problems. For example, tectonic interpretations
hinge on whether the entire WB experienced synchronous loading and high-pressure
metamorphism, and the timing of high-pressure metamorphism with respect to
igneous intrusions in the central WB. Yet, there are few reliable ages for peak
metamorphism and few P-T-t path determinations for the central and northern WB.
Available data comprise P-T estimates based on mineral rim chemistry, P-T
estimates for growth of garnet cores based on zoning, and P estimates for pluton
emplacement based on Al in hornblende (Ague &amp; Brandon, 1996). Detailed data
are available for the NE margin of the Mt. Stuart batholith (Stowell &amp;
Tinkham, 1999; Tinkham &amp; Stowell, 2000a, 2000b; Tinkham in prep. 2). The
PI's preliminary quantitative P-T-t paths for metamorphism indicate that
regional garnet growth postdates the Mt. Stuart. Geochronologic and petrologic
data are compatible with post intrusion metamorphism likely involving a small P
increase. Research will integrate garnet Sm-Nd ages and garnet growth conditions
north of the Mt. Stuart batholith. These data will be used to develop
quantitative P-T-t paths that will complement existing data for the NE edge of
the Batholith. Metamorphic P-T-t paths and new U-Pb zircon ages for
orthogneisses at Pear Lake and within the Banded Gneiss on Wenatchee Ridge will
be used to constrain the heat source for metamorphism. Ages for garnet will be
estimated from garnet - rock Sm-Nd isochrons. P and T of initial garnet growth
will be estimated from mineral compositions and pseudosections, supplemented
with P and T from equilibrium thermobarometry. U-Pb zircon geochronology will
provide critical ages for magmatic bodies in the Banded Gneiss and the Pear Lake
orthogneiss that may have provided significant heat during metamorphism.
Geochronologic&lt;br/&gt;and thermobarometric data will be interpreted in the
context of structural data to place constraints on the conditions and timing of
deformation. Integration of these data will help define the WB metamorphic
history, and elucidate how metamorphism and subsequent cooling relates to
magmatic arc plutonism and deformation. It will also document how detailed
garnet thermobarometric and chronologic techniques can be used to extract
complex tectonic histories. Tectonic models describing metamorphic/orogenic
processes in a magmatic arc can only be critically evaluated after details of
metamorphic P-T-t paths have been described, and these paths spatially and
temporally related to plutonism and deformation. The results of this study will
help to distinguish between metamorphism resulting from advective heat transfer
by plutons and conductive heat transfer after crustal thickening.