* 0207522
* Phase Formation, Microstructure and Mechanical Properties in Mixed Metal/Silicon Carbide Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2006
* James Krzanowski, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

In this research program the structural and mechanical properties of mixed
transition metal carbide/silicon carbide thin films will be studied. The strong
chemical immiscibility between the metallic carbides and SiC, as well as the use
of low-temperature deposition processes will promote the formation of
heterophase nano-scale microstructures. Fundamental mechanisms of phase
formation and microstructural evolution in these films, with particular emphasis
on the structures formed near the percolation threshold of a-SiC on the grain
boundaries of the metallic carbides, will be examined. Characterization methods
will include high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. In addition, models of surface vs. bulk diffusion
processes will be used to rationalize the observed microstructures, including
observations of phase separation. The mechanical properties of these films,
particularly the deformation mechanisms operating in these films by observing
the microscopic deformation structure present after indentation, will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Recent research reports on the mechanical
properties of mixed metal nitride/silicon nitride thin films with nano-scale
heterophase structures have claimed dramatic property enhancements, including
hardness levels exceeding that of diamond and high fracture toughness. The
ability to create materials with hardness levels above that of diamond is a
long-standing quest for materials scientists. If this objective can be achieved,
it would allow significant advances in applications such as coatings for cutting
tools and bearings. In this research program we will study transition metal
carbide/silicon carbide coatings that are analogous to the nitride systems that
have been the subject of much recent research interest. Using advanced
characterization and testing methods, along with thermodynamic and kinetic
modeling, we hope to achieve an improved understanding of strengthening
mechanisms in these materials, along with new candidate ceramic materials for
improved industrial coatings.&lt;br/&gt;***