* 0207004
* International: Biostratigraphy, Biogeography, and Phylogeny of Vertebrates from the World's Oldest Known, Eutherian Dominated Fauna (Dzharakuduk, Uzbekistan)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* J. David Archibald, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2006
* USD 249,999.00

The 100m, Upper Cretaceous Dzharakuduk section (Kyzylkum Desert, Uzbekistan)
includes river and marine sediments that yield over 100 species of vertebrates.
Collecting microvertebrates at these sites was begun by the late Russian
paleontologist Nessov and has been continued by an international consortium of
Uzbek, Russian, British, American, and Canadian (URBAC) scientists. Large, new
collections of marine invertebrate from the upper part of the section that can
be correlated to type sections in Europe, indicate a Coniacian/Santonian age
(about 85 million years old). This reconfirms that the underlying terrestrial
vertebrates are at least 85-90 million years old, thus older than the more
famous Gobi Desert sites. Locally abundant vertebrate remains are fragmentary,
but often preserve exquisite detail. Most fossils were rapidly buried, possibly
by flash floods, with little reworking. Paleoecology is similar to the Late
Cretaceous North American coastal plains. Postcranial and cranial elements of
pterosaurs, mammals, and dinosaurs remain common from the newly screened 55 tons
of matrix. Among amphibians, salamanders are much more common than frogs. Among
reptiles, aquatic turtles, and hadrosaur and tyrannosaur dinosaur fragments are
common, while lizards, small theropod, ankylosaur, ceratopsian, and sauropod
dinosaurs are relatively rare. Birds are diverse, including both extinct groups,
as well as species closer to living birds. The rodent-like multituberculate
mammals and relatives of marsupial mammals are rare. Eutherian mammals, the
group of mammals to which humans belong, are the most common mammalian species
at Dzharakuduk, with some 11 species. These include the world's earliest
relatives of the group that gave rise to rodents and rabbits, as well as the
group that may have given rise to at least seven orders of hoofed mammals and
whales. All indications show that previous work has only begun to uncover the
fossil riches of Dzharakuduk. The next three years of work there will provide
answers to many of the remaining questions regarding these 85-90 million-year-
old vertebrate faunas.