* 0207555
* Paleobiology of the Doushantuo Formation: Multiple Taphonomic Windows into the Late Neoproterozoic Biosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Shuhai Xiao, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 10/31/2003
* USD 159,904.00

Paleobiology of the Doushantuo Formation: Multiple Taphonomic Windows into the
Late Neoproterozoic Biosphere

Abstract

This study will focus on the Neoproterozoic Doushantuo Formation (550 - 600 Ma)
in South China. The Doushantuo Formation was deposited across the Yangtze
Platform in South China during a critical geological time interval, - probably
after the Neoproterozoic climatic crises but before the Ediacaran radiation of
macroscopic animals. The Doushantuo Formation is also known to contain three
extraordinarily clear taphonomic windows preserved in phosphorites, cherts, and
carbonaceous shales. These complementary taphonomic windows allow us to
understand the taphonomic bias associated with each taphonomic pathway and, in
combination, they provide a more complete picture of the Neoproterozoic
biosphere. The goals of this study is to improve our knowledge about the early
evolution of multicellular organisms by further documenting phosphatized,
silicified, and carbonaceous biotas in the Doushantuo Formation, to understand
the constraints imposed by these different taphonomic pathways by comparing and
contrast these taphonomic windows, and to expand the investigation of Doushantuo
paleobiology into deep-water facies. The PI and his colleagues will conduct
extensive fieldwork on the Doushantuo Formation in the next three years in order
to understand its distribution, sedimentary environment, and paleobiology.

