* 0207847
* Composition and Structure of Gouge from the Focal Depths of Recent Earthquakes: Rupture Zones in South African Gold Mines
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Thomas Dewers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2005
* USD 200,001.00

It is impossible to access the rupture zone of an earthquake at its focal depth,
and thus the perception of earthquake rupture zones is inferred from indirect
observations of surface rupture and exhumed fault-zones. A different approach is
used here: direct observations in deep gold mines of South Africa where the PI
recently mapped the rupture zones of three earthquakes. These mapped zones are
associated with moderate earthquakes of magnitudes 3.7 to 5.1 that cut across
the thick quartzite sequences of the western Witwatersrand basin. He found that
a typical rupture zone of a single earthquake consists of 5-20 crosscutting
gouge zones that were active during the earthquake. The gouge zones contain
crushed, quartzitic powder, rock fragments or clay minerals; some of these zones
are 15 cm thick. The PI proposes to analyze in detail the composition,
microstructure and geochemical stability of the gouge found in these rupture
zones. He plans to determine gouge mineralogy, high-pressure phases, gouge
surface area and gouge solubility. He will examine the fragmentation processes
at the microscopic scale and the transition from intact rock to gouge powder.
The gouge material will be subjected to long term (1-3 months) cementation
experiments at hydrothermal condition (&lt; 500) to explore its stability and
strengthening under mid-crust conditions. This study will resolve some central
questions of earthquake processes and seismic hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Is
the slip during the earthquake localized along a single frictional surface or is
it distributed along many fractures?&lt;br/&gt;2. Do high-pressure and high-
temperature mineralogical phases form during an earthquake (they could be
unstable and not be found in exhumed faults)?&lt;br/&gt;3. Could
pseudotachylites form during shallow earthquakes?&lt;br/&gt;4. How much gouge is
formed during a single earthquake?&lt;br/&gt;5. What portion of the mechanical
energy of the earthquake is invested in gouge formation?&lt;br/&gt;6. Is the
formed gouge good starting material for fault-zone cementation during the
interseismic stage?&lt;br/&gt;7. Which properties of ERZ are indicators of the
seismic activity and could be used for distinguishing between an exhumed seismic
fault and an exhumed creeping?&lt;br/&gt;8. How fast does gouge compact and
cement (lithify), and how does that affect fault strength?