* 0207081
* Advanced Computational Stochastic Dynamic Programming for Continuous Time Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Floyd Hanson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 302,100.00

Hanson&lt;br/&gt;0207081&lt;br/&gt; The principal investigator and his
colleagues develop&lt;br/&gt;computational stochastic dynamic programming
methods to find&lt;br/&gt;approximations to optimally control the expected
objective value&lt;br/&gt;for a wide variety of applications. These applications
include&lt;br/&gt;the optimal treatment of cancer by chemotherapy drugs,
the&lt;br/&gt;optimal financial investment portfolio and parameter
estimation,&lt;br/&gt;optimal control of stochastic manufacturing systems, and
the&lt;br/&gt;optimal remediation of ground water pollution. The wide scope
of&lt;br/&gt;testbed applications helps to increase the robustness of
their&lt;br/&gt;advanced numerical methods by having to treat a variety of
models&lt;br/&gt;and boundary conditions. Another characteristic of many of
these&lt;br/&gt;applications is that the most severe changes happen as jumps
of&lt;br/&gt;the system and many models utilize stochastic jump-
diffusion&lt;br/&gt;processes. The computation of optimal approximations in
jump&lt;br/&gt;environments is a unique feature of the models, where
increased&lt;br/&gt;realism of the models more than compensates for the added
burden&lt;br/&gt;of increased computational complexity over diffusions.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator is writing an applied book with a colleague
on&lt;br/&gt;stochastic processes and control emphasizing jump-
diffusion&lt;br/&gt;models to give broader impact to their more general results.
The&lt;br/&gt;mathematical level is intermediate so that it is accessible
and&lt;br/&gt;useful to those who actually work with real applications
in&lt;br/&gt;science, engineering, and finance.&lt;br/&gt; The principal
investigator and colleagues study models of&lt;br/&gt;systems in uncertain
environments and seek optimal computational&lt;br/&gt;approximations to get the
best performance from these systems.&lt;br/&gt;Many of the applications are
national challenges. One&lt;br/&gt;application is the optimal management of
cancer chemotherapy when&lt;br/&gt;cancer cells develop resistance to a cancer
drug combination.&lt;br/&gt;The impact of finding optimal cancer treatment
schedules would be&lt;br/&gt;significant because cancer is a leading cause of
death. Another&lt;br/&gt;application is computational solutions for optimal
investor&lt;br/&gt;portfolio and consumption problems in a market with crashes
in&lt;br/&gt;value; the benefit is a better understanding of our nation's
and&lt;br/&gt;the world's financial systems. A third application is
the&lt;br/&gt;optimal scheduling of manufacturing systems subject to
uncertain&lt;br/&gt;failures, repairs, and other disruptions. Here
improved&lt;br/&gt;efficiencies are important for the national economic well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;A fourth application is the optimal remediation of pollution
in&lt;br/&gt;ground water, with important environmental consequences.
Students&lt;br/&gt;are involved in these projects, providing them with
significant&lt;br/&gt;experience in interdisciplinary research. Finally,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigators are writing an intermediate level applied book
on&lt;br/&gt;the optimal control of systems in uncertain environments
with&lt;br/&gt;large changes, integrating their results over a wide variety
of&lt;br/&gt;applications. The aim is to bring these ideas in a
more&lt;br/&gt;accessible form to scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;