* 0207435
* Identifying Causal Mechanisms Underlying Nonignorable Unit Nonresponse Through Refusals to Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Stanley Presser, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2008
* USD 348,122.00

This project is a set of randomized experiments aimed at systematically both
producing and eliminating unit nonresponse error in survey estimates.
Specifically, three attributes of the survey request (topic interest, survey
sponsor, and monetary incentives) will be experimentally manipulated in concert
with choice of target population. Sampling frames containing persons with known
characteristics (e.g., occupational groups, interest groups, groups of consumers
of specific products or services) will be used. Randomly identified subsamples
of these groups will be asked to participate in self-administered surveys on
topics of relevance to the frame and topics irrelevant to the frame. Crossed
with this factor, the sponsorship of the survey will be experimentally varied,
with one sponsor relevant to the frame and one irrelevant to the frame. Finally,
the use of a monetary incentive will be crossed with both of the other factors
to measure the effects of extrinsic benefits of participation. The key
hypothesis is that topic interest and sponsorship act to produce nonignorable
nonresponse when the surveys contain items relevant to the frame, and that
monetary incentives act to reduce the magnitude of nonresponse error by bringing
into the respondent pool sample persons with low topic interest and minimal
affect toward the sponsor. The effects of sponsor affect and topic interest are
expected to be additive; monetary incentives are expected to counteract the
nonignorability influences of both factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical
importance of this work to statistics based on surveys is: a) to help agencies
conducting surveys anticipate when different sponsors may obtain different
results; b) to provide evidence about potentially harmful effects on nonresponse
error of interviewers' emphasizing single purposes of a survey; c) to produce
evidence regarding the ameliorating effects on nonresponse error of monetary
incentives; and d) to test a conceptual structure that will help survey sponsors
anticipate when nonresponse rates will affect error and when they will not. This
research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program
and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under the Research on Survey
and Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;