* 0207785
* Dynamic Superpipelining: Shaping Microarchitecture for Variable Frequency
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Eric Rotenberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 06/30/2006
* USD 229,241.00

Microprocessor performance enhancements tend to be inefficient in terms of
power, especially as new sources of performance become scarce. Yet, performance
remains a key competitive factor in the microprocessor market and inefficiency
is somewhat inevitable.

Microprocessors that support multiple frequencies are strategic because they
can manage inefficiency. Performance requirements of systems change over time.
Microprocessors with variable frequency can be used to balance performance,
power, and energy by adapting frequency to changing performance requirements.

This project predicts that the need for variable frequency will have a profound
impact on the way microprocessors are designed in the future. Current hardware
support for variable frequency is predominantly circuit and technology oriented:
dynamic voltage scaling accommodates higher or lower frequency by raising or
lowering supply voltage, respectively. In the future, support for variable
frequency should also be an integral part of microarchitecture design.

To demonstrate this overall vision, this project puts forth a novel
microarchitecture called dynamic superpipelining (DSP). DSP switches from low to
high frequencies by dynamically doubling the number of pipeline stages. DSP
combines the advantages of two very different pipeline design styles (shallow
and deep pipelines) that are optimized for different frequency targets. A
flexible pipeline delivers better performance across a wider range of
frequencies, ultimately improving the energy efficiency of the microprocessor.
To evaluate DSP, it will be used as a variable-frequency substrate for a
speculative frequency reduction technique recently proposed by the PI.