* 0207291
* Elementary Reactions of Hyperthermal Gas-Phase Oxygen Atoms with Atomic Adsorbates on Si(100)-(2x1): Mechanisms and Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Jason Weaver, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 06/30/2006
* USD 227,634.00

The objective of this proposal is to determine the elementary mechanisms and
kinetics governing the non-thermal reactions of hyperthermal, gas-phase oxygen
atoms with atoms adsorbed on single crystal silicon. A novel beam source of
hyperthermal atomic oxygen will be used to stimulate reactions at the adsorbate-
modified silicon surface. The desorbing reaction products will be monitored
during the atom-adsorbate reactions using mass spectrometry. The reaction
products that remain adsorbed on the surface and the chemical changes of the
surface will be studied using thermal desorption, x-ray photoelectron and Auger
electron spectroscopy. The reactions of hyperthermal, gas-phase oxygen atoms
with adsorbed oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, and deuterium atoms will be investigated
with these techniques to determine the influence of adlayer structure and
bonding energetics on the elementary mechanisms, kinetics, and selectivity of
the reactions. Results of this project will advance the current understanding of
elementary atom-adsorbate reactions. The educational component is the mentoring
of graduate and undergraduate students. Graduate students will be trained in an
area that will be of significant interest to industries interested in
heterogeneous chemistry, especially in the semiconductor industry. The results
of this work could have a significant impact on our understanding of processes
in the semiconductor industry, including plasma processing.