* 0207818
* Uplift History of the Colorado Plateau Since the Late Miocene: Analysis Using Vesicular Basalts as a Paleoaltimeter
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2005
* USD 192,114.00

The PI's have developed a method for deten-nining paleoelevations of highland
areas on the basis of the vesicularity of lava flows. They demonstrated the
validity of the approach by testing the method against recent lavas emplaced at
known elevations, and recently applied the technique in an exploratory study on
the Colorado Plateau to obtain a general constraint on the timing of uplift.
This has been a subject of considerable concern and debate in the geological
research community. The results of the exploratory study indicate that the
Colorado Plateau experienced slow uplift from 25 to IO Ma, and rapid uplift
after IO Ma. These results reconcile the longstanding controversy between
interpretations of ancient vs. recent uplift by providing an uplift history
curve for the Colorado Plateau. The PI's initial investigation did not resolve
the nature of the slow-fast transition, nor the details of differential uplift
between different parts of the plateau, but subsequent sampling of young flows
(&lt;10 Ma) should reveal these details and the extent (if any) of internal
plateau deformation. They now propose to conduct a detailed analysis of the
uplift of the Colorado Plateau, building on the results of our exploratory
project, and focusing on the last 10 m.y.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of
establishing the uplift history for the Colorado Plateau and Rocky Mountains
lies in its pivotal role in paleogeographic reconstructions and paleoclimatic
changes, as well as its reflection of lithospheric then-nal structure and mantle
processes. Various approaches for deten-nining timing of uplift have been tried
in the past including geomorphologic, paleofloristic, sedimentary, and isotopic
investigations, but each has had sources of uncertainty stemming from using
proxies that depend on factors other than elevation alone. Because the PI's
recently developed technique measures paleoatmospheric pressure, it is not
subject to these uncertainties (although like all measurements, has its own
potential sources of error). Using the proposed analysis, the PI's will be able
to reconstruct the detailed uplift history of the Colorado Plateau and adjacent
Rocky Mountains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vesicular lavas preserve a record of
paleopressure at the time and place of lava emplacement because the difference
in internal pressure in bubbles at the base and top of a lava flow depends on
atmospheric pressure and lava flow thickness. At the top of the flow, the
pressure is simply atmospheric pressure, while at the base, there is an
additional contribution of rgH lava overburden. Thus the modal size of the
vesicle (bubble) population is larger at the top than at the bottom. Because the
thickness of the flow can easily be measured in the field, and the vesicle sizes
can be measured in the lab, this leads directly to paleoatmospheric pressure.
Given that sea level pressure has not changed significantly in Cenozoic time,
the difference between the paleoelevation "preserved" in the lavas and their
present elevation reflects the amount of uplift. Lava can be well dated,
therefore a suite of samples of various ages will constrain the timing of
epeirogenic uplift independent of climate, erosion rates or any other envirom-
nental factors. In their recent work, the PI's developed new tools for analysis
of vesicular volcanic rocks. These tools most notably include methods for
identifying appropriate field sampling locations, and the computational software
which allows tomographic data to be manipulated to produce vesicle population
statistics necessary for deten-nining size distributions. The proposed method is
based on the modal size of the vesicle population, so it is critical to be able
to accurately measure the size distribution in collected samples from the tops
and bottoms of flows. The new analytical techniques involve Computed X-Ray
Tomography to measure vesicle sizes. Based on our ability to measure vesicle
size to within 1.6% (by volume), a factor analysis of the sensitivity of the
technique to atmospheric pressure provides an elevation within +-300 in. As done
in their preliminary project in conjunction with local field experts, the PI's
propose to collect samples from various identified flows that are now at high
elevations. They will prepare samples for Xray Tomographic scanning to be done
at the facility at U. Texas. The resulting data will be analyzed with software
they have developed previously. The size distributions will be used to
reconstruct paleopressure and thus paleoelevation. This should provide an
unambiguous documentation of the details of uplift history of the region, as
well as elucidate any differential uplift within the Colorado
Plateau.&lt;br/&gt;