* 0207885
* Annual Copper Mountain Conferences on Multigrid and Iterative Methods, Copper Mountain, CO  2003-2006
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Van Henson, Front Range Scientific Computations, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 42,000.00

The Copper Mountain Conference Series, begun in 1983, is held in early April at
Copper Mountain, Colorado; the subject of these meetings alternates yearly
between Multigrid Methods and Iterative Methods. The Series is an important
forum for the exchange of ideas in these two closely related fields. The
meetings are planned for five days, with sessions consisting of individual talks
of approximately a half hour each. By tradition, these conferences will have an
egalitarian style with no invited talks and student presentations put on equal
footing with all others. One of the main goals is to enhance the participation
in this meeting by students, women, and minority mathematicians. This is
accomplished through a student paper competition, and a special fund to augment
travel support for women and minority
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several topics of emphasis have been
selected for this Series: the coming conferences will emphasize advanced
architectures (reflecting a heightened interest due to multiprocessor
computing), algebraic methods (spurred by the recent advent of very large
discrete problems arising from unstructured grids), eigenvalue problems (where
recent trends include robust parallel implementations of classical methods), and
preconditioning (where great improvements have come from domain decomposition or
parallel approximate inverses). One important feature of the multigrid
conference series is the use of tutorials. The series has featured half-day
tutorials on basic multigrid, algebraic multigrid, multigrid for parallel
computers, and cache-aware multigrid. Other important features of the conference
proceedings include preliminary proceedings, given out upon registration, and
special issues of major journals (SIAM SISC, ETNA, etc.) devoted to the
conferences.