* 0207389
* An Integrated Study of Paleointensity during Mesozoic and Tertiary using Dated Basalt, Submarine Basaltic Glass, and Single Plagioclase Crystals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Xixi Zhao, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 281,732.00

Zhao EAR-0207389

The record of the intensity of Earth's magnetic field during the past
(paleointensity) carries important information about the geodynamo and probably
about the state of Earth's interior that is not contained in the record of
paleodirection. Firm conclusions regarding long-term paleointensity variation
and its role in mantle dynamics require averages of many more data than are
currently available. For this reason, the investigators propose to carry out new
determinations of Earth's field during Mesozoic and Tertiary time using dated
rock materials from Siberia, Kazakhstan, China, the Faroe Islands, and Ontong
Java and Kerguelen plateaus. The principal objectives of this study are focused
on three important geophysical problems which are currently debated: (1) to
obtain reliable paleointensities to test the hypothesis that there was an
extended period of low field intensity in the Mesozoic and, if so, to better
define its onset and termination; (2) to determine mid-Cretaceous
paleointensities to test the recent suggestion that the field strength was
unusually high during the Cretaceous Normal Superchron (CNS); and (3) to obtain
mean paleointensity values during the Tertiary period of high reversal frequency
for comparison with those for the mid-Cretaceous period of low reversal
frequency to see whether there is a correlation between reversal rate and
geomagnetic field strength. The rock units the investigators have targeted for
sampling and those they currently have available have high potential of
providing valuable paleointensity data to address these questions of fundamental
importance in geophysics. The opportunity to compare paleointensity results from
these different geologic materials is a strong secondary motivation for this
research.