* 0207411
* Communications in Embedded Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00

Egerstedt, Magnus&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0207411&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communications in
Embedded Control Systems - Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
how different embedded software and hardware&lt;br/&gt;components should
communicate with each other in order for the overall, global&lt;br/&gt;system to
behave in a satisfactory way. The main area of investigation is
the&lt;br/&gt;information theoretic content of the transmitted signals, i.e. a
study of how&lt;br/&gt;many bits of information need to be transmitted between
the different components&lt;br/&gt;in order to make the physical system meet its
specifications. For instance,&lt;br/&gt;autonomous robotic systems are normally
relaying on a variety of heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;sensors, and the question then
becomes, which of the sensors are needed? And&lt;br/&gt;furthermore, is it
possible to compress the data in a systematic way, e.g. using&lt;br/&gt;virtual
sensors, so that information that is not essential to the current
task,&lt;br/&gt;or mode of operation, can be
discarded?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the sensory data needed for accomplishing
a certain task depends both on&lt;br/&gt;the control law, the dynamics of the
system, and the complexity of the task,&lt;br/&gt;information theory provides a
tool for treating questions concerning sensor and&lt;br/&gt;actuator selection
and control mode design in a unified way. This project is&lt;br/&gt;focused on
the following two enabling areas of research:&lt;br/&gt;1. Modeling of the
information theoretic content of the symbolic, computer&lt;br/&gt;generated
inputs used for controlling continuous, mechanical devices.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Selection of embedded sensors and actuators for a multi-agent,
robotic&lt;br/&gt;system. This selection is done so that the control system
meets its&lt;br/&gt;specifications in the presence of bandwidth constraints,
i.e. so the robots&lt;br/&gt;maintain formation while avoiding obstacles in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project computer generated, or
linguistic control commands are modeled&lt;br/&gt;as strings of mode
descriptions that can be read by trigger based hybrid&lt;br/&gt;systems. In
other words, models for software based control of physical,&lt;br/&gt;continuous
devices are developed in such a way that the actual control
signals&lt;br/&gt;have a clear information theoretic content in terms of code
lengths, thus&lt;br/&gt;connecting the field of multi-modal control with that of
information theory.&lt;br/&gt;This model enables the investigation of component
integration issues. Since each&lt;br/&gt;sensor or actuator contributes to the
total number of bits needed for coding the&lt;br/&gt;control signals, by
minimizing the code lengths subject to the constraint that&lt;br/&gt;the system
should behave in a satisfactory way, a natural measure of
what&lt;br/&gt;components are needed in the current mode of operation is
derived. Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;the explicit focus on code lengths has immediate
implication on coding theory,&lt;br/&gt;i.e. a theory for how the information
shared between different embedded&lt;br/&gt;components should be represented is
a direct consequence of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information
theoretic approach to control theory under investigation in
this&lt;br/&gt;project has a number of potential applications outside the field
of embedded&lt;br/&gt;control. For instance, in teleoperated robotics the
control signals are&lt;br/&gt;transmitted over communication channels in which
the presence of channel noise&lt;br/&gt;makes it preferable to transmit
instructions that are as short as possible. A&lt;br/&gt;related problem arises
in the area of minimum attention control, where an&lt;br/&gt;attention
functional is defined as a measure of the control variability.&lt;br/&gt;