* 0207728
* Collaborative Research:   Opportunistic Scheduling for Multimedia Wireless Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Ness Shroff, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2006
* USD 242,371.00

This collaborative project focuses on network-level solutions for exploiting the
time-varying nature of the wireless environment to increase the overall
performance of the system taking into account quality of service (QoS) and
fairness for Multimedia Wireless Systems. The proposed algorithms are classified
"opportunistic" since they consider channel conditions (and related definitions
of per-user utility). The following research activities will be particularly
pursued: opportunistic scheduling with and without explicit delay requirements
as well as opportunistic scheduling in the frequency domain. The objective
related to opportunistic scheduling without explicit delay requirements is to
develop scheduling algorithms that exploit the time-varying nature of the
wireless channel to optimize network performance under different fairness
requirements. In particular, the channel estimation problem will be explored for
which fast methodologies to effectively track the system parameters through
stochastic approximation types of techniques will be developed. For
opportunistic scheduling with explicit delay requirements, the goal will be to
develop scheduling mechanisms for real-time applications such as voice and video
where the objective is not only to schedule users based on their channel
conditions and fairness constraints, but also based on their deadlines. In
particular, the problems of opportunistic scheduling without individual QoS
constraints and problems of opportunistic scheduling with individual QoS
requirements will be studied. For that purpose, the off-line optimal scheduling
solutions that provide benchmarks in evaluating other schemes will be developed.
On the other hand, the on-line algorithms that take into account network traffic
statistics will be developed and proven on practicability. Finally, the
activities related to opportunistic scheduling in the frequency domain will
consider taking advantage of both time-domain and frequency-domain diversity in
wireless systems. In particular, the problems will be explored where the
objective will be to maximize the system performance where power could be an
explicit constraint or a penalty function. Other types of problems that will be
explored here will deal with minimizing the transmitted power subject to
performance constraints.

