* 0207793
* Bacterial and Sediment Tracing in Mantled Karst Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Greg Thoma, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2006
* USD 274,000.00

Davis&lt;br/&gt;0207793&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal waste associated with the
production of livestock (poultry, cattle and swine) contributes significantly to
non-point source contamination of surface water and groundwater.by nutrients and
bacteria. Water-quality data collected over storm hydrographs from several
springs throughout the mantled karst aquifer in northwest Arkansas indicate that
concentrations of fecal coliform bacteria, dominated by Escherichia coli (E.
coli), rise significantly in the early portion of the storm hydrograph. Pork
bacterial concentrations occur coincident with the peak in spring discharge.
Bacteria and other pathogens may survive for extended periods within the open
flow domain of mantled karst aquifers. However, the transport mechanism and
specific storage reservoir for the bacteria within these mantled karst
environments are poorly understood but critical to the development of effective
management strategies to protect human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a multiple tracer experiment with a main goal of elucidating the fate
(transport and storage) of bacteria within well-characterized, well-defined
mantled karst basins. Specific questions addressed by this project include (1)
the use of Eu-labeled bacteria and La-labeled clay, a visible technique to
monitor injected tracer's breakthrough over time periods that include
significant recharge events, and (2) what information we can infer about the
bacterial fate in the subsurface from the breakthrough
curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple tracers will be injected into a losing
stream segment previously used during the pilot project at the Savoy
Experimental Watershed (SEW) to provide more detailed breakthrough data needed
to assess the project hypotheses, and to quantify tracer loads and capture. The
SEW is a University of Arkansas property of approximately 1,250 hectares. Inputs
and outputs in the mantled karst aquifer formed in the Mississippian Boone and
St. Joe Formations are routinely monitored at SEW, and karst basin boundaries
have been previously delineated. A second well-characterized injection site in
northwest Arkansas will be used to assess the exportability of the
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides (1) minimum detection levels
for the analytes injected, (2) estimated dilution factors for the tracers, (3)
development of breakthrough curves to assess differences in tracer response, (4)
verification of the presence of Eu-tag on variable injected bacteria at the
sampling point, and (5) correlation of tracer loads to the hydrograph. If the
environment in the springs is stable and conducive to the survival of fecal
coliform bacteria, then it may also be conducive to supporting other potentially
harmful pathogens. Results of this project will be beneficial for development of
effective management strategies to minimize bacterial pathogen input into karst
aquifers.&lt;br/&gt;