* 0207392
* Collaborative Research:  Influence of a Proterozoic Southern Laurentia Long-Lived Convergent Orogen In the Lake Superior region, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Daniel Holm, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2006
* USD 135,978.00

The PI's propose to employ recent advancements in geochronometric techniques to
refine their understanding and models of the Proterozoic geology of the southern
Lake Superior region. Their objectives are two-fold: 1) to use U-Pb monazite
geochronometry (both ion probe and EMP) to document and directly date Penokean
and subsequent metamorphic events (i.e., Yavapai, Mazatzal and Wolf River
metamorphism) in an attempt to link these episodes to continued subduction after
the Penokean orogeny; and 2) to use Ar-Ar laser microprobe grain-scale age
mapping to evaluate the influence of multiple crustal events on the regional
thermal record. Their results will be used ultimately to establish the
Proterozoic geology of this historical region in the context of a long-lived
convergent orogen model (Karlstrom et al., 2001).

Metamorphic geochronometry. Results of recent NSF-supported research (Holm and
Van Schmus) on the origin of post-Penokean granites show that magmatism long
thought to be solely 1760 Ma, actually occurred in three separate, generally
southeastward-migrating pulses at 1800, 1775, and 1750 Ma. Van Schmus, Holm and
their co-authors have postulated that these magmatic pulses could correlate with
northward-directed subduction associated with southward growth of the continent.
In one possible scenario, geon 17 Yavapai-age slab rollback of a northward
subducting oceanic plate caused continental arc magmatism to step generally
southeastward between 1800 and 1750 Ma. As the slab steepened, it would have
disengaged from the overlying, overthickened crust. The reduced compressional
stresses and increased thermal input allowed for extensional collapse of the
orogen and subsequent but short-lived crustal stabilization. The PI's propose to
carry out a detailed metamorphic study to test the hypothesis that widespread
metamorphism (and not simply widespread cooling) occurred with the migrating arc
magmatism and might be linked spatially to tectonic extrusion (i.e., collapse)
structures. Their preliminary SHRIMP and EMP dating of metamorphic monazites
appear to support this. These data will provide the first direct timing
constraints on both Penokean and post-Penokean metamorphism in the southern Lake
Superior region.

Metamorphic thermochronometry. In the 1990's, NSF-funded (Holm) Ar-Ar mineral
age data were used to document the timing and extent of orogenic cooling and
later thermal reheating across the Penokean orogen. For instance, abundant
1760-1720 Ma plateau cooling ages are interpreted to be associated with a rapid
crustal collapse/stabilization period and 1630-1600 Ma plateau ages are
interpreted to indicate reheating/deformation associated with the Matzatal
orogeny to the south. However, preliminary Ar-ion laser microprobe age data
documents the presence of significant age gradients across muscovite crystals
(500 m.y. in one case). These results merit further scrutiny of the existing
thermochronologic data. Specifically, do the 1630- 1600 Ma Ar-Ar plateau ages i)
reflect the time of widespread deformation and mild reheating; ii) represent
partial resetting associated with geon 14 magmatism; iii) or perhaps represent
slow cooling? Ar-Ar muscovite laser probe age mapping will allow the PI's to
better constrain the medium-temperature history of the region and, especially to
relate it to younger overprinting events in the thermally reheated areas. The
data collected in this study are critical to properly interpret the new igneous
ages (obtained by Van Schmus, Holm, and others) and existing Ar-Ar ages and to
evaluate the Proterozoic geology of southern Lake Superior region in the context
of a long-lived convergent orogen model.