* 0207311
* The Question of Delaminated Continental Lithosphere in South Atlantic Oceanic Basalt Sources - A Study of Mantle and Lower Crustal Samples from Southern Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Cornelia Class, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 172,702.00

Class&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207311&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unusual unradiogenic
143Nd/144Nd and 206Pb/204Pb isotopic compositions of oceanic basalts from the
South Atlantic and other ocean basins have been attributed to ancient
subcontinental lithospheric mantle (SCLM), or, more recently, to lower
continental crust, which is thought to have been introduced into the oceanic
upper mantle at the time of the breakup of Gondwana. However, the isotopic
composition of the actual SCLM and lower crust spatially associated with those
unusual oceanic basalts is only poorly constrained. It is proposed to test the
hypotheses of delaminated SCLM and/or lower crust in the source of oceanic
basalts by evaluating a direct relationship between the composition of enriched
oceanic basalts in the South Atlantic and continental material potentially
delaminated from the sub-Gondwana lithosphere. A series of mantle xenolith-
bearing kimberlite fields in Namibia and South Africa provide a unique
opportunity to directly sample the SCLM and lower crust in the critical area of
the Proterozoic Namaqua-Natal Belt as well as the Kaapvaal Craton. Sr-Nd-Pb
isotopic compositions as well as trace elements on mineral separates from mantle
xenoliths, concentrates of mantle-derived clinopyroxenes, lower crustal
xenoliths and host kimberlites from these locations will be used to constrain
the composition of the SCLM and lower crust at the time of the opening of the
South Atlantic. This project will be done in collaboration with Dr. Anton le
Roex, University of Capetown, South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;