* 0207931
* Blind Channel Estimation and Signal Detection for Direct Sequence(DS) Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) Systems Employing Long Spreading Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Zhengyuan Xu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2006
* USD 232,110.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0207931&lt;br/&gt;Xu, Zhengyuan &lt;br/&gt;U of California -
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid evolution of the global information
society has been fostered by the increasing demand for seamless wideband
integrated services. The development of advanced communication technologies is
becoming imperative to meet such a demand. Future desired services will range
from the traditional voice and paging services to interactive multimedia,
including high speed data communications. To support multiple bit-rate
transmissions, direct sequence (DS) code division multiple access (CDMA)
technology appears as an appealing solution due to the inherent merits of CDMA
modulation. In DS spreading, the spreading sequence which will be adopted for
next generation wireless systems will be aperiodic with period much longer than
the bit duration. Employment of long codes bestows several benefits on the
communication system. First, it increases the immunity of the system to
multiuser interference (MUI) on the average because of less correlation of
signature waveforms of different bits from different users. This leads to
improved system performance. Secondly, spreading by long codes can uniformly
distribute the signal bandwidth over the available spectrum, thus improving the
bandwidth efficiency. In addition, long&lt;br/&gt;spreading codes provide end-
users more secure communication and prevents interception by eavesdroppers.