* 0207720
* Integrating Hydraulic, Tracer, and Geophysical Methods to Image Flow-Channeling Behavior in Fractured Bedrock
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Matthew Becker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2005
* USD 118,443.00

Becker 0207720

It has long been hypothesized that ground water flows through bedrock fractures
in a channelized manner, implying that contaminated ground water may be very
difficult to detect or predict. To date, flow channeling at the field scale has
been detected only in boreholes or tunnels. This research will yield, for the
first time, map-view images of channeling in a fracture plane. Saline tracer
will be injected into a single saturated sub-horizontal bedding-plane fracture,
and its distribution will be mapped using high-resolution ground-penetrating
radar. Experiments will be conducted in floor of a limestone quarry so that the
water table is shallow and there is no overburden to obstruct the radar signal.
Several forced gradient hydraulic configurations will be used to allow both low-
resolution time-variant and high-resolution time-invariant imaging of saline
tracer. Monitoring holes will simultaneously detect saline concentration, so
that the efficacy of borehole monitoring in the presence of channeling can be
evaluated. Finally, fluorescent dye will be injected into the fracture and the
rock above the fracture removed so that flow channeling can be mapped directly.
Ground penetrating radar, monitoring well concentrations, dye distribution, and
hydraulic testing will be used to calibrate a finite difference ground-water
flow and transport model. This model will be used to investigate errors
associated with monitoring ground-water pollution and design hydraulic and
tracer tests to characterize effective porosity in fractured bedrock. Although
the geophysical techniques employed in this research are not practical for most
contaminated sites, tracer and hydraulic methods developed from this project
could have a significant impact on how contaminated sites in fractured bedrock
are monitored, characterized, and remediated.

