* 0207328
* Collaborative Research:  A Multidisciplinary Study of an Exhumed Active Continental Margin:  The Wrangell Transect, SE Alaska.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,07/31/2002
* Cameron Davidson, Beloit College
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Goldstein
* 07/31/2002
* USD 41,996.00

The PI's propose a multidisciplinary study of Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks
along an east-west transect in the Wrangell - Petersburg - Prince of Wales
Island area of SE Alaska (= Wrangell transect). Previous research demonstrates
that integration of paleomagnetic studies with geochronologic,
thennochronologic, barometric, and structural geologic observations can produce
important insights into the tectonic evolution of the Insular superterrane and
Coast Mountains orogen in western BC and SE Alaska. The PI's recent results from
near Prince Rupert show that paleomagnetism is a key component of
multidisciplinary efforts investigating exhumed shallow and mid-crustal
sections. When accompanied by geologic observations resulting from a carefully
coordinated multidisciplinary research program, palcomagnetic data on intrusive
igneous rocks yield critical information on the tectonic development of defon-
ned regions that cannot otherwise be obtained. For example, the PI's have
documented that panels of crust containing the Paleocene Quottoon igneous
complex east of the Coast shear zone have experienced east-side-up tilts ranging
to 40' during Eocene extension. In addition, their geochronologic,
paleomagnetic, barometric, and structural geologic data suggest that the
midCretaceous Ecstall pluton was folded during west-directed thrusting. These
discoveries are fundamental to understanding the crustal architecture and
tectonic development of the continental margin in the northern
Cordillera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because igneous rocks were emplaced into this
part of the magmatic arc during the Cretaceous, throughout the Paleogene, and
into the Miocene, the Wrangell transect provides the opportunity to track defon-
nation of an evolving convergent to strike-slip plate margin in space and time.
Methods will include U/Pb geochronology of zircon and spheric, Al-in-homblende
barometry, 40 Ar/39 Ar thermochronology, (U-Th)/He dating of zircon, metamorphic
petrology, and structural geologic investigations in addition to paleomagnetic
analysis. Preliminary investigations on the eastern portion of the transect
indicate that this area experienced -17' ESEside-up tilt about an axis with
azimuth 22' since 20 Ma. Observations from across the transect indicate that
paleomagnetic directions from Cretaceous plutons are variable, with both
concordant and discordant inclinations. Paleomagnetic study of the Cretaceous
and Tertiary igneous rocks of the Wrangell transect, coupled with the
geochronologic, then-nochronologic, and barometric analyses, can deten-nine: (1)
when and where Cenozoic deformation occurred; and (2) whether regionally
consistent tilting/folding and/or large-scale transport can account for
discordant paleomagnetic directions from Cretaceous plutons. Combined with
results from the Prince Rupert area, successful completion of the proposed
research can provide a comprehensive model for the tectonic and paleogeographic
evolution of the Coast Mountains and Insular superterrane for the past I 00 m.y.