* 0207654
* Absolute Chronology of the Pazyryk Culture and Climate Variability in the Altai Mountains Inferred from Tree Rings
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Jeffrey Dean, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 235,714.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Irina Panyushkina, Jeffrey Dean,
and their colleagues will undertake a dendrochronological (tree-ring) analysis
of wood from Iron Age archaeological sites in Central Asia focussing on the
Scythian Pazyryk Culture (1,000 B.C.) in the Altai Mountains, which lies across
Russia, Mongolia, China, and Kazakhstan states. Crossdated tree-ring sequences
from living trees, dead trees in glacial valleys, and archaeological timbers
will be used to build a 3,000-year continuous master tree-ring chronology, which
will provide calendar dates for Scythian, Tagar, Hun-Sarmatian, and Turkic
archaeological sites. This achievement will be a quantum advance like that of
the 1920s when dendrochronology precisely dated hundreds of Paleo-Indian sites
in the U.S. Southwest. The Altai project is a scientific partnership between the
United States and the Russian Federation to study the archaeology,
dendrochronology, and paleogeography of Central Asia. The project integrates
efforts of Russian, German, American, Kazakhstani, and French archaeological
teams conducting multidisciplinary studies of Iron Age steppe nomads in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will directly address (1) the absolute
chronology of the Siberian Scythians and of the Iron Age in Inner Asia, (2) the
place of the Pazyryk people in the general cultural and historical context of
the region, (3) the extent to which climatic variability and extremes during the
last few thousands years (Late Holocene) impacted nomads of the Eurasian steppe.
Although diagnostic Pazyryk artifacts and decorative styles commonly are used to
establish connections among the pastoral and sedentary groups of Eurasia, the
insecure dating of the Pazyryk expression impedes understanding the interactions
among these Iron Age societies. Application of the 3,000-year master tree-ring
chronology to dating wood objects from Scythian tombs will provide an absolute
chronological framework for systematizing existing archeological data and future
finds. An absolute chronology for the study region will clarify ideas about
Indo-European origins, the prehistory of pastoral societies before Mongol
expansion into Inner Eurasia, and Scythian influence on the cultures of Asia
Minor and the Mediterranean Basin. Combining the dendroclimatic records with
other indicators of environmental changes will produce high resolution (seasonal
and annual) environmental reconstructions for the last 3,000 years. These data
will be used to assess the degree of environmental stress on the pastoral steppe
nomads whose animal herds, a vital component of their economy and social
organization, where highly vulnerable to fluctuations in climate and vegetation.
This, in turn will indicate the degree to which climatic variability "forced"
the sequent waves of Scythian impact on the agrarian cultures to the west.
&lt;br/&gt;