* 0207439
* Collaborative Research:   Analysis of the Transport and Storage of Contaminated Sediments in the Rio Pilcomayo Basin, Bolivia: A Geochemical-Geomorphic Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jerry Miller, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2005
* USD 53,650.00

0207439&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Rio Pilcomayo
heads on the Cerro Rico de Potosi precious metal-polymetallic tin deposits of
Bolivia. Mining of the Potosi deposits was initiated by the Spanish in 1545 and
has continued without interruption to the present. Our previous studies have
demonstrated that the release of mining and milling wastes to the environment
during the past 450 years has resulted in extensive contamination of water and
sediments of the upper Pilcomayo valley. The primary objective of this
investigation is to determine if Pb isotopes can be effectively used in a large
river system to quantify the decadal scale transport and storage of contaminated
debris from mining operations. Inherent in the study is an analysis of the
linkages between geomorphic processes and the long-term dispersal of
contaminated materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the project
objectives several tasks will be completed: (1) Pb sources within the upper
reaches of Rio Pilcomayo basin will be identified and characterized in terms of
their geographical distribution and Pb isotopic signatures. This step will
involve the collection and analysis of ore samples from Cerro Rico, the major
bedrock units that underlie the watershed, mineralized zones within tributary
basins, and channel bed sediments within major tributaries; (2) the alluvial
stratigraphy and geomorphology of the tributary basins will be documented and
linked to the existing geomorphic-stratigraphic data on the Rio Pilcomayo to (a)
refine our understanding of the timing, magnitude, and nature of historic
geomorphic events that have occurred along the Rio Pilcomayo, and (b) gain
insights into the timing and magnitude of sediment influx to the Rio Pilcomayo
from tributaries (both of which are believed to have had an impact on the
downstream movement of contaminated sediment); (3) spatial variations in the
total concentration of selected metals and Pb isotopic ratios will be documented
perpendicular to flow, downstream, and vertically within age-constrained
alluvial deposits. Emphasis will be placed on the analysis of 1.5-2 m long cores
extracted from contaminated alluvial terraces composed of vertically accreted
flood deposits; and (4) sediment mixing models will be used to quantify the
relative proportion of Pb in alluvial deposits that is derived from each of the
delineated Pb sources. &lt;br/&gt;