* 0207058
* SGER: An Assessment of US Electric Power Grid Geomagnetic Disturbance Hazard Risk Due to SSC, SI and Related Magnetospheric Shock Disturbances
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* William Radasky, Metatech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 03/31/2003
* USD 49,969.00

Geomagnetically-Induced Currents (GICs) are generally produced by the rate-of-
change of the local geomagnetic field caused by a geomagnetic storm. The GIC
when large in magnitude and/or geographically wide-spread can lead to severe
power system problems. Failures of equipment can occur due to this interaction
of the GIC with the power grid.

It has been previously understood that electrojet-driven geomagnetic storm
processes were responsible for local geomagnetic field disturbances and GICs
affecting power girds, especially for power grids at high magnetic latitudes,
which are in close proximity to the electrojet currents. However, a large number
of reported power system problems did not fit the timing or location pattern as
being associated with intensification of auroral electrojets. Rather, they were
associated with the onset times of geomagnetic storm commencement (SC) events. A
preliminary review of power system disturbance and storm climatology data
reported in Solar Cycle 22 and to date in Solar Cycle 23 indicates that a number
of severe power system impacts have been observed due to this SC process. Severe
impacts to power system operations have been observed as far south as Los
Angeles, Texas-New Mexico, and all across the southeastern US, as well as
traditional mid and northern latitude locations.

No rigorous study has been conducted in the US to do even a preliminary
assessment of this risk potential. The PI will undertake a US-focused
geomagnetic hazard study and assessment to further develop detailed
understanding of this important storm process and how this storm process couples
to important ground-based infrastructures such as power girds and communication
cables.