* 0207220
* Purchase and Distribution of a new Digital Elevation Model of the Kuparuk Watershed, Alaska, for NSF Arctic Scientists
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2003
* Matt Nolan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Simon Stephenson
* 02/28/2003
* USD 133,668.00

The team, lead by Nolan, will purchase, validate, and distribute a new, high
resolution Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of the Kuparuk River watershed in
northern Alaska, for use by all NSF funded scientists who require such data for
their research. In the Alaskan Arctic the only DEMs commonly available are those
from the USGS, with pixel size of roughly 60 m x 90 m and vertical accuracy of
about 15 m. These DEMs often have large errors at the sheet boundaries, making
them difficult to mosaic accurately. In contrast, the Star3i X-band airborne-
radar system operated by Intermap Technology Corporation, creates a
topographically seamless DEM at 5 m pixel size with a mean vertical error of 1
to 3 m, depending on product purchased. Intermap acquired the Kuparuk watershed
in August of 2001, and this DEM is now available as an off-the-shelf product.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distribution package made available to NSF researchers
will include more than the raw data. The team will validate the new DEMs for
accuracy, principally through comparing hydrologic channel networks created from
the DEMs with those found in the real world. They will also produce vector
layers of these stream channels for use in many GIS applications, and calculate
some basic hydrological information on the watershed. They will include a
variety of shareware software to allow novice users to easily access the data,
as well as include a number of still images and animations for use in analysis
and outreach. Finally, they will include a number of references and technical
specifications to help new users understand the limitations of the data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DEM will be made available to all NSF researchers
through JOSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;