* 0207018
* GOALI:  The Study of Luminescent Heavy Metal Complexes and their Incorporation as Emitters in OLED Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Richard Eisenberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 440,000.00

This GOALI award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program in the Division of Chemistry, the Solid State Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the Directorate of Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports research by a
collaborative academic/industrial group headed by Professor Richard Eisenberg at
the University of Rochester and the Eastman Kodak Company to study the
luminescence of heavy metal complexes and their incorporation as emitters into
OLED devices. Dopant emitters are used in organic light-emitting diode (OLED)
materials to make them more efficient and versatile for display applications.
Luminescent heavy-metal complexes emit light through triplet excited states
(exicitons) providing a route for higher efficiency than organic polymeric
materials alone. Several classes of metal complexes including square planar
iridium and platinum systems and polynuclear metal complexes will be prepared
and their photophysical properties tuned through variations in their ligands.
The emission quantum yields and lifetimes of these complexes will be studied in
rigid media. Computational studies will suggest trends to support and direct the
experimental work. Complexes with metal centered excited states include Au(I)
and Cu(I) complexes as well as face-to-face square planar systems. New complexes
will be examined by incorporation into prototype OLED devices and assayed for
photoluminescence and stability under operating conditions. Selected dopant
emitters will be investigated as to their excitation mechanisms and the factors
limiting their efficiency in order to identify molecular property alterations
that improve performance in OLED displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This academic-
industrial partnership will also involve a reciprocal seminar series in which
personnel from the University of Rochester will present seminars at the Kodak
Research Laboratories and industrial personnel will present their work at the
University of Rochester. These researchers will also develop a demonstration and
teaching unit on photochemistry and display devices for presentation to
elementary and secondary schools. The unit will also be shared with the
Rochester Museum and Science Center for public presentations. In collaboration
with the Rochester Section of the American Chemical Society, a pilot program for
an Industrial Mentor Partnership will be initiated in which undergraduate and
graduate students at the University of Rochester will have a industrial mentor
at the Kodak Company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New metal complexes will be studied
to improve the efficiency of materials used as light emitting displays in
electronic devices. Educational opportunities for students in an industrial
setting are involved and educational demonstration units will be provided to
local schools and museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;