* 0207254
* Dynamics of Mush Column Magmatism: Experiments Involving Transport of Particle-Laden Fluids
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Bruce Marsh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2006
* USD 227,277.00

Dynamics of Mush Column Magamtism: Experiments Involving Transport of Particle-
Laden Fluids&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207254&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Marsh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature and behavior of the plumbing system that
carries magma to large volcanic centers can be looked upon as a magmatic mush
column. Mush columns are envisioned as a vertically extensive stack of
horizontal sheets (or sills) and chambers of magma interconnected by a plexus of
pipe-like and/or dike-like conduits stretching downward for distances as great
as 50 km. Because of their longevity and complexity, mush columns may play a
central role in the evolution of magma and in the general geologic evolution of
Earth-like planets. Mush column dynamics may be central to understanding the
connections between magmatism and volcanism, between eruptive flux and magma
composition, between chamber and conduit geometry and cumulate bed formation,
between conduit clogging and volcanic tremor, and between magma transport and
layered intrusions, among many other issues. &lt;br/&gt;This project will design
and build a scale model of a mush column to study experimentally the dynamics of
magma charged with crystals as it ascends through a series of interconnected
magma chambers. Particle-laden fluid will be used to simulate magma carrying
crystals, where the fluid and the sizes and densities of the particles are
carefully chosen to achieve dynamic similarity with melt and crystals in a real
system. The geometry of the plumbing of the scale model will be based on
geophysical and geological studies of real volcanic systems. A primary goal of
this project is to delineate in detail how the loss, gain, and deposition of
crystals depends on local and large scale geometry of the system and on the
magnitude and time history of flux of magma. A series of reconnaissance
experiments using a simple scale model has shown the feasibility of this
approach to study transport and emplacement of crystal-rich magma.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;