* 0207050
* Theoretical and Numerical Investigation of Dynamical Systems Method for Solving Linear and Nonlinear Ill-Posed Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Alexander Ramm, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 72,300.00

Smirnova&lt;br/&gt;0207050&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and her colleague aim to
develop&lt;br/&gt;theoretically a novel method, the DSM-dynamical system
method,&lt;br/&gt;for solving a wide variety of linear and nonlinear ill-
posed&lt;br/&gt;problems, to implement algorithms based on this method, and
to&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate the advantages of this method in efficiency
and&lt;br/&gt;accuracy. The DSM method is used as a general approach to
the&lt;br/&gt;construction of regularizing algorithms for solving ill-
posed&lt;br/&gt;problems, i.e. a stopping rule is developed: a rule for
choosing&lt;br/&gt;that moment of time at which the value of the solution to
the&lt;br/&gt;basic evolution equation stably approximates the solution to
the&lt;br/&gt;original ill-posed equation in the case when the data are
given&lt;br/&gt;with some error. Applications of different versions of the
DSM&lt;br/&gt;are considered to classical ill-posed problems of
computational&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, such as stable differentiation of noisy
data, stable&lt;br/&gt;inversion of ill-conditioned matrices, and to nonlinear
inverse&lt;br/&gt;problems arising in geophysics, quantum physics, medicine,
remote&lt;br/&gt;sensing in technology, and other applied areas. The DSM
with&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous updates of the inverse derivative operator
without&lt;br/&gt;actual inverting of this operator is developed for
solving&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear ill-posed problems. The DSM is used as a general
method&lt;br/&gt;for constructing convergent iterative processes for
solving&lt;br/&gt;ill-posed operator equations. Namely, convergent
discretization&lt;br/&gt;schemes for solving the basic evolution equation of the
DSM&lt;br/&gt;provide convergent iterative methods for solving the
original&lt;br/&gt;equation. The DSM is developed for unbounded operators, which
do&lt;br/&gt;not have continuous inverse operators, and also for a
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;operators whose derivative is a Fredholm operator with
nontrivial&lt;br/&gt;null-space.&lt;br/&gt; The area of ill-posed (unstable)
problems is extremely&lt;br/&gt;difficult, because solutions to ill-posed
problems are very&lt;br/&gt;sensitive to small variation in input data. For that
reason&lt;br/&gt;ill-posed problems cannot be solved by classical methods:
the&lt;br/&gt;corresponding numerical procedures for them turn out to
be&lt;br/&gt;divergent. However, ill-posed problems are frequently
encountered&lt;br/&gt;in many branches of natural sciences and
engineering:&lt;br/&gt;astrophysics, geophysics, spectroscopy, plasma
diagnostics,&lt;br/&gt;computerized tomography, antenna design, optimal design
of&lt;br/&gt;technical systems and engineering constructions,
optimal&lt;br/&gt;planning, optimal control over various processes, and many
other&lt;br/&gt;fields. Mathematical statements of these problems are given
in&lt;br/&gt;the form of operator equations of the first kind, problems
of&lt;br/&gt;functional minimization, problems of determining values
of&lt;br/&gt;unbounded operators, variational inequalities, and so on.
The&lt;br/&gt;project develops computational methods that provide more
accurate&lt;br/&gt;solutions to a wide range of ill-posed problems. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;also uses the results in the graduate courses on ill-
posed and&lt;br/&gt;inverse problems she teaches at Georgia State
University.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, because ill-posed problems are of basic
importance in&lt;br/&gt;applications, the results are of wide use in engineering
and&lt;br/&gt;applied sciences.&lt;br/&gt;