* 0207173
* Undergraduate Scholarships in Engineering to Improve Retention and Diversity
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Donna Crow, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 12/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Significant increases in the number of engineering and related technology
graduates from the Utah State System of Higher Education will be required over
the next several years to advance the intellectual and economic well being of
the state and its citizens. In response, the State Board of Regents has
developed an Engineering and Computer Science Initiative within the state system
of higher education with intentions to double the number of graduates in
engineering and related technology majors by the year 2006. The faculty within
the College of Engineering believe that efforts to improve retention, and to
increase enrollment opportunities for students from underrepresented minorities,
will contribute significantly toward that goal. Central to this effort is an
increase in the number of scholarship opportunities available to engineering
students within each of the 5 departments in the College of Engineering. For
each year of the four year duration of this project, 30 need-based scholarships
at $3,125 each are being awarded. The scholarships allow students to spend more
time on academic pursuits, and less time employed outside the University.
Scholarship recipients must: 1) be U.S. citizens, 2) enroll full time within the
College of Engineering, 3) demonstrate financial need as defined by the U.S.
Department of Education rules for Federal Financial aid, and 4) show academic
potential or ability. Recruitment is done through the USU Office of High
School/College Relations, the Multicultural Student Center, and the College of
Engineering. In addition to traditional recruiting methods, the college recruits
through its annual Engineering State program, a four day event held each spring
in which approximately 250 high school juniors from throughout the State of Utah
are introduced to the opportunities available in the various fields of
engineering. In addition to scholarship opportunities, the program also provides
CSEMS scholars with: 1) a formal program through which they can receive academic
assistance and advising, 2) a mechanism to promote interaction with upper-
division students and faculty on a regular basis, 3) research opportunities with
faculty mentors, and 4) early access to co-op/internship opportunities and
industry mentors. The CSEMS program is directed by faculty members from the
College of Engineering and staff from High School/College Relations, the
Multicultural Student Center, and USU Career Services.