* 0207601
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Nuclear Chiral Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Tsung-Shung Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2005
* USD 26,500.00

0207601&lt;br/&gt;Bernstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on nuclear chiral
dynamics to be held in Honolulu, Hawaii from February 17-20, 2003. The co-
organizers are Professor Aron Bernstein at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Professor Makoto Oka at the Tokyo Institute of Technology in
Japan. The seminar will focus of two general areas. The first is on the
structure of the nucleon and its interactions with the Goldstone Bosons.
Specific topics include: 1) the deviations of the nucleon and it's first excited
state from spherical symmetry as measured in electromagnetic pion production
experiments; 2) the polarizabilities of the nucleon as measured in Compton
scattering; 3) the question of isospin breaking, caused by the difference of up
and down quark masses, in pi N scattering and electromagnetic pion production
with polarized targets; and 4) electromagnetic kaon and eta production and
scattering from nucleons. Theoretically these are treated by Chiral Perturbation
Theory (ChPT) and dynamical meson-exchange models. The second general area to be
discussed is the use of effective field theories for the nucleon-nucleon
interactions and for few-nucleon physics. Here the experimental basis is much
further developed although there are still important new measurements,
particularly involving spin degrees of freedom and neutron properties, that need
to be further explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research topics to be discussed
are being actively pursued by theorists and experimentalists in the U.S. and
Japan. In the U.S. there are new electromagnetic apparatus and facilities at
Bates, Jefferson Lab and LEGS. In Japan there are the new Spring-8 photon
facility and the Tohuku University electron ring. The project advances
international human resources through the participation of a postdoc and
graduate student. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding
and cooperation. The researchers plan to publish proceedings of the seminar on
their Web sites.&lt;br/&gt;