* 0207308
* On the Nonlinear Dynamics of Interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Michael Frankel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2007
* USD 187,879.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0207308&lt;br/&gt;PI: Frankel,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Indiana University &lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: On the Nonlinear Dynamics of
Interfaces&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the research project is
the study of the nonlinear dynamics of flames. One of the major directions is
the study of free-interface problems related to combustion and exothermal phase
transitions. Free interface problems correspond to sharp changes in physical
characteristics describing the problem; they arise naturally in many models in
physics. An important example of free-interface problem to be studied is the
model of SHS (Self-propagating High-temperature Synthesis a.k.a. solid
combustion) which exhibits a remarkable variety of dynamics scenarios. SHS is a
potentially new method of manufacturing composite materials with qualities
superior to those obtained through traditional methods. Frankel will show the
compactness and finite dimensionality of the attractor for SHS model. Frankel
will also study the free-interface model of premixed gas combustion. The second
major direction of the project is the study of surface evolution equations
modeling certain basic flame instabilities and spatio-temporal patterns
associated with them. These equations are expressed in terms of instantaneous
geometrical characteristics and normal velocity of the surface which allows a
more natural representation of the basic nonlinearities that are of a purely
geometric origin. Solutions of these equations exhibit wrinkling and self-
fractalization similar to those observed in experiments. They are also capable
of generating the so-called fingering of the surface that occurs in many
processes in fluid dynamics. The proposed work will include rigorous study as
well as asymptotic methods and direct numerical
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses mathematical modeling of
the complex dynamics of flames. The investigator will study two major themes to
enhance the modeling of flame dynamics: 1) free-interface problems, i.e. ones in
which there are sharp changes in physical characteristics and 2)
&lt;br/&gt;surface evolution problems, i.e. where the equation is associated
with the flame front deformation and motion. These methods could extend our
understanding of flame instabilities, wrinkling, fingering as well as a form of
solid combustion which could have new applications in manufacturing of composite
materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Date: May 8th, 2002&lt;br/&gt;