* 0207425
* Collaborative Research: RUI: The Origin and Evolution of the Galapagos Lithosphere, Floreana Volcano
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Karen Harpp, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2008
* USD 111,502.00

Harpp&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207425&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floreana Island is the most
distinctive volcano of the Galapagos hotspot system. Unlike other Galapagos
Islands, Floreana experienced extensive explosive activity, and its alkalic
lavas are anomalously enriched in incompatible trace elements, exhibit evidence
of metasomatism, have unique isotopic compositions, and contain abundant mantle
xenoliths. The fundamental goal of the proposed project is to use Floreana's
unique features to elucidate the magmatic processes that construct and modify
the lithosphere forming the Galapagos Platform, which will be accomplished
through a detailed volcanologic, petrologic, and geochemical study. Determining
the volcanic history and compositional evolution of Floreana volcano will permit
estimation of variations in the depths and extents of melt production through
analysis of major and trace element variations and how those change with time.
These results will be applied to questions about Floreana's volcanic evolution,
including: a) the relationship between the different eruptive sequences; b)
apparent shallow depths of melting, which may contradict a deep plume origin; c)
compositional variations within single eruptive episodes; d) the relationship
between Floreana lavas and the giant volcanic terraces which underlie the
southern Galapagos Platform; and e) the origins of the xenoliths and their
relationship to Floreana lavas and other parts of the Galapagos lithosphere. The
powerful combination of high precision geochemical and petrologic analysis
coupled with detailed field observations will provide a rare opportunity to gain
insight into elusive questions about plume-lithosphere interaction, ocean-island
magmatism, and, ultimately, mantle evolution. &lt;br/&gt;