* 0207362
* Collaborative Research:  Physical Properties of Bubble- and Crystal-bearing Melts and Their Implications for Eruption Dynamics: Integrated Theoretical, Experimental and Field-based
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Paul Wallace, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 248,508.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Physical Properties of Bubble- and Crystal-bearing Melts
and their Implications for Eruption Dynamics: Integrated Theoretical,
Experimental and Field-based studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207362;
EAR-0207471&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Cashman&amp;Wallace; Manga&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Magma must ascend to the Earth's surface prior to erupting. Field and
theoretical studies over the past decade have shown that the rate of magma
ascent plays a critical role in determining the style, and violence, of the
ensuing eruption. This dependence results from physical changes that the magma
undergoes as it ascends (decompresses). Bubbles nucleate, grow, and coalesce
during decompression; crystals may also nucleate and grow. The presence of
bubbles and crystals, in turn, affects the magma's ability to flow (its
rheology), and thus its continued ascent. For this reason, development of an
accurate model of magma ascent and eruption requires that we understand both the
distribution of bubbles and crystals as a function of depth below the Earth's
surface and the effect of bubbles and crystals on magma rheology. We propose to
address both of these questions through a combination of experimental,
theoretical and field-based studies. Our specific goals are: (1) to determine
the effect of suspended crystals on the rheology of bubble-bearing melt; (2) to
use the bubble structure of volcanic samples to estimate shear (velocity)
profiles across volcanic conduits; and (3) to examine the permeability (bubble-
interconnectedness that permits gas escape) of volcanic clasts as a function of
both their bubble and crystal content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;