* 0207844
* Erosion Beneath the Laurentide Ice Sheet, and its Role in Pleistocene Ice Age Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* John Stone, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2005
* USD 217,411.00

EROSION BENEATH THE LAURENTIDE ICE SHEET, AND ITS ROLE IN&lt;br/&gt;PLEISTOCENE
ICE AGE DYNAMICS&lt;br/&gt;Subglacial erosion and sediment dynamics influence
the size, stability, and climatic sensitivity of large ice sheets. These
processes may regulate large-scale surging behavior, initiating rapid shifts in
climate and sea level (MacAyeal, 1993a,b), and perhaps dictate the periodicity
of the Quaternary ice ages (Clark and Pollard, 1998). We intuitivly associate
the scoured landscapes of the northern continents with subglacial erosion, yet
estimates of the rates, timing and spatial pattern of erosion by the Pleistocene
ice sheets are conflicting or ambiguous. Subglacial erosion is difficult to
study because: (i) The processes involved take place beneath large ice sheets.
(ii) As in all eroding landscapes, the record of change is continually effaced
as the surface is removed, and (iii) Although thick deposits of Pleistocene
glacial sediment, which contain information about erosional conditions, survive
around the margins of former ice sheets, they are patchily preserved and
difficult to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to study the history of
erosion by the Laurentide ice sheet, using the&lt;br/&gt;cosmogenic isotopes 10
Be and 26 Al. First, we will date glacial sedimentary sequences at the southern
margin of the former ice sheet using the technique of "burial dating" (Granger
et al., 1997). Cosmogenic 10 Be and 26 Al are produced within the crystal
structure of sedimentary quartz grains while the sediment is exposed to cosmic
radiation near the Earth's surface. Once the sediment is buried, these isotopes
decay at different rates and their ratio provides a measure of the burial time.
We have used this technique in trial measurements on glaciofluvial sands
interbedded with till, providing stratigraphically consistent mid-Pleistocene
bracketing ages on previously undated glacial deposits. Second, we will use
atmospherically-produced 10 Be, which accumulates in soils and is highly
concentrated near the surface of deeply weathered terrains, to investigate the
contribution of pre-glacial regolith to Laurentide tills. We presume the deep
regolith that covered the Canadian Shield prior to the Quaternary must have
contained an enormous inventory of 10 Be, far exceeding what could have
accumulated on the craton during Quaternary interglacial periods. By measuring
the 10 Be content of sediments eroded and deposited by the Laurentide ice sheet
throughout the Pleistocene, we will track the removal of pre-glacial regolith
and evaluate the ice sheet's response to the onset of hard-bed conditions. Our
initial measurements show that mid-Pleistocene tills contain enormous
concentrations of 'meteoric' 10 Be. Concentrations in Wisconsin till are two
orders of magnitude lower. It appears that the Laurentide ice sheet was 'mining'
a cover of heavily-weathered surficial material in the middle Pleistocene, but
that this source has now been largely exhausted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will
apply these methods to well-studied sequences of till and interbedded
glaciofluvial sediments in southwestern Minnesota, and early Pleistocene tills
bracketed by well-dated ash layers in drill cores from South Dakota and
Nebraska. This combination will provide samples of material eroded by the
Laurentide Ice Sheet throughout the Pleistocene. The field area in southwestern
Minnesota provides access to at least nine separate till units in outcrop and
drill core. Extensive prior work in the area, and easy access to both surface
and subsurface samples make it ideal for this study.&lt;br/&gt;