* 0207266
* Improved Security and Management of Underground Infrastructure Systems: Lessons Learned from September 11, 2001
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2002,09/30/2002
* Arthur Lembo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 09/30/2002
* USD 36,336.00

The collapse of the WTC Towers and destruction of surrounding buildings were
accompanied by damage to underground water distribution, electric power, natural
gas, steam, wastewater conveyance, telecommunication, and transportation
systems. This research aims to investigate and model complex system response,
involving underground facilities that are often taken for granted or overlooked
in comprehensive emergency planning. Understanding and documenting how
underground infrastructure performs during extreme events is a necessary step
for increasing the resilience of urban utility and transportation networks. This
research will strive to extend the knowledge gained to understand the
interdependencies of underground infrastructure and improve their security in
future extreme events. In addition to investigating integrated system response
in New York, the research will compare the effects of intense localized damage
at WTC with infrastructure system performance affected by distributed damage
during major California earthquakes. Response during extreme events will be
compared with the effects of previous severe accidents in New York. Three
activities are involved: 1) data collection and interviews with system managers;
2) comparative analysis; and 3) methodology for assessing interdependencies.
Some of this work has already begun. Deliverables include recommendations for
developing a methodology to evaluate the damage, areas of greatest
vulnerability, and the possibilities of cascading damage. Eventually, a
methodology will be sought that adapts risk management techniques used in
industrial process control to decision support systems for civil infrastructure
managers.

