* 0207556
* Hydrology of Braided River Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2006
* USD 263,093.00

0207556&lt;br/&gt;Foufoula&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Braided rivers are complex
dynamical systems comprising multiple unstable alluvial channels that divide and
rejoin around bars and islands and migrate frequently across the river's
braidplain. Although not common in lowland areas, braided rivers are dominant at
high latitudes and in areas with rapid sedimentation. They represent a major
management challenge in areas such as Alaska and the Pacific Northwest where
bridges and pipelines must be built across them. In addition, the alluvial
deposits of braided rivers are important reservoirs of water, oil, gas, coal,
sand, gravel and heavy minerals. Their instability and opportunistic flow
patterns make prediction of braided rivers extremely difficult.&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances have suggested several new ways of analyzing these complex dynamical
systems. It is now clear that braided rivers exhibit both spatial and dynamic
(time-space) scaling; i.e. a small part of the river network is statistically
similar to a larger part, in terms of planform geometry and evolution, under
appropriate resealing. This observation opens up the possibility of statistical
prediction of rare, high-magnitude channel shifts from readily obtainable
records of lower magnitude but more frequent events occurring at smaller scales.
It is also clear that at least some of these system-scaling or "emergent"
properties of braided rivers can be predicted on the basis of simplified models
of the stream dynamics. Finally, recent experimental work has illustrated that
the planform pattern and dynamics of braided rivers can be dramatically affected
by modest amounts of bank vegetation; it may even be possible to convert a
braided to meandering river by vegetation effects alone.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
unite and build on these three lines of research, focusing on the following
basic issues: (1) extension of scaling analysis in braided rivers to the third
(vertical) dimension, i.e., scaling of flows, velocities, bed elevation and
sediment flux, with implications for statistical prediction of floods, scour and
mobility in modern rivers, and stratigraphic architecture in ancient deposits;
(2) testing and refinement of existing braided-river models using hydrologic
scaling results as a model metric; and (3) study of the effects of vegetation on
braided rivers, focusing on how repeated cycles of flow and vegetation can lead
to the 'regularization' of braided-river flows into a small number of well
defined channels, breaking the scaling and perhaps leading to the development of
the first truly self-regenerating meanders.&lt;br/&gt;