* 0207662
* Social and Economic Context of Early Neolithic Villages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Ian Kuijt, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2008
* USD 189,231.00

As an evolutionary event the transition from foraging to farming is one of the
most important social and economic process in human prehistory. Supported by the
National Science Foundation Dr. Kuijt and his colleagues will conduct three
seasons of archaeological excavation at the early Neolithic village of Dhra',
Jordan, to explore the social, economic, and demographic context of this
transition. The early agricultural village of Dhra', dating to approximately
11,500 years ago and located next to the Dead Sea, provides an important means
of reconstructing the earliest transition from foraging to farming, and
developing an understanding of the social context in which food production and
agriculture first emerged in the Old World. Archaeological excavations will be
conducted in a series of broad continuous five by five meter excavation units
documenting the internal organization of one of our earliest Neolithic villages.
This will provide researchers with an understanding of the spatial organization
of village life, including the location where food preparation occurred, how
residential areas were organized, the location and nature of food storage
systems, and where ritual and mortuary activities occurred. In exploring these
important evolutionary and anthropological issues, Dr. Kuijt and his
collaborators will use archaeological data to address three interrelated
questions: 1) How was the development of new systems of food production linked
to paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental changes? 2) How might the development of
new forms of food production be linked to later population growth and pressure?
and, 3) What was the social context early village life, and how did this change
with the development of early food production? Guided by these questions, this
research provides new insights into the social process and impact of the process
of plant and animal domestication on small-scale foraging/farming communities,
including the emergence of social inequality, the development of ritual and
civic elites, and the development of food surpluses. Bringing together
specialists to conduct investigations into the social, demographic, and
environmental context of food production at Dhra', this research contributes
towards our understanding of the evolutionary transition from foraging to
farming on three levels. First, it will help researchers to gain insight into
how this transition impacted life at the scale of local village life. Second,
this study will help archaeologists to understand how village social and
economic changes are linked to regional and intra-regional changes. Finally, at
the global scale this research will help anthropologists and archaeologists to
better understand the evolutionary trajectory, and nature of, the transition
from foraging to farming.



