* 0207560
* Functional Polymer Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2009
* Kenneth Wynne, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2009
* USD 564,000.00

The theme of this research is the development of a molecular and macromolecular
basis for generating desired surface structure and function that avoids post-
manufacturing processes such as plasma treatment. To this end, the synthesis and
utilization of Dual Function Macromonomers (DFMs) will be carried out. DFMs are
difunctional low molar mass copolymers having conventional end groups (e.g.,
alcohol) and containing (a) semifluorinated sidechains and (b) functional
sidechains. It is proposed that semifluorinated "nanoballoons" will bring
desired functionality to the surface in operations such as solvent casting or
melt processing. Thus, the DFM concept leverages the well-known tendency of
fluoropolymer groups to surface-concentrate. However, in so doing, copolymer
structure causes functionality that would ordinarily be in the bulk to be
brought to the surface. The DFM concept will be applied first to polyurethanes.
The plan is to prepare (a) surface active DFMs, (b) PUs incorporating DFM soft
blocks, and (c) blends using a conventional polyurethane as major component and
DFM PU as minor component. The resulting material properties are controlled at
the nanostructure and microstructural levels. The DFM PU is employed for
controlling surface function while a conventional bulk PU provides independently
controlled mechanical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
focuses on a new and potentially economical method for introducing chemical
functionality specifically at the surface of polymeric materials. The proposed
control of surface chemistry is anticipated to improve adhesion and durability
of manufactured items, to facilitate long-term function of biomedical materials,
and to bring into existence new materials for destroying dangerous pathogens on
contact.&lt;br/&gt;