* 0207030
* Quantum Invariants and Representations of 3-Manifold Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Charles Frohman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 114,957.00

DMS-0207030&lt;br/&gt;Charles D. Frohman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will work
on a number of projects in low dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology and its
applications. These projects include &lt;br/&gt;investigating various properties
of the Turaev-Viro&lt;br/&gt;invariants including the construction of universal
&lt;br/&gt;polynomials relating the representation theory of the
&lt;br/&gt;fundamental groups of manifolds to these invariants and the
&lt;br/&gt;extension of these invariants away from the unit circle.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the PI will consider, given a tetrahedral
&lt;br/&gt;decomposition of a knot, how one may define a rigorous&lt;br/&gt;path
integral over the space of cross ratios of the tetrahedra &lt;br/&gt;to compute
the Turaev-Viro invariant of an integral surgery &lt;br/&gt;on the knot. The PI
will also investigate the structure of &lt;br/&gt;the Kauffman bracket skein
module in terms of the geometry &lt;br/&gt;of character varieties,and, more
generally, use quantum &lt;br/&gt;invariants in the study of Dehn surgery on
knots. Finally, &lt;br/&gt;this award provides support for the PI's graduate
students &lt;br/&gt;to assist him in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology is a kind of geometry where the congruence
&lt;br/&gt;transformations do not preserve metric properties such &lt;br/&gt;as
distance and angle. The objects the PI studies are &lt;br/&gt;given as the
result of gluing together polyhedra along faces. &lt;br/&gt;To know when two
such objects are different topologically one &lt;br/&gt;needs to make
measurements that are unchanged by &lt;br/&gt;topological congruence
transformations. An example of &lt;br/&gt;such a measurement is the Euler
characteristic of a &lt;br/&gt;surface, which is the number of vertices minus
the&lt;br/&gt;number of edges plus the number of faces. If two surfaces
&lt;br/&gt;are topologically equivalent they have the same Euler
&lt;br/&gt;characteristic. One of the most celebrated theorems of
&lt;br/&gt;geometry is the Gauss-Bonnet theorem which relates the
&lt;br/&gt;Euler characteristic of any surface to a quantity &lt;br/&gt;computed
metrically. Quantum invariants of three manifolds &lt;br/&gt;are like Euler
characteristic, but more delicate. They &lt;br/&gt;are constructed statistically
from a probability space &lt;br/&gt;made up of "states" which come from the
description &lt;br/&gt;of how polyhedra are glued together to form the object.
&lt;br/&gt;The PI's work is about relating these invariants to &lt;br/&gt;metric
quantities derived from the geometry of the&lt;br/&gt;underlying object. To this
end, the PI shows that &lt;br/&gt;the space of states can be replaced by spaces
of &lt;br/&gt;geometric measurements made on the object. The goal &lt;br/&gt;of
the project is to see how the geometry and topology &lt;br/&gt;of the object are
determined by its combinatorial &lt;br/&gt;description in terms of
polyhedra.&lt;br/&gt;