* 0207035
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Synthesis of Novel Magnetic Nanoparticles Engineered with Polymeric Micellar Templates
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Linda Shekhawat, Harris                  Linda          A
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 03/31/2005
* USD 123,872.00

0207035 Harris

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen month research fellowship by Dr. Linda A.
Harris to work with Dr. Tim G. St. Pierre at the University of Western Australia
in Perth, Australia. Support for this project is from the Math and Physical
Sciences Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.

The goal of this project is to prepare well-defined isolated magnetic
nanoparticles encapsulated in an organic sheath, and to use these as models for
understanding nanomagnetic behavior. The availability of magnetic nanoparticles
with well-defined structural features is a major hurdle in understanding
structure-magnetic behavior relationships. The Pis will synthesize a series of
polymers that will serve as nanoreactors for the controlled formation of iron
oxide nanoparticles. These well-defined materials will function as models to
test the hypothesis that constrained polymer micelles can control the size and
morphology of iron oxide nanoparticles. These methods will be used to synthesize
iron oxide nanoparticles selectively labeled with 57 Fe at either the particle
surface or core. Differentiating the surface vs. core will allow particle sub-
structure characterization by Mossbauer spectroscopy to enable correlations
between nanomagnetic behavior and structure.

Professor St. Pierre has over a decade of experience in the study of synthetic
and biogenic magnetic materials with a particular focus on iron oxides.