* 0207729
* A Novel Surface Nanocrystallization and \(SNH)\ Process for Improved Fatigue and Wear Resistance
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Leon Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 08/31/2006
* USD 396,750.00

The project is on a novel surface nanocrystallization and hardening (SNH)
process wherein metallic parts are impacted with high-energy balls under a
controlled atmosphere. It will be suitable for both large and small engineering
components and offer superior fatigue and wear properties derived from the
synergy of the tailored microstructure, the smooth gradients of both composition
and grain size, and the desired residual stress distribution. The University of
Connecticut (UConn) and the University of Tennessee (UT) have joined together to
investigate the key issues related to the SNH process. UConn will bring in
expertise in the high-energy ball milling and SNH process, while UT will provide
expertise in the area of fatigue mechanisms and modeling. A major goal of the
study are to develop and construct a special SNH machine with independent
control of a variety of the SNH process variables such as the surface grain
size, grain-size gradient, composition gradient, formation of new compounds,
residual stresses, and surface finishing. The objective of the project is to
perform systematic and comprehensive experiments to establish the processing
maps for surface nanocrystallization of the Ti-6-4 alloy including detailed
microstructure and dislocation density studies using high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy (HREM). Based on the mechanisms established,
analytical and numerical models will be developed to predict the general trend
of surface nanocrystallization. Mechanical properties of the SNH-processed
Ti-6-4 alloys will be quantified using nanoindentation, pin-on-disc wear, and
high-cycle fatigue tests. The fatigue mechanisms established in these studies
will be used as a basis to develop theoretic models for the prediction of
fatigue crack initiation and propagation behavior in the material with surface
nano-grains and a grain-size gradient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work under this
grant attempts to develop bulk nanocrystalline metallic components with superior
mechanical properties through the development and testing of a new process known
as surface nanocrystallization and hardening (SNH). The ultra fine grain size in
the surface with appropriate grain size gradient into the bulk is expected to
result in improved fatigue life of the structural components. The project plans
include participation of undergraduate and high school students along with
graduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;