* 0207125
* Conference on Inverse Spectral Geometry, June 20-28, 2002, Lexington, Kentucky
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Peter Perry, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 11/30/2003
* USD 16,048.00

DMS-0207125&lt;br/&gt;Peter Perry and Carolyn Gordon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
award provides partial support for active research mathematicians with limited
means &lt;br/&gt; of support to attend and participate in the Conference on
Inverse Spectral geometry to be &lt;br/&gt; held at the University of Kentucky,
June 20-28, 2002. The conference will consist of two &lt;br/&gt; parts. The
first (June 20-22) is a series of special lectures by Steven Zelditch
&lt;br/&gt; (Johns Hopkins University), Richard Beals (Yale University), Peter
Perry &lt;br/&gt; (University of Kentucky), and Tanya Christiansen (University
of Missouri) covering inverse &lt;br/&gt; spectral problems, scattering theory,
and analysis on the Heisenberg group. The second is &lt;br/&gt; a workshop on
inverse spectral geometry (June 24-28) with three morning lectures and one
&lt;br/&gt; afternoon lecture to allow maximum time for discussion and
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt; Conference themes are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (1)
Scattering theory for the Heisenberg group and Two-Step Nilpotent Lie Groups
&lt;br/&gt; (2) Direct and inverse scattering problems for the Laplacian on
exterior domains and &lt;br/&gt; non-compact Riemannian manifolds &lt;br/&gt;
(3) Geometric invariants which are (are not) spectral invariants on compact
&lt;br/&gt; Riemannian manifolds &lt;br/&gt; (4) Geometry of the Hodge Laplacian
on p-forms on compact Riemannian manifolds &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Further
information is available at http://www.ms.uky.edu/~isgconf/&lt;br/&gt; or from
the conference organizers:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Peter A. Perry
perry@ms.uky.edu&lt;br/&gt; Carolyn Gordon
Carolyn.S.Gordon@Dartmouth.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;