* 0207218
* Applications of Set Theory to Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Alexander Kechris, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The Fields Institute in Toronto, Ontario is running an
intensive&lt;br/&gt;program in Applications of Set Theory to Analysis from
September&lt;br/&gt;to December 2002. This is an award for the support of
junior&lt;br/&gt;U.S. participants in that international program. Long-
term&lt;br/&gt;activities in the semester include graduate courses and
seminars,&lt;br/&gt;and shorter activities include a workshop on Descriptive
Set&lt;br/&gt;Theory and a workshop on Banach Spaces, Algebras, and
Subspaces&lt;br/&gt;of Baire Class 1 Functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even people
whose only contact with higher mathematics comes from&lt;br/&gt;watching reruns
of "Star Trek" or "The Simpsons" will have encountered&lt;br/&gt;the phenomenon
that the decimal expansion of Pi requires infinitely&lt;br/&gt;many digits. The
ratio of the circumference of a circle to its&lt;br/&gt;diameter, therefore, is
a manifestation of the actual, as opposed to&lt;br/&gt;just the potential,
infinite. While the existence of the actual&lt;br/&gt;infinite has had a
profound influence on mathematics, its acceptance&lt;br/&gt;was not immediate
and the history of the subject is fraught with&lt;br/&gt;controversy. Two major
branches of mathematics which devote much of&lt;br/&gt;their resources to the
study of the infinite are analysis and set&lt;br/&gt;theory. Much of analysis is
concerned with understanding limiting&lt;br/&gt;behaviour in various contexts. A
simple prototype of this is found in&lt;br/&gt;considering the number Pi as the
limit of increasingly longer finite&lt;br/&gt;decimal approximations to Pi. Many
of the spaces which analysts study&lt;br/&gt;consist of limits of simpler
objects. Set theory, on the other hand,&lt;br/&gt;studies the infinite in a more
abstract setting, concentrating on the&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial and structural
implications of the infinite. While the&lt;br/&gt;connections between set theory
and analysis have always been&lt;br/&gt;acknowledged, too much of the work in
these two areas has gone on&lt;br/&gt;largely unheeded by researchers in the
other area. The chief purpose&lt;br/&gt;of the current proposal is to create an
environment where leading set&lt;br/&gt;theorists and analysts can collaborate
on problems which straddle the&lt;br/&gt;boundaries of their
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;