* 0207571
* Paleobotanical Estimates of the Eocene Elevation of the Sierra Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Clement Chase, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2006
* USD 201,023.00

Much of what is now the North American Cordillera was near sea level in the
Early Cretaceous. Knowing when uplift to its present elevation occurred is
essential to understanding the large-scale tectonic processes that led to its
formation. For the Sierra Nevada of California, it has been thought since the
1890s that geomorphic and other evidence required middle Miocene and later
uplift of the range, despite cessation of major magmatic activity in the Late
Cretaceous. New geophysical, geochemical, and paleoaltimetric data have cast
doubt on this concept of late uplift.&lt;br/&gt; We propose new paleobotanical
studies to determine the Eocene elevation of the Sierra Nevada, which will allow
us to decide between early and late uplift models. Analyses of the physical
morphology of modern leaf assemblages are able to produce reasonably accurate
estimates of present-day climate and altitude (750 m). The relationship is
especially well calibrated in North America. Leaf morphology studies have
indicated that western Nevada was higher at 16 Ma (middle Miocene) than at the
present, and this conclusion is supported by other lines of evidence. The
history of elevation of the Sierra Nevada - western Nevada region prior to 16
Ma, however, is very uncertain. We propose to collect and analyze numerous
Eocene leaf assemblages that occur in this region with ages from 45 - 50 Ma.
This is the probable age of the lower part of the "auriferous gravels" of the
Sierra Nevada, the focus of so much of the California gold rush.&lt;br/&gt;
Paleobotanical work will focus first on fossil leaves known as the Chalk Bluffs
flora found in the lower part of the auriferous gravels. These gravels are
probably of early and/or middle Eocene age and were deposited by the ancestral
Yuba River. Differences in inferred paleotemperature could result from global
climatic change or from local climatic change due to altitudinal change. There
are low-altitude leaf assemblages of the same age to the west that we will use
as standards to control for regional climate change and estimate paleoaltitudes
for the inland assemblages. The low altitude assemblages will also be compared
to other low-altitude early to middle Eocene leaf assemblages in a range of 20
latitude along the Pacific Coast.&lt;br/&gt; Some of the localities we wish to
sample are threatened by development; there is some urgency in making these
collections and analyses before the opportunity to constrain the early Tertiary
elevation of the north and central Sierra Nevada slips
away.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;