* 0207106
* Slow Dynamics and Extended Structures in Complex Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/2005
* USD 243,000.00

The intricacy and complexity of condensed matter systems are often succinctly
expressed through effective theories valid in the limit of large length and time
scales. Such theories, both in equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical
mechanics, arise out of a coarse-graining process which relies on a separation
of microscopic and macroscopic length and time scales. This separation of scales
becomes suspect in systems where extended spatial structures lead to large scale
heterogeneities. There is mounting evidence from experiments and simulations
that such structures exist in granular systems, supercooled liquids and foams.
It is also well established that the dynamical behavior of these systems set
them apart from ordinary liquids and suggests that the complexity of dynamical
behavior and response can be traced back to occurrence of extended spatial
structures. One way of unraveling this complexity is to identify the extended
structures responsible for the anomalous dynamics, and then construct
'effective' equations of motion for these extended degrees of freedom. The
objective of this theoretical research project is to formulate effective models
at the mesoscopic scale of these heterogeneities; a scale intermediate between
the microscopic one characteristic of molecular dynamics simulations and the
macroscopic one entering hydrodynamic descriptions. Such a formulation should
provide a direct interface between theory and experiments since the information
at the mesoscopic scale is often directly available from experiments. Numerical
simulations will be used as a stepping stone in the construction of effective
dynamical theories. The techniques will be developed in the context of lattice
models and then extended to continuum models. By focusing on geometrical
structures at the mesoscopic scale, the project aims to explore the emergence of
macroscopic physical properties from microscopic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical project investigates
complex and disordered condensed matter systems, such as glasses, and attempts
to determine how behavior at the microscopic scale affects behavior at the large
scale. This is a fundamental problem in science whose solution would have wide
impact.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;