* 0207756
* The Role of Surface Complexes on Metal Incorporation into Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Richard Reeder, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2008
* USD 254,857.00

Reeder&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207756&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will investigate the fundamental structural and coordinative aspects of
metal sorption at the calcite-water interface. The experimental approach will
combine laboratory experiments in model systems with spectroscopic techniques to
characterize the detailed coordination geometry of selected metal and metalloid
species adsorbed on calcite. Metals of interest include divalent lead and
cadmium, selected trivalent rare-earth elements, and arsenate anions. These
species are important contaminants in soils, sediments, aquifers, and other
near-surface environments. One goal of the research is to determine the role of
adsorption in controlling binding site preferences for minor element uptake by
calcite during crystal growth. Observations that non-octahedral surface
complexes for Zn(II) and Cu(II) adsorbed on calcite result in preferential
uptake on the less constrained of two binding sites, suggests that site
preferences for other metals should also correlate with surface complex
geometry. The proposed research tests this hypothesis for selected metals (Pb
and Cd) and provides structural information that can be used in predictive
models. A further goal of the research is to evaluate how adsorption complexes
control the coordination of rare-earth elements following incorporation into
calcite, where observations have shown differences in coordination number
between light and heavy lanthanides. The role of solution pH on the structure of
surface complexes will also be evaluated in laboratory and spectroscopic
studies. Another component of the research project will identify the mechanism
of adsorption of arsenate ions on calcite. Arsenate, an important contaminant in
some natural waters, shows similarities in behavior with phosphate. The latter
is a strong inhibitor of calcite surface reactivity, and its presence may reduce
the ability of calcite to sorb and incorporate other impurity species. The
results of this aspect of the research will provide insight to the mechanism of
surface inhibition as well as provide fundamental information about arsenate
interactions with calcite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research
project will contribute to a broader understanding of the molecular-scale
processes that govern the distribution and behavior of geochemically and
environmentally important elements in Earth's near-surface environment. The
results of this work will also contribute to an understanding of ways in which
the threat to society posed by metal contaminants can be reduced. &lt;br/&gt;