* 0207963
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Coordinated TIMS U-Series Dating and Paleoenvironmental Interpretations of Pedogenic Carbonate, Wind River Basin, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Warren Sharp, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2005
* USD 189,116.00

PROJECT SUMMARY With prior support from NSF, we have shown that TIMS (Thermal
Ionization Mass Spectrometry) U-series dating of pedogenic carbonate can provide
a precise chronology of pedogenesis and reliable ages for appropriate Quaternary
alluvial deposits (Sharp et al., accepted). Though the U/Th ratios of pedogenic
carbonate of carbonate-clast dominated alluvium at Kyle Canyon (Nevada) are too
low for U-series dating, pedogenic carbonate in granitic-clast dominated gravels
of the Wind River Basin (Wyoming) is highly suitable. Precise U-series ages (1-2
percent, 2) may be measured on a few cubic millimeters of pedogenic carbonate
and require only very small corrections for detrital 230Th. Suites of ages may
be screened for reliability using criteria inherent in the U-series results. The
time lag between clast deposition and accumulation of datable carbonate.a
critical parameter if U-series dates of innermost clast-rinds are to be used to
date host Quaternary deposits. is estimated to be 5+ 5 kyr in the Wind River
basin. O- and C-isotope analyses of a trial suite of pedogenic carbonate samples
shows that a temporally resolved stable isotope paleoclimatic record can be
constructed using pedogenic carbonate dated by U-series. Funds are requested to
further develop U-series dating of pedogenic carbonate and its application to
the refinement of a Rocky Mountain glacial chronology. Emphasis will be placed
on resolving the timing of Bull Lake glacial advances (at their type locality)
with respect to other regional and global climate records. Moreover, we propose
to characterize the spatial and temporal accumulation of pedogenic carbonate in
relict soils of Late- Middle to Late Pleistocene deposits, and measure the O-
and C-isotopic compositions of carbonate samples dated by U-series. We will
interpret these data to provide a comprehensive history of paleoenvironmental
change in the Wind River Basin throughout much of the late Illinoian and
Wisconsin glacial cycles. Ultimately, our goal is to correlate the soils-based
paleoenvironmental record with the geomorphic expressions of paleoclimatic
change.the well-preserved glacial moraines and glacio-fluvial terraces of the
Basin.by establishing a common chronological framework based on precise U-series
ages. This is a collaborative proposal. Warren Sharp and Ken Ludwig (Berkeley
Geochronology Center) will be responsible for U-series analyses and age
interpretations; Ron Amundson (U.C. Berkeley) will provide field and laboratory
expertise in pedology and stable isotope analysis and interpretation; Oliver
Chadwick (U.C. Santa Barbara) will provide expertise in Quaternary geology,
geomorphology and soil stratigraphy as well as familiarity with the Wind River
area.