* 0207723
* Collaborative Research: Cognitive and Physiological Effects of Stereotypes on Problem Solving: Causal Mechanisms and Prescriptive Measures
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Steven Fein, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 02/29/2004
* USD 92,339.00

The failure of large groups of students to perform to their potential.such as
females in &lt;br/&gt;math, or African Americans across a variety of academic
disciplines.is one of the great &lt;br/&gt;tragedies in our educational system.
The significance of this problem has inspired numerous &lt;br/&gt;investigations
of its scope, nature, and potential causes. A recent breakthrough points to the
&lt;br/&gt;power that social context can have in creating, perpetuating, or
eliminating the underperformance &lt;br/&gt;that has hindered these groups.
Steele, Aronson, Spencer, and their colleagues have demonstrated &lt;br/&gt;the
crucial role of stereotype threat, a situational phenomenon that occurs when
individuals who &lt;br/&gt;are targets of stereotypes alleging intellectual
inferiority are reminded of the possibility of &lt;br/&gt;confirming these
stereotypes (e.g., Spencer, Steele, &amp; Quinn, 1999; Steele, 1997). For
example, &lt;br/&gt;Spencer et al. (1999) showed that high-achieving female
college students performed significantly &lt;br/&gt;worse than males on a
standardized math test when the stereotype about their math ability was
&lt;br/&gt;made salient (.Males have performed better than females on this test
in the past..). However, this &lt;br/&gt;gender gap was eliminated simply by
changing the words used for introducing the test (.Males &lt;br/&gt;and females
have performed equally well on this test in the past..). A counterintuitive
finding is &lt;br/&gt;that only individuals who are highly identified with
success and achievement in given &lt;br/&gt;stereotyped domains are the ones who
show deficits under threat, in contrast to stigmatized &lt;br/&gt;individuals
who are not achievement oriented in these domains (Steele, 1997). Thus, it is
the &lt;br/&gt;people in the vanguard of their group who are the most vulnerable
to situations in which &lt;br/&gt;stereotypes about their ability become
salient. The detrimental effects of stereotype threat extend &lt;br/&gt;to
African Americans (e.g., Steele &amp; Aronson, 1995), Latinos (e.g., Aronson
&amp; Salinas, 1997), &lt;br/&gt;and students of low socioeconomic status (e.g.,
Croizet &amp; Claire, 1998), who are concerned with &lt;br/&gt;academic success.
&lt;br/&gt;We hypothesize that the priming of a stereotype results in heightened
physiological &lt;br/&gt;arousal. According to the classic Yerkes-Dodson (1908)
law of physiological arousal, &lt;br/&gt;performance is optimal at intermediate
levels of arousal and decreases when arousal is either low &lt;br/&gt;or high,
resulting in an inverted-U shaped function. More recent neurophysiological
research has &lt;br/&gt;corroborated and expanded on the classic findings of the
Yerkes-Dodson law in animals and in &lt;br/&gt;humans. For example, Lupien and
McEwen (1997) provided evidence for an inverted-U shape &lt;br/&gt;relationship
between the level of the corticosteroid, cortisol, and cognitive processes in a
variety &lt;br/&gt;of animal and human studies. We hypothesize that high-
achieving individuals in stigmatized &lt;br/&gt;domains approach a problem-
solving task in the given domains with an optimal level of arousal
&lt;br/&gt;for performing well. Stereotype threat may interfere with these
individuals. performance by &lt;br/&gt;leading to arousal that exceeds an
optimal level, causing performance deficits. By trying to &lt;br/&gt;uncover the
role of physiological arousal in mediating stereotype threat and the cognitive
nature &lt;br/&gt;of the resultant deficits, we are hoping to contribute to
understanding the theoretical &lt;br/&gt;underpinnings of stereotype threat as
well as to help stigmatized high-achieving students to &lt;br/&gt;overcome its
effects. In the psychometric literature, Gallagher (1992, 1998) has shown that
&lt;br/&gt;females performed more poorly than males on math-SAT problems that
required the use of &lt;br/&gt;meaningful mental short cuts and estimation
(versus problems that required standard calculation). &lt;br/&gt;There is reason
to believe that cortisol reactivity may be implicated in defaulting to rote
&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic versus meaningful problem solving (Forget, Lacroix,
Somma, &amp; Cohen, 2000). We &lt;br/&gt;will test interventions for combating
stereotype threat by reducing arousal, improving the use of
&lt;br/&gt;meaningful problem-solving strategies, and creating a practice of
self-affirmation. In sum, the &lt;br/&gt;proposed research is designed to
examine: (1) the role of physiological arousal as a mediator of
&lt;br/&gt;stereotype threat; (2) whether reasoning becomes more algorithmic and
less meaningful under &lt;br/&gt;stereotype threat; and (3) ways in which the
detrimental effects of stereotype threat can be &lt;br/&gt;mitigated or
eliminated.