* 0207273
* Form of Gold and its Relation to the Hydrothermal History of Carlin-type Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Rodney Ewing, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 241,915.00

Kesler et al &lt;br/&gt;0207273&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
requests funding for a comprehensive study of the form of gold and its relation
to the hydrothermal history of Carlin-type deposits. Most studies of these
deposits have focused on macro-scale (geologic) observations with limited
attention to micro-scale features. They have left a fragmented picture of the
form of gold in Carlin-type deposits and how it relates to the origin and age of
the deposits. The study will combine state-of-the-art high-resolution,
transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and xray absorption, near edge
structure (XANES) with more traditional surface ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)
analyses to provide comprehensive mineralogical information. Work will focus on
the Twin Creeks, Betze-Post-Screamer, and Meikle Carlin-type deposits, all of
which have been well studied geologically. By combining observations from the
atomic scale to the deposit scale, we will provide better control on mechanisms
of gold transport and deposition in these deposits and on their hydrothermal
history and age. Our main objectives will be to determine whether structurally
bound gold in arsenian pyrite, the main host for gold in these deposits, is
present as interlayers of arsenopyrite/marcasite in pyrite, and how they relate
to nano-scale gold particles observed in reconnaissance studies of these
deposits. This information is important because structurally bound gold might
have been deposited from solutions that were not saturated with respect to
native gold, thus allowing them to collect gold more efficiently during their
formation. We will also evaluate whether arsenian pyrite-hosted gold and small
particles of native gold are coeval or were deposited at different times. This
information is needed to relate gold to the appropriate stage of mineralization
and evaluate the possibility that Carlin-type deposits in Nevada were formed by
several, spatially overlapping, gold-depositing events. Deposition from
unsaturated solutions and formation by multiple events could also help explain
why these deposits are so large. Finally, our work will relate the deposits to
their geologic and tectonic setting, which is essential to exploration for ore
to serve the next generation. &lt;br/&gt;