* 0207784
* Transport, Transformation, and Retention of Arsenic in a Headwater Stream: Hydrologic, Biological, and Geochemical Controls
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Herbert Valett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2007
* USD 229,998.00

0207784&lt;br/&gt;Schreiber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well-known that arsenic,
a toxic and carcinogenic element, is readily transported in natural waters and
that its forms, speciation, and concentrations are affected by biogeochemical
reactions. In this proposal, we address the transport, transformation and
retention of arsenic in a stream-aquifer system impacted by past mining
activities. Given our current understanding of the structure of stream-aquifer
system in close contact with the mine, we developed a number of questions
regarding the role of hydrologic, geochemical and biological processes
controlling the speciation and concentration of arsenic. The proposed research
will center on addressing two central questions: (1) what factors control
spatial and temporal variations in arsenic fluxes to the stream? (2) How do
hyporheic processes influence retention of arsenic in the
stream?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, we will utilize a
combination of field, laboratory, and modeling techniques to evaluate the
controls on arsenic mobility within the stream, with specific emphasis on
characterizing the role of the hyporheic zone in acting as a source or a sink
for arsenic. The proposed research elements include employing hydrologic and
geochemical monitoring to characterize groundwater and surface water end-members
as well as to describe biogeochemical conditions within the hyporheic zone. In
addition, transient storage models will be used to evaluate the hydrologic
characteristics of the hyporheic zone and, through incorporation of reactive
uptake terms, to address the role of the hyporheic zone in retarding or
promoting arsenic transport to the stream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this
proposed research will have implications for our general understanding of the
biogeochemical cycling of redox-sensitive trace elements such as arsenic. The
recent tightening of the arsenic drinking water standard from 50 to 10 ug/L will
drive federal and state agencies to closely examine sources of both natural and
human-introduced arsenic contamination. Improving the knowledge of the processes
that control arsenic mobility will greatly aid these agencies in developing
plans for protecting and treating drinking water supplies.&lt;br/&gt;