* 0207864
* Next-Generation Optical WDM Mesh Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Biswanath Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2006
* USD 425,000.00

This project aims at creating new knowledge on the design, analysis, and
optimization of novel system architectures, network protocols, and software
algorithms for building next generation optical Wavelength Division Multiplexing
(WDM) backbone networks. Particular research focus will include hierarchical
optical switching, optical multicasting, and optimal topology reconfiguration.
For hierarchical optical switching, the generalized optical switch architecture
with multiple levels will be developed where the advantages of both optics and
electronics will be exploited. For example, a hybrid switch architecture will
include wavebands (bands of wavelengths) being switched all-optically, while
wavelength and sub-wavelength connections may be switched with optical-
electrical-optical (OEO) switches. Results from this investigation will provide
guidelines on where to strategically place resources such as hierarchical
optical switches. This project will also design optical multicasting switch
architectures and develop mathematical models and efficient algorithms for
supporting light-trees in a network with hierarchical optical switching. The
research team will develop new efficient models for network operators as well as
will design new algorithms for protecting light-trees using various schemes such
as link protection and shared protection. In particular, the signaling protocols
for set up, maintenance, and termination of light-tree based connections will be
designed and studied by simulation. Finally, in the part of the research related
to the virtual topology design, the reconfigurations of WDM networks will be
studied so that the bandwidth upgrades are taken into account, e.g. instead of
fully taking down a lightly-loaded lightpath or adding a maximum-capacity
lightpath, an existing lightpath can be upgraded when a fraction of its free
capacity is needed. In particular, traffic fluctuations, such as within the
global optical network over the time zones, can create another dynamism, i.e.,
traffic intensity peak rates. In this context, the research team will study
different virtual topology-design methods to obtain a better understanding of
this and similar problems related to dynamic traffic fluctuations.