* 0207766
* Tempo and Mode of Early Animal Evolution: Estimating Metazoan Divergence Times with a Molecular Clock
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Kevin Peterson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2006
* USD 131,949.00

Tempo and mode of early animal evolution: estimating metazoan divergence times
Kevin Peterson EAR-0207766 ABSTRACT Accurate dating of when the first
bilaterally-symmetrical animals (i.e., Bilateria) arose is crucial to our
understanding of early animal evolution. The fossil record suggests that
bilaterians arose about 555 Ma ago, whereas most previous molecular-clock
analyses estimate they arose between 800-1000 Ma ago. Because of this pronounced
disparity, PI seeks to show that a molecular clock can accurately, and with
precision, date deep divergences among metazoan taxa. Distance analysis of four
concatenated proteins from nine invertebrate taxa gives the correct phylogenetic
topology, and regression analysis using four calibration points shows that
branch lengths are directly correlated with time. PI's clock estimates appear to
be accurate, because a molecular estimate of the divergence between echinoderm
subphyla (507 Ma) falls within the range established from the fossil record
(485-520 Ma). His analyses estimate that bilaterians arose 570 Ma ago, and
animals themselves arose almost 700 Ma ago. Intriguingly, these originations
follow two of the most extreme environmental episodes in the history of life
("snowball earth"). The objective of this proposal is to further test these
ideas by first calibrating the clock using the same methods as above, but from
bivalve molluscs. Using both sets of calibration points the age of the
origination of Bilateria will be more reliably ascertained. Furthermore, PI will
test two hypotheses concerning the ecology of these early animals. First, did
metazoans live in the plankton during snowball earth? Because of the putative
global planktonic shut-down during snowball earth, food would be very scarce
suggesting that metazoans could not be wholly planktonic during this geological
interval. If metazoans were not planktonic, then they must have been benthic,
but if they were they must have been very small in order to explain the absence
of trace fossils during this interval of time. Hence, PI's second question
concerns these benthic micrometazoans: are living animals like gastrotrichs,
which are very similar to these purported early animals, basal bilaterians?
Fulfillment of the goals of this proposal will give unique insight into the
tempo and mode of animal evolution, and serve as the training ground for at
least one undergraduate's intellectual foray into the Precambrian/Cambrian
transition.

