* 0207377
* Dissertation Research: The Co-Production of Knowledge and Legitimacy in Bioethics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Jennifer Croissant, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 4,158.00

This dissertation research project will examine how contemporary academic
bioethics in the U.S. balances the aspiration to guide biomedical research and
practice with the need to become an institutionally legitimate force in society.
Since its inception three decades ago, to what extent has bioethics made
biomedicine more socially accountable? At the same time, to what extent has
bioethics been made into a public-relations tool for academic and corporate
biomedicine? This project will investigate the co-production of the legitimacy
and intellectual content of the academic field of bioethics by examining
theactivities of bioethicists in three professional arenas: the establishment
and furtherance of an academic bioethics unit, the testimony of expert bioethics
witnesses in the judicial forum, and the deliberations and recommendations of a
federal bioethics commission. Bioethicists' efforts to legitimize their field
are viewed as competition and collaboration with other professionals to stake
out an emblematic expertise, which is then tendered to various societal clients.
A case study of an academic bioethics unit will be conducted to reveal how the
unit's efforts to secure material resources and organizational legitimacy shapes
the center's intellectual output, drawing on the unit's archival documents and
interviews with the unit's director, faculty, staff, and graduate students.
Discourse analysis will be used to explore how bioethicists and other
professionals seek to legitimize and circumscribe their respective expertise,
making use of courtroom proceedings in bioethics cases and the proceedings of
the National Bioethics Advisory Commission related to the human stem cell
research debate. The proposed research on the social aspects of the intellectual
and organizational basis of recent bioethics shifts attention in the budding
sociology of bioethics from clinical to academic bioethics, and highlights the
institutional and power relationships between bioethics and public policy. This
study will also contribute to the fields of higher education studies and science
and technology studies, where ethics, and the relationship between legitimacy
and knowledge content, have not been sufficiently explored. The findings of this
project will provide useful insight into the challenges and opportunities
bioethicists face in cultivating socially responsible biomedical science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;