* 0207893
* Collaborative Research: Paleometeorological Records from Sand Dunes and Eolian Sandstones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* David Loope, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2006
* USD 262,570.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:Paleometeorological Records from Sand
Dunes&lt;br/&gt; and Eolian Sandstones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
proposal requests support for collaborative research on modern and ancient sand
dunes by earth scientists at University of Nebraska-Lincoln and University of
Nevada's Desert Research Institute. Field and laboratory work will concentrate
on the 190-million-year-old Navajo Sandstone of the southwestern United States
and on modern dunes in California and Nevada. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Navajo
Sandstone accumulated in the subtropics, near the western edge of Pangea, the
largest continental mass known from Earth history. The ancient rocks contain
evidence for annual cycles in the direction and strength of the dominant wind,
as well as evidence for heavy rainfall events, brief wind reversals, and a
surprisingly high level of animal activity. Because we can recognize annual
cycles of deposition, we can ascertain the migration rates of the sand dunes,
and the seasonality and frequency of rainfall events. The rains may have
occurred during long rainy episodes similar to conditions that prevailed in the
Sahara desert between 14,000 and 5,000 years ago. A high water table between
dunes may explain why abundant animal and plant life was present even while the
dunes were actively migrating. The brief wind reversals may represent the
passage of fronts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will monitor modern sand dunes
during frontal passages to see if they record these events with deposits similar
to those we have seen in the rocks. Modern dune studies may also allow us to
better estimate the height of ancient dunes. Although many features in the
Navajo Sandstone can be interpreted to be similar to modern analogs, others
indicate very different conditions. It appears that the Jurassic dunes were
migrating more rapidly than most large modern dunes, indicating strong,
persistent winds. Plants apparently could not stabilize these dunes, even during
the rainy episodes. The dominant winds were out of the northwest, but nowhere do
westerlies prevail in areas so far to the south today. High winds are commonly
attributed to strong temperature gradients, and the thermal contrast between the
poles and equator today causes strong atmospheric circulation. In the Jurassic,
however, few, if any, glaciers existed and there is evidence that temperatures
at high latitude positions were considerably milder than today. We hypothesize
that in the southern summer, the supercontinent Pangea developed an effect
similar to that over Asia today, and drew in air from the northwest across the
equator. Our field studies of modern and ancient dunes will help us to develop a
global climate model for the Jurassic. Experiments with the model will test
several hypotheses relating to atmospheric circulation over
Pangea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ancient dune deposits record meteorological,
hydrological, and biological events in amazing detail. Our study will attempt to
mine this information with an eye toward better understanding atmospheric
circulation under conditions different from those of today's Earth.&lt;br/&gt;