* 0207732
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evaluating the Contribution of Late Cretaceous Biogeography to Earliest Cenozoic Biodiversity in North America
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Anne Weil, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2007
* USD 72,827.00

Collaborative research: Evaluating the contribution of Late Cretaceous
biogeography to earliest Cenozoic biodiversity in North
America&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anne Weil, Thomas Williamson, Steven
Semken&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators will use a
recently discovered, diverse, terrestrial microvertebrate fossil assemblage,
found in the Naashoibito Member of the Kirtland Formation, in the San Juan Basin
of New Mexico, to test the following hypotheses: (1) that there was mammalian
faunal provinciality in the latest Cretaceous of North America, and; (2) that
recovery faunas of earliest Cenozoic North America are derived at least in part
from diverse provinces present in Late Cretaceous North America. Terrestrial
ecosystem recovery following the end-Cretaceous mass extinction is best known
from studies of the North American Western Interior. This recovery is typified
by the appearance of mammals whose lineages are unknown from North America in
the preceding Late Cretaceous period. That may be because knowledge of latest
Cretaceous mammalian faunas has been geographically restricted to the northern
region of the Western Interior. In collecting this new, southern fauna, better
establishing the age of the Naashoibito Member, and incorporating this new fauna
in analyses of existing phylogenetic and biogeographic data bases, the
investigators will advance understanding of how biogeographic factors preceding
the most recent mass extinction contributed to the subsequent recovery of
terrestrial ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;A secondary goal of this project is
undergraduate education through involvement in original research, directed in
part toward Native American students. The Kirtland Formation outcrops along the
edge of the Navajo (Dine) Nation; this project offers an unique opportunity to
educate Dine students in the geological history and vertebrate fossil resources
of this part of their homeland, as well as in field and laboratory research
methods. The findings of this project will be integrated into undergraduate
geoscience curricula for science majors and pre-service K-12 teachers in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;