* 0207627
* Large Eddy Simulation:  Mathematical theory and Numerical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* William Layton, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 136,599.00

Large eddy simulation is widely considered to be the most promising approach to
simulating turbulence and its mathematical validation and development are
important to its further evolution. Current eddy-viscosity models are of limited
usefulness in long time simulations because they can overly diffuse the large
structures. They are of limited accuracy because their connection to the physics
of turbulent fluctuations is tenuous. Layton will first test an improved eddy
viscosity model which arises from a more careful mathematical description of the
involved physical processes and which is less diffusive than the Smagorinsky
model. A second idea of eddy viscosity acting only on the finest resolved scales
will be investigated. Most present de-convolution models are limited by an
incorrect under-attenuation of high frequencies and an incorrect global kinetic
energy balance. The proposed research on de-convolution models will seek to
correct both difficulties. The usefulness of LES in industrial applications is
severely limited by the crude near wall models currently used. Layton has
developed improved near wall models for channel flow with the correct double-
asymptotics (Re -&gt; infinity and delta -&gt; 0). These will be extended to
produce nonlinear near wall models suitable for recirculating flows. Layton will
also investigate a new variational multiscale method based on a multiscale
decomposition of the fluid stresses rather than fluid
velocities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layton proposes to continue the mathematical
development of large eddy simulation. Large eddy simulation addresses the
problem of predicting, using mathematical analysis, physical modeling and high
performance computing, the large, energetic eddies (or swirls) in the flow of
fluids at high Reynolds numbers. This problem is a core difficulty in many
important applications such as global change studies, geophysics and the
environment, aeronautics and aerospace applications and even in the design of
artificial hearts. Large eddy simulation is widely considered to be the most
promising approach to simulating turbulence and its mathematical validation and
development is important to its further evolution. This proposal aims to improve
eddy-viscosity models, de-convolution models, and near-wall models by a thorough
mathematical analysis.