* 0207437
* Collaborative Research:  Co-evolution and Dynamic Interplay of the  San Jacinto and Southernmost San Andreas Fault Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2002,09/30/2004
* Richard Bennett, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2004
* USD 73,850.00

The PI's request funds to analyze the dynamics of fault interaction between the
San Jacinto (SJFZ)and southernmost San Andreas (SAFZ) fault zones in southern
California. They seek to address whether there has been a decrease in the slip
rate along the Indio segment of the SAFZ related to the birth and continued
maturation of the SJFZ, and/or whether these two fault zones alternatively
assume dominant roles in accommodating relative plate motion across the region
over any time scales. These questions have proven difficult to address with any
one geological/geophysical technique or data type. They will therefore employ an
integrated, cross-disciplinary approach to investigate the evolution, present-
day behavior,and dynamics of these active faults. Specifically, the PI's propose
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Investigate trade-offs between fault model parameter
estimates derived from geodetic observations. They will use the SCEC and SCIGN
data sets together with inverse elastic fault&lt;br/&gt;models and more
realistic visco-elastic finite element forward models to perform
resolution&lt;br/&gt;and covariance analyses to explore the trade-offs between
slip rate, locking depth, creep, and&lt;br/&gt;seismic cycle effects on these
faults. They will (1)determine marginal confidence bounds on the&lt;br/&gt;range
of present-day boundary conditions on fault evolution models, and (2)determine
what&lt;br/&gt;improvements in geodetic coverage (e.g.,PBO station locations and
station density)will be&lt;br/&gt;necessary in order to further narrow the class
of admissible fault evolution models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Investigate the
relative importance of, and feedbacks between, fault zone geometry, and
lithospheric rheology by numerical simulations using a 3-D visco-elastic finite
element modeling&lt;br/&gt;approach. Their investigations will include an
assessment of how the presence of the restraining&lt;br/&gt;bend in the SAFZ
affects partitioning of strain between the SJFZ and SAFZ, how the
eastern&lt;br/&gt;California shear zone affects this partitioning, and whether
there are resolvable differences in&lt;br/&gt;fault zone strength between the
SAFZ and the SJFZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Determine the age of offset alluvial
deposits using cosmogenic dating techniques which were&lt;br/&gt;not available
ten years ago, at the present-day precision. The order-of-magnitude increase
in&lt;br/&gt;precision of the offset alluvial fan ages will allow the PI's to
discriminate between competing models for fault zone evolution over the 10 to
100 ka time scale. These new cosmogenic dating measurements will be made at no
additional cost under this proposal. Rather, funds to cover the&lt;br/&gt;costs
of this component of our research are anticipated from Deutsche
Forschungsgesellschaft&lt;br/&gt;(DFG proposal pending, Prof. Friedrich,
P.I.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Construct a model for the co-evolution of the SJFZ
and SAFZ incorporating an aggregation&lt;br/&gt;of new and existing displacement
history data sets across a broad range of time scales for&lt;br/&gt;both fault
zones, as well as dynamical considerations. Our integrated approach will
provide&lt;br/&gt;a more comprehensive test of fault slip dependence between
these fault systems than any&lt;br/&gt;individual technique could possibly
provide on its own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of our proposal is that
our multidisciplinary research will be coordinated by the&lt;br/&gt;over-riding
goal of testing competing hypotheses for the evolution of this complex fault
system.