* 0207651
* The Influence of lst-and 2nd-Hand Investigations on Learning Opportunities and Outcomes in Inquiry-Based Science in the Elementary School
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Annemarie Palincsar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 855,835.00

This three-year project explores the influence of two modes of investigation,
1st- and 2nd-hand, on student development of scientific knowledge and reasoning.
In 1st-hand investigations students have direct experience with phenomena. In
the 2nd-hand investigations students interact with informal text, either in a
traditional format or an innovative format modeled after the notebook of a
scientist. The project proposes to conduct a series of three studies in schools
with diverse populations: rural, urban-poor, and urban bilingual. In Study 1 and
2, the instruction of the unit will be done by the investigators and will be
conducted with groups of 12 students during the school day. In Study 3 the
instruction will be done by the teachers and it will involve four whole classes.
Study 1 is a mixed experimental design in which 48 students will participate.
Students, matched for general achievement, will be randomly assigned to four
sequences. Sequence varies mode of instruction (1st- and 2nd-hand
investigations) and topic (force- and mass-motion). Instruction will be
videotaped, and interviews will be conducted to a randomly selected sample of 4
students on each group. Study 2 includes a third variable: mode of 2nd-hand
investigations, traditional or notebook. It is a five-condition study involving
different sequences. During this study, a classroom observation instrument will
be developed. Study 3 will involve the implementation of the conditions that
proved to have the best outcomes in Study 2. The study will try to identify
individual differences that may interact with the type of condition. Instruction
will be documented (taped) twice during the course of each mode of
investigation. The classroom observation instrument will be administered during
each investigation. A random sample of 8 students within each class will be
interviewed twice in each instructional phase. The study will advance
understanding of how instruction can maximize student learning in different
inquiry contexts. A new classroom observation tool will be developed