* 0207569
* Can We Constrain the Evolution of Crustal-Scale Normal Fault Arrays Using Geomorphic and Structural Criteria?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Alexander Densmore, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2007
* USD 163,051.00

The proposed project is aimed at understanding the relationship between the
evolution of large continental non-nal fault arrays and the development of
drainage catchment-alluvial fan systems. Previous studies of non-nal fault
growth, footwall denudation and catchment development have either ignored
spatial and temporal changes in fault array geometry and slip rate, or have
focused on portions of the fault array that are far from actively-propagating
tips and relay zones between adjacent fault strands. In the proposed work, the
PI's and a Tulane University graduate student will carry out a quantitative
structural and geomorphological study of active faulting at extensional relay
zones, i.e. areas of segment overlap and fault linkage, and at fault tips. The
study area is located in the circum-Snake River Plain area of cast-central
Idaho, southwestern Montana and western Wyoming. This area is well suited to the
aims of the project because the Basin and Range non-nal faults show a wide range
in scale; i.e., the faults show varying amounts of total displacement and rock
uplift, and hence the footwalls exhibit varying degrees of drainage incision and
denudation. Two tasks are proposed. The first task is an analysis of digital
topographic data. This will measure a number of geomorphic parameters (catchment
spacing, relief and area; and alluvial fan area) along fault strike and across a
range of fault length scales. Results of this work will constitute the first
quantitative assessment of relations between fault structure, slip rate and
footwall morphology, as well as the first evaluation of the fan area/catchment
area ratio as proxy for fault slip rate, and thus as a potential neotectonic
tool. The second task is a focused field investigation of 3 relay zones along 2
of the largest and most active faults. This work will map the distribution of
active faulting through these segment linkage sites, and document the
relationships between the spatial fault pattern and catchment-fan parameters
(derived in Task 1) in relays. The 3 field sites chosen for the detailed
structural and geomorphological work show varying amounts of fault segment
separation and linkage development, which is hypothesized to control some of the
patterns of catchment evolution. The proposed work is expected to establish
predictable relationships between the growth, interaction and linkage of
continental-scale normal faults and patterns of denudation and catchment-fan
evolution. This research will also lead to an improved understanding of
earthquake hazards, because the approach will address issues of fault segment
connectivity over a time scale longer than that addressed by paleoseismology
alone.