* 0207589
* Developing a "Numerical Laboratory" to Test Scaling Hypotheses for Hydrologic Extremes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Vijay Gupta, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,472.00

0207589&lt;br/&gt;Gupta&lt;br/&gt;The physical processes governing floods in
river basins are highly variable in space and time. Spatial variability produces
a very large number of values of the parameters governing production of runoff
from hills and its transport through channels. Most of these parameters cannot
be measured, and the number of different values that they can take increases
with spatial scale. By contrast, the aggregated behavior of peak flows exhibits
statistical scale invariance at successively larger spatial scales. The slopes
and the intercepts of log-log linear relationships describing this invariance
are called 'scaling parameters', which can be estimated empirically. Statistical
scaling is an emergent property of a complex physical system, which is not built
into the physical equations. Scaling theory provides a new mathematical
framework for interpreting empirical scaling parameters in terms of numerical
and analytical solutions of physical equations and thereby testing different
hypotheses. Scaling theory unifies spatial scaling flood statistics with
physical processes, which has been a long-standing, fundamental open problem.
&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop a "numerical laboratory" for testing different
physical hypotheses regarding empirically observed statistical scaling for peak
flows on real and simulated channel networks. The foundation of this laboratory
is a new-generation Java-based software program called "HidroSig" that extracts
river networks from digital elevation models and analyzes their topologic and
geometric properties. It takes a geomorphologic approach, which consists of
treating a river basin as a collection of hills that contribute runoff to links
in a river network. Stream flows will be generated using an integral-balance
hillslope model that includes Hortonian overland flow, saturated overland flow,
ground-water recharge, and base flow. Stream flows will be routed using discrete
link-based mass and momentum balance equations. Our simulation results will be
compared against statistical scaling properties of peak flows that are based on
sampled hydrographs at multiple spatial scales. We will test this central idea
using peak flow data sets from two experimental basins in the United States,
Walnut Gulch, AZ, and Goodwin Creek, MS. &lt;br/&gt;