* 0207072
* QuarkNet
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Randal Ruchti, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,661,221.00

Quarknet has been funded as a partnership among the ESIE program of EHR ; the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Elementary Particle Physics
Program (Division of Physics) , both within MPS; as well as the Division of High
Energy Physics at DOE.

QuarkNet is a national program that partners high school science teachers with
particle physicists working in forefront experiments at the scientific frontier.
These experiments are searching for answers to fundamental questions about the
origin of mass and about the nature of symmetries that govern physical
processes. QuarkNet provides valuable research experience to teachers enabling
them to teach the basic concepts of introductory physics in a context that
students find exciting. QuarkNet's goals are to establish a lasting national
community of researchers that includes high school teachers and students as well
as physicists, to attract young students to careers in science and technology,
to help develop scientific literacy in society, and to develop links between the
high school classroom and experiments and techniques used to explore the
scientific frontier. QuarkNet is led by a group of teachers, educators and
physicists with many years of experience in particle physics workshops and
institutes, materials development and teacher research programs. Five "staff"
teachers help design, coordinate and run the project. QuarkNet has been
envisaged and designed as a multi-decade-long program with a "growth" phase of 5
years followed by an "operational" phase of at least twice that duration. In
this schema, the growth phase admits twelve new centers per year until a maximum
of 60 centers is reached; the operational phase oversees the maturation of the
centers into an inclusive and engaging community of researchers. Currently
completing its third year, QuarkNet comprises 36 centers located at universities
and laboratories around the country. Under this five-year proposal, QuarkNet
will complete the growth phase by the end of the second proposal year, with
science education centers participating in a variety of experiments at Fermilab,
CERN, SLAC, and in non-accelerator and astrophysics programs. In this two-year
period 48 "lead" teachers, two from each new center, will hold 8-week research
appointments and will work under the guidance of physicists from a university or
laboratory near their homes. In the operational period to follow (proposal years
3-5), QuarkNet will revisit existing centers (again in groups of 12) to offer
8-week scientific appointments, and to strengthen ongoing research experiences
and activities by engaging high school students directly in research projects
under the direction of physicists and supervising teachers, for periods up to 8
weeks duration. Key features of QuarkNet are the establishment of mentor
relationships between teachers and scientists, summer research experiences of up
to 8-weeks for lead and supervising teachers and 1-3 weeks for associate
teachers, the inclusion of high school students as researchers, and the
development of scientific "community" within and among centers. Over the five
years 2002-2006, this proposal is expected to reach up to 720 teachers, more
than 100 physicists, and eventually more than 50,000 students, approximately 300
of whom will have summer research experiences.