* 0207085
* Coastal Bacterioplankton Systematics: A High Throughput Culturing Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 06/30/2006
* USD 369,729.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Stephen Giovannoni and Michael Rappe to survey,
inventory, grow and describe new species of marine bacteria from coastal waters
of the Pacific Northwest. Previous studies of gene sequences from seawater DNA
have provided compelling proof that many species of marine microorganisms are
virtually unknown, probably because technologies in routine use in
microbiological laboratories do not provide the conditions these cells need to
replicate. This project will employ a new technology developed at Oregon State
University that miniaturizes and automates the process of culturing microbial
cells from nature. This new technology uses concentrations of cells and
nutrients that are approximately 100,000 fold lower than those used by the
culturing technologies now in routine use. Specifically, this survey will sample
oceanic waters off coastal Oregon, within a rectangle described by the
coordinates 44 degrees 12' to 45 deg. 02' N; 124 deg. 03' to 124 deg. 38' W.
Samples will be taken from throughout the water column at depths ranging to 200
m. In addition to supporting research that isolates and identifies new strains
of microorganisms, and inventories them, this project will support the
maintenance of a culturing facility that will distribute cell cultures or
genomic DNA to other laboratories for further study. Properties of the newly
cultured species of cells such as their physical size, genome size, abundance
and distribution in Oregon coastal seawater, the nutrients they use and the
metabolic pathways that operate in them, will be studied to determine their
relationship to other microorganisms, and those strains that are new to science
will be named.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new knowledge
about microbial biodiversity in the exceptionally productive coastal waters of
the Pacific Northwest. The resulting cultures of microorganisms and information
about them will fill gaps in basic knowledge about coastal ecological processes.
The cultures themselves will also be a resource for academic and industrial
scientists who seek to develop new agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals from
microbial biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;