* 0207405
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Excavating Community and Identity in the Borderlands of Late Classic (A.D. 650-900) NW Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Robert Sharer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2003
* USD 11,470.00

Archaeological research around the globe has long been focused on the grand
monuments, fine artistic achievements and sweeping political dramas of ancient
peoples. This emphasis has often been adopted at the expense of a smaller scale,
more intimate understanding of the lives and experiences of the individual
peoples comprising those cultures. A consideration of how ancient peoples
perceived and identified themselves with respect to those within and without
their communities will provide an important step in improving our
anthropological understanding of personal and group identity in both the past
and present. This research project addresses issues of co mmunity identity and
its material expression on range of scales among the Late Classic (650-900 A.D.)
peoples of Las Canoas, NW Honduras. Research includes the intensive excavation
of both elite and non-elite houses and administrative/ritual buildings at the
archaeological site of Las Canoas, as well as analysis of artifacts recovered
from those structures. This information will be studied with the aim of finding
patterns in the use of built spaces and the production, trade, and use of
material goods, such as pottery. The design of human settlements and the changes
wrought on them over time lends insight into the ways people feel their
environment should be organized and communities experienced. The types of
possessions made, gathered, saved, displayed, hidden, and/or discarded by
individuals and families reveals much about what they value, what they are able
to acquire and to what lengths they will go to access such items. Studies of
both ancient architecture and artifact assemblages including pottery, stone
tools, domestic refuse, burials, special caches and/or ritual deposits provide a
view into how a group of people shaped, lived in, and gave meaning to their
world - in essence created their identities. The proposed research will consider
the layout, orientation and relationships of buildings to one another, as well
as the types and styles of artifacts (especially pottery), as indicators or
expressions of individual and community identity. Information recovered from Las
Canoas will be analyzed with these ideas in mind and then compared to that known
from contemporaneous, similarly sized sites in the surrounding area.
Understanding how the peoples living at Las Canoas related to the social,
political, and economic hierarchy in Late Classic Mesoamerica are basic goals of
this project. The broader aim of the research, however, is to test the
hypothesis that much-debated anthropological concepts such as culture and
ethnicity do not always play themselves out in the daily reality of human lives.
Rather, it is proposed that peoples craft their identities to suit a variety of
material and symbolic needs, shifting their alliances and affiliations in
response to changing pressures and situations. This research is designed to
question our often-untested assumptions about the nature of interaction between
different peoples and communities in achieve a better understanding of human
behavior.

