* 0207364
* Collaborative Research:  Initiation and Long-Term Slip History of the Altyn Tagh Fault System, Northern Tibetan Plateau, NW China: A Tertiary Basin Piercing Point Study
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Stephan Graham, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2004
* USD 164,606.00

The Altyn Tagh fault system, which delineates the northern edge of the Tibetan
Plateau, is one of the largest and most striking, yet also most enigmatic
features attributed to collision between India and Eurasia. In spite of a
generally poor understanding of the structural geology and slip history of the
Altyn Tagh fault, its tectonic significance has been the subject of much
speculation, and the fault figures prominently in models of the Himalayan-
Tibetan orogen. Recent attempts to gain better knowledge about the Altyn Tagh
fault have primarily used indirect methods to interpret age of fault initiation
and magnitude of displacement, or geodetic techniques to interpret slip rate.
Direct investigation of fault displacement using geologic piercing points has
not been widely attempted. As a result three critical questions remain
concerning the offset history of the Altyn Tagh fault: (1) What is the age of
initiation of the Altyn Tagh fault? (2) How has the slip-rate on the Altyn Tagh
fault varied over geologic time? (3) How does the magnitude of slip vary along
the length of the Altyn Tagh fault? In order to answer these three questions it
is essential to identify pre-slip and multiple syn-slip piercing points on each
segment of the fault. These piercing points will allow the history of offset on
the fault to be determined for each segment of the fault (western, central, and
eastern) and thus demonstrate slip magnitude, slip rate, and variation in these
parameters along the length of the fault. The proposed study will directly
address the Tertiary slip history of the Altyn Tagh fault and the distribution
of slip on the fault, by identifying multiple Eocene-Upper Pliocene sediment-
source matches across the fault for ten Tertiary basins that are truncated by
the Altyn Tagh fault. By identifying multiple piercing points of various ages
from a single basin, the slip history for that segment of the fault ca be
reconstructed throughout the Tertiary. Furthermore, by examining a series of
basins along the length of the fault, along-strike changes in displacement can
be documented. These results will provide a robust and unambiguous data set from
which the timing and rate of faulting can be directly determined, and that will
also allow ideas about systematic changes in slip magnitude along the fault to
be tested. The PI's prior work on the Altyn Tagh fault (Ritts, 1998; Yue and
Liou, 1999; Ritts and Biffi, 2000; Sobel et al., 2001; Yue et al., in review)
has demonstrated their ability to identify and document piercing points of a
variety of ages and a variety of types on the Altyn Tagh fault. The proposed
research includes documentation of lithostratigraphy and chronostratigraphy,
physical sedimentology and lithofacies, provenance, and paleocurrents of ten
Tertiary sedimentary basins that are truncated by the Altyn Tagh fault. Two
major field seasons will focus on the characterization of sedimentary basins as
well as potential sediment source terranes on the opposite side of the fault.
Fieldwork in the Tertiary basins will include description of measured sections,
collection of paleocurrent and conglomerate composition data, and geological
mapping. Fieldwork in potential sediment source areas will focus on lithologic
description and verification of Chinese mapping, as well as collection of
potential source units for analytical work. Analytical techniques will be
applied to conglomerate clasts and potential source units in order to test
sediment-source correlations that are proposed based on field data. These
techniques will include petrographic examination, trace and major element
geochemistry, and U-Pb and 40 Ar/ 39 Ar geochronology. Biostratigraphic analysis
of mudstones will be used to confirm the ages of the Tertiary units. This study
will constrain the geology of Tertiary basins in order to construct a series of
time- displacement curves to characterize the history and along-strike
variability of the Altyn Tagh fault. The resulting data will better define the
role that the Altyn Tagh fault plays in accommodating Cenozoic convergence
between India and Asia, and thereby distinguish the relative importance of
mechanisms such as extrusion tectonics in continental deformation. &lt;br/&gt;