* 0207036
* Collaborative Research:  Correlogram Migration of Scattered Teleseismic Body Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Robert Nowack, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2004
* USD 50,111.00

A new methodology for the imaging of the earth's reflectivity distribution by
correlogram migration of scattered teleseismic body waves is being investigated.
The correlation migration methods developed for applications in seismic
exploration are being extended to the imaging of crustal and upper mantle
structure beneath a dense receiver array using teleseismic body waves. These
waves include P to SV and P to P surface reflected phases, in addition to other
direct and surface scattered phases. The result is an image of the reflectivity
distribution beneath the recording array for each of the scattered waves. The
current imaging methods using receiver functions for laterally varying structure
mostly use directly converted P to SV arrivals for subsurface illumination.
Correlation imaging of ghost reflections provides complementary resolution to
that of P to SV transmitted waves. Questions concerning the practicality of
using correlogram migration of different phases for the imaging of laterally
varying media using teleseismic array data are being addressed. Also, the
limitations of correlogram migration as a function of data quality, receiver
spacing and type of teleseismic data used are being investigated. Since for
practical teleseismic array configurations, some aliasing effects will result, a
new beam-like migration algorithm, call wavepath migration, which is less
sensitive to these effects, is being tested for the imaging of teleseismic array
data. The correlogram migration of teleseismic data is being tested using
different teleseismic array configurations across the Wasatch Front. The
significance of this research is the development of new imaging methods for
laterally varying structure using teleseismic data, which generalizes receiver
function imaging to include converted as well as ghost reflections. Correlogram
imaging is most effective for dense seismic networks.