* 0207599
* Development, Analysis, and Implementation of Robust Algebraic Preconditioners for Sparse Linear Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Michele Benzi, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 153,910.00

Benzi&lt;br/&gt;0207599&lt;br/&gt; The solution of large, sparse systems of
linear equations &lt;br/&gt;continues to be one of the fundamental problems of
computational mathematics. Recent years have seen significative advances in the
performance and robustness of iterative methods, prompted by the need to solve
increasingly large systems of equations. The linear systems (and eigenvalue
problems) arising from the discretization of partial differential equations in
three space dimensions are too large for direct solution methods, and the only
viable option is to use preconditioned Krylov subspace methods or, if
applicable, multigrid-type methods. While robust and effective iterative solvers
are available in the case of systems involving symmetric positive definite
matrices or M-matrices, much work remains to be done in the case of indefinite
systems. A major part of the project consists in the development of algebraic
preconditioners for symmetric indefinite matrices. The investigator develops
both incomplete factorization methods and sparse approximate inverses. He makes
use of techniques developed by the direct solvers community, like pivoting
strategies of the Bunch-Kaufman and Bunch-Parlett type. Preliminary experiments
on saddle-point and shifted linear systems are encouraging. He also explores
multilevel variants of these preconditoners. Special methods targeted to so-
called KKT-type systems are investigated. Other parts of the project deal with
the construction of robust preconditioners for least-squares problems, and for
singular linear systems arising from Markov chain calculations. The latter
problem is currently of particular interest due to recent applications in data
mining. Specifically, the largest matrix problems currently being solved are the
so-called "Google Problems", which amount to computing the stationary
distribution vector of Markov chains with 2.7 billion states. Improvements in
solution techniques have the potential of greatly affecting this important
area.&lt;br/&gt; Advances in many important fields of science and technlogy
depend on progress in mathematical algorithms used in computer simulations. A
recent example is provided by the emerging field of data mining. The well-known
search engine "Google" (see http://www.google.com) relies on the solution of an
extremely large, sparse matrix model; in technical terms, a stochastic matrix,
or Markov chain. This amounts to finding the solution to a very large set of
simultaneous linear algebraic equations. Part of this project deals with finding
improved solution methods for problems of this type. More generally, the project
aims to solve challenging, large-scale problems in numerical linear algebra. The
main goal is to develop efficient and robust algorithms, and related software,
for solving difficult problems arising in various fields of engineering and
physical sciences. Some other areas that would benefit from this work include
computational fluid dynamics, structural analysis, acoustics, electromagnetics,
and optimal control. In all of these areas, computer simulations are of
paramount importance and there is a strong need for reliable and efficient
solution algorithms and software. &lt;br/&gt;