* 0207216
* SGER:  Seawater Calcium Isotopes and Carbonate Deposition History
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2003
* Adina Paytan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2003
* USD 23,320.00

Seawater Calcium Isotopes and Carbonate Deposition
History&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in the amount
of carbonate precipitation and dissolution have significant effects&lt;br/&gt;on
oceanic alkalinity, total CO2, and atmospheric CO2, thus climate. Knowledge of
the&lt;br/&gt;carbonate depositional history is important for understanding the
global calcium and&lt;br/&gt;carbon cycles and may lead to improved
understanding of global biogeochemical cycles&lt;br/&gt;operation on Earth on
various time scales and the potential feedback mechanisms in
these&lt;br/&gt;cycles and their effect on climate. The calcium isotope ratio is
seawater at any given&lt;br/&gt;time is largely controlled by biological
precipitation of calcium carbonate, a process that&lt;br/&gt;discriminates
against heavy isotopes. This fractionation causes seawater to be
enriched&lt;br/&gt;in heavy calcium relative to the average isotopic ratio of
input sources to the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, reconstruction of seawater Ca
isotope ratio could lead to an estimate of the&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations in the
amount of calcium carbonate deposited in the oceans through time
and&lt;br/&gt;to better understanding of the calcium and carbon cycles.
Accordingly, the main&lt;br/&gt;objective of this SGER proposal is to explore
the potential of the mineral barite separated&lt;br/&gt;from deep-sea sediments
to trace the variations in seawater Ca isotope ratios, and to&lt;br/&gt;evaluate
the use this proxy for reconstruction of the calcium carbonate deposition
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work fits the criteria for a SGER proposal as
it seeks partial support for conducting&lt;br/&gt;preliminary work of an
untested and novel idea it is a high risk project and applies
newly&lt;br/&gt;developed tools (so far only two labs in the USA measure Ca
isotopes routinely). Results&lt;br/&gt;if encouraging will provide a basis to
perform further more detailed research that will&lt;br/&gt;advance our
understanding of the global biogeochemical cycle and its coupling
with&lt;br/&gt;climate and contribute significantly to the field of
paleoceanography and earth history.&lt;br/&gt;