* 0207402
* Computational Methods for Problems in Material Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Peter Smereka, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 208,694.00

This project concerns the development of efficient numerical&lt;br/&gt;methods
for problems related to material science. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator studies
computational issues concerning the&lt;br/&gt;numerical solution of continuum
models for thin film growth. Many&lt;br/&gt;of these models include effects for
surface diffusion, which is a&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear 4th order term. Consequently,
these models are very&lt;br/&gt;stiff from a computational point of view.
Because the surface&lt;br/&gt;diffusion term is nonlinear, it is difficult to
use implicit&lt;br/&gt;methods. The investigator introduces a new semi-implicit
level&lt;br/&gt;set method for solving motion by surface diffusion. He uses
this&lt;br/&gt;new method to incorporate the effects of surface diffusion
into&lt;br/&gt;models of polycrystalline thin films. He also develops a
new&lt;br/&gt;approach for computing island dynamics, where the adatoms on
the&lt;br/&gt;terraces are considered as a continuum field and the atoms on
the&lt;br/&gt;edge of the island are treated discretely. This approach
retains&lt;br/&gt;the potential advantage of continuum methods but at the same
time&lt;br/&gt;preserves the discrete and stochastic effects present in
island&lt;br/&gt;dynamics. The investigator includes effects of edge
diffusion,&lt;br/&gt;surface tension, nucleation, and elasticity. An
important&lt;br/&gt;computational aspect of this problem is the numerical
solution of&lt;br/&gt;the diffusion equation in a complex domain. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;examines new methods for the efficient solution of this
problem.&lt;br/&gt; Thin films occur in a large number of applications,
from&lt;br/&gt;coatings on bearings to semi-conductor devices. In many
cases&lt;br/&gt;these films are not single crystals but instead
are&lt;br/&gt;polycrystalline and the quality of the film can depend on
its&lt;br/&gt;texture. Films with good biaxial texture are close to being
a&lt;br/&gt;single crystal and have applications in the manufacture
of&lt;br/&gt;super-conducting tapes, for example. One important
physical&lt;br/&gt;effect in determining the evolution of the texture is
surface&lt;br/&gt;diffusion, but this is difficult to implement numerically and
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator plans to develop a semi-implicit level set method
to&lt;br/&gt;study the growth of polycrystalline thin films. The work
here&lt;br/&gt;could help improve the fundamental understanding of these
films.&lt;br/&gt;Another important process by which thin films are made
is&lt;br/&gt;molecular beam epitaxy. The standard method for
accurate&lt;br/&gt;simulation of this process is kinetic Monte Carlo. In
many&lt;br/&gt;situations this method can be slow, and continuum models have
the&lt;br/&gt;potential to greatly increase the speed of such
computations.&lt;br/&gt;However, continuum models ignore discrete and stochastic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator develops hybrid models that have good
physical&lt;br/&gt;fidelity but offer considerable computational speed.