* 0207744
* Collaborative Research: Life History Strategies, Growth Rates and Microstructural Character Evolution across the Coelurosaurian/Avialan Transition
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Gregory Erickson, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2006
* USD 175,000.00

ABSTRACT: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH--&lt;br/&gt;LIFE HISTORY STRATEGIES, GROWTH
RATES AND &lt;br/&gt;MICROSTRUCTURAL CHARACTEREVOLUTION ACROSS THE
&lt;br/&gt;COELUROSAURIAN/AVIALAN TRANSITION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gregory M.
Erickson. Kristina Curry-Rogers, Mark Norell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Birds
(avialan dinosaurs) are unique among living animals in showing extremely rapid
growth rates. How they attained this capacity is unknown. In our research we
will reconstruct the growth of the earliest birds and their closest ancestors,
the coelurosaurian dinosaurs. We will do this by coupling age estimates
(garnered through growth line counts) with size estimates for a diversity of
fossil species. From the results we will be able to quantitatively assess when
and how avian growth rates were generated and determine whether the first birds
were simply feathered dinosaurs or physiological equivalents to living species.
Aside from helping us to understand how the most speciose group of animals
living in our world came to came to be, broader impacts of this research
include: 1) establishing a World Wide Web site from which the lay pubic and
professions can learn about scientific research, 2) providing advanced
scientific training to undergraduate and graduate students including those from
underrepresented groups, and 3) providing material for our public and non-major
collegiate lectures in paleontology.&lt;br/&gt;