* 0207490
* Collaborative Research: Coordinated TIMS U-Series Dating and Paleoenvironmental Interpretation of Pedogenic Carbonate
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Ronald Amundson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2005
* USD 38,764.00

&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With prior support from NSF,
we have shown that TIMS (Thermal Ionization Mass &lt;br/&gt;Spectrometry)
U-series dating of pedogenic carbonate can provide a precise chronology of
&lt;br/&gt;pedogenesis and reliable ages for appropriate Quaternary alluvial
deposits (Sharp et al., &lt;br/&gt;accepted). Though the U/Th ratios of
pedogenic carbonate of carbonate-clast dominated &lt;br/&gt;alluvium at Kyle
Canyon (Nevada) are too low for U-series dating, pedogenic carbonate in
&lt;br/&gt;granitic-clast dominated gravels of the Wind River Basin (Wyoming) is
highly suitable. &lt;br/&gt;Precise U-series ages (1-2 percent, 2) may be
measured on a few cubic millimeters of &lt;br/&gt;pedogenic carbonate and
require only very small corrections for detrital 230Th. Suites of
&lt;br/&gt;ages may be screened for reliability using criteria inherent in the
U-series results. The time &lt;br/&gt;lag between clast deposition and
accumulation of datable carbonate.a critical parameter &lt;br/&gt;if U-series
dates of innermost clast-rinds are to be used to date host Quaternary
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;is estimated to be 5+ 5 kyr in the Wind River basin. O- and
C-isotope analyses of a trial &lt;br/&gt;suite of pedogenic carbonate samples
shows that a temporally resolved stable isotope &lt;br/&gt;paleoclimatic record
can be constructed using pedogenic carbonate dated by U-series. &lt;br/&gt;Funds
are requested to further develop U-series dating of pedogenic carbonate and its
&lt;br/&gt;application to the refinement of a Rocky Mountain glacial chronology.
Emphasis will be &lt;br/&gt;placed on resolving the timing of Bull Lake glacial
advances (at their type locality) with &lt;br/&gt;respect to other regional and
global climate records. Moreover, we propose to characterize &lt;br/&gt;the
spatial and temporal accumulation of pedogenic carbonate in relict soils of
Late-&lt;br/&gt;Middle to Late Pleistocene deposits, and measure the O- and
C-isotopic compositions of &lt;br/&gt;carbonate samples dated by U-series. We
will interpret these data to provide a &lt;br/&gt;comprehensive history of
paleoenvironmental change in the Wind River Basin throughout &lt;br/&gt;much of
the late Illinoian and Wisconsin glacial cycles. Ultimately, our goal is to
correlate &lt;br/&gt;the soils-based paleoenvironmental record with the
geomorphic expressions of &lt;br/&gt;paleoclimatic change.the well-preserved
glacial moraines and glacio-fluvial terraces of &lt;br/&gt;the Basin.by
establishing a common chronological framework based on precise U-series
&lt;br/&gt;ages. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal. Warren
Sharp and Ken Ludwig (Berkeley Geochronology &lt;br/&gt;Center) will be
responsible for U-series analyses and age interpretations; Ron Amundson
&lt;br/&gt;(U.C. Berkeley) will provide field and laboratory expertise in
pedology and stable isotope &lt;br/&gt;analysis and interpretation; Oliver
Chadwick (U.C. Santa Barbara) will provide expertise &lt;br/&gt;in Quaternary
geology, geomorphology and soil stratigraphy as well as familiarity with the
&lt;br/&gt;Wind River area. &lt;br/&gt;