* 0208985
* Collaborative:  Improving Subjectivity Analysis to Achieve High-Precision Information Extraction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Ellen Riloff, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 275,010.00

This project will use subjectivity analysis to improve the accuracy of
information extraction (IE) systems. IE systems are designed to extract facts,
but they are prone to false hits from subjective statements such as accusations,
allegations, suspicions, and opinions. The first phase of the research will
create a subjectivity classifier that uses learning algorithms to identify
linguistic features associated with subjective language. The classifier will use
several natural language representations, including extraction patterns,
N-grams, and noun phrases. The classifier will be embedded in a bootstrapping
architecture so that it can learn from unannotated corpora, requiring only a
small amount of annotated data to jumpstart the bootstrapping. In the second
phase, the classifier will be integrated into an IE system to measure the impact
of subjectivity classification on IE performance. Information extracted from
objective sentences will be treated as facts, but information extracted from
subjective sentences will be labeled as uncertain or discarded. This research
will produce a better understanding of how subjective language is expressed and
the role that context plays in recognizing subjectivity. The potential impact of
the research is to produce more accurate subjectivity classifiers and to
demonstrate that subjectivity analysis can improve the performance of IE
systems.