* 0208384
* Reactive convection cells: A mechanism for transport and precipitation of salt in fractures under evaporative conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Ronald Guenther, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2005
* USD 114,986.00

Vadose zone fractures are known to play a significant role in groundwater
recharge in desert areas. This project will evaluate the hypothesis that
evaporation from fracture surfaces in the upper vadose zone triggers capillary
forces within the matrix that drive pore-water and solutes from the matrix
toward the fracture faces. Evaporation results in salt crust formation on the
fracture walls. Subsequent rain events move water through the fractures
dissolving salt crusts and transporting them to the water table. Furthermore,
under desert conditions, nighttime cold temperatures may result in the formation
of thermal convection cells within fracture voids, dramatically enhancing
evaporation rates. The project will: 1. Test the concept of accelerated night-
time convection at a fractured-rock field study site. 2. Investigate salt crust
formation rate in the laboratory for two rocks permeabilities to determine: (a)
time rate of change and strength of the evaporation rate; (b) rate and extent of
the salt crust formation; and (c) ratio of nighttime (convection driven) to
daytime (diffusion driven) evaporation rates. 3. Develop a field scale numerical
model to analyze the significance of this mechanism under a range of climatic,
fracture and matrix conditions. Parameters will include fracture aperture, rock
permeability and extent of thermal inversion. This study will provide a better
understanding of the mechanism for salt accumulation and transport. It will
provide a valuable tool for exploring the importance of this mechanism on a
global scale as it relates to salt loading of groundwater resources and bypass
toxic solutes in already contaminated sites.