* 0208008
* Ion Exchange at Metal/Ceramic Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Frank Ernst, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2006
* USD 381,000.00

The objective of the investigation is to understand the fundamental aspects on
the possible bonding mechanism between metals and ceramics. Since the ion-
exchange reaction can substantially change several fundamental materials
properties, it is important to understand this reaction at a quantitative level.
The goal is to study model systems with a particularly simple interface geometry
that will be more suitable for microanalysis and will allow to distinguish the
influence of various parameters. The work involves fabrication of ideal
aluminum-spinel interfaces by thin-film techniques. The atomistic structure of
the resulting interfaces and the spatial distribution of aluminum, magnesium,
and oxygen in their immediate environment will be analyzed by cross-sectional
high-resolution analytical TEM. Quantitative analysis of the elemental
distribution at different stages of the reaction will give fundamental insight
in the kinetics of this technologically important process. Mechanical testing,
employing the method of periodic cracking, will be used to assess the interface
strength after different annealing treatments and to correlate it with the
observed concentration profiles of the three elements across the aluminum-spinel
interface. The experimentally obtained concentration profiles will be used for
modeling the kinetics of the ion-exchange reaction as a function of a few key
parameters such as temperature, diffusion and activity coefficients. The results
of mechanical testing and their correlation with the concentration profiles will
serve for modeling the influence of a space-charge layer on metal-ceramic
adhesion and to investigate the hypothesis that the ion-exchange reaction causes
the experimentally observed strong mechanical bonding between aluminum and
spinel. The possibility of manipulating the interfacial bonding will be pursued
by applying an external electric field during the ion-exchange reaction.

The study involves fundamental research on aluminum-spinel interfaces via thin-
film techniques. Along with microstructural characterization at the interface
and quantitative analysis of elemental distribution for studying kinetics,
mechanical testing is used to assess the interface strength. Synthesis and HRTEM
work will be carried out at CWRU while the mechanical testing and
modeling/correlation of ion-exchange with strength will be performed at UCB. The
project has a team-oriented approach to the involvement of undergraduates and
minorities in research. The link between the mechanical strength and ion-
exchange at the metal-ceramic interface involves fundamental materials science
while will have major impact in the metal-ceramic bonding technology in many
industries.