* 0208690
* SGER- Annotated Checklists for Fishes and Preparation of the Official List of Names in Ichthyology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,10/31/2003
* William Eschmeyer, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 10/31/2003
* USD 74,884.00

The field of Ichthyology (fishes) through previous NSF funding has accumulated
a database of fish names and related information as the Catalog of Fishes
(published in 1998 and on-line at http:www.calacademy.org/research); it is the
most comprehensive informational database for any animal group. This database
summarizes the information known for about 50,000 described species of fishes
(more than all other vertebrates combined), of which about 30,000 are valid
species. However, there are still many described species for which we do not
know the status (valid species or a synonym or duplicate name), and new species
of fishes continue to be described at a rate of about 300 per year. Ichthyology
is changing, and many of the scientists of the 1950s-1980s are nearing the end
of active careers. They have much information in files and accumulated
unpublished data that can be published in annotated checklists - a summary of
the knowledge for the groups of fishes that they have spent their career
studying. Also, the naming of animal groups is directed by a "Code" to which all
scientists worldwide use, and a new edition of the code taking effect in 2000
allows for the creation of a list of available names for a discipline and the
purging of other names from further consideration. The present project has two
goals: it will allow the Catalog of Fishes staff to work directly with
specialists so that they can author annotated checklists for the groups for
which they are the world specialist, and these will be published by the
California Academy of Sciences and place on the www. Following this, the List of
Available Names in Fishes will be assembled and placed on the www, and steps
will be taken to have this list approved by the International Commission on
Zoological Nomenclature. The Catalog of Fishes staff will prepare the
manuscripts for the specialists - the specialist's role will primarily be to
edit and add information.

The primary way information about animals and plants is organized is around
scientific names provided by taxonomists. Traditional taxonomists, the
monographers and revisers responsible for the major taxonomic advances over the
past half-century are an aged group, many over 60 years of age. Many of them
harbor a wealth of information in their heads and personal files on status of
species, on type specimens (the original specimens used by the first author to
describe the species), and related information. This project is therefore
opportunistic. A preliminary survey of specialists revealed a strong and
enthusiastic willingness to participate. The present project will be the first
test cast of preparing a "List of Available Names" under provisions of the Code.
Such lists will add stability to names. The checklists will consolidate our
level of knowledge and at the same time reveal taxonomic and geographic areas in
need of further investigation. This information on fishes is important for
biodiversity studies, for molecular studies, for conservation needs, for
commerce, and for a framework to house the accumulated knowledge about fishes.