* 0208377
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Biotic Diversity and Vertebrate Evolution in Late Devonian Non-Marine Ecosystems of North America
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Neil Shubin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2005
* USD 219,995.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Biotic
diversity and vertebrate evolution in&lt;br/&gt;Late Devonian non-marine
ecosystems of North America&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neil Shubin-
EAR-0208377&lt;br/&gt;Edward Daeschler-EAR-0207721&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late
Devonian (375-360 MYA) witnessed a burst of diversification of vertebrate life,
including the origin of limbed vertebrates, and the elaboration of plants and
invertebrates in terrestrial ecosystems. Accordingly, the description and
analysis of Late Devonian vertebrates and ecosystems offers the ability to
generate important data on the emergence of new taxa, new anatomical structures,
new faunas, and new habitats during this critical moment of evolution. Our prior
work (1993 to present) in the Late Devonian (Famennian Stage) Catskill Formation
in Pennsylvania has produced well-preserved, highly diverse vertebrate
assemblages from the same stratigraphic horizons as macrofossil plants,
palynomorphs, arthropods, and bivalves. Exploratory work (1999-2000) in the Late
Devonian (Frasnian Stage) Okse Bay Group in the Canadian Arctic has also
revealed significantly fossiliferous units in this virtually unexplored
region.&lt;br/&gt;This project will document and interpret the diversity of the
non-marine parts of these Late Devonian systems in eastern North America. The
temporal range will cover the Frasnian and Famennian Stages of the Late
Devonian, a critical window in evolution. Fieldwork in the Famennian-age
Catskill Formation has taken a significant step; the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation has given permission to remove a large wedge of overburden from
the Red Hill locality, source of two early tetrapod taxa and a very diverse
fauna and flora. Fieldwork in the Frasnian-age Okse Bay Group in the Canadian
Arctic will focus on areas now recognized for their fossil productivity. The
first major goal is the recovery, preparation and description of Late Devonian
fossil material. Ensuing investigation of the phylogenetic affinities and
stratigraphic position of fossil assemblages will allow both intraformational
and global comparisons of biotic diversity. Assessment of intraformational
stratigraphic relationships will enable an understanding of the biotic diversity
in different portions of the fluvial systems. These analyses will inform: 1)
higher level phylogenetic hypotheses of gnathostome vertebrates, 2)
biostratigraphic and biogeographic analysis of the distribution of the Late
Devonian tetrapods and fish, and 3) paleobiological investigation of the
elaboration of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;