* 0208024
* Synthetic Receptors for Anions, Salts and Neutral Molecules
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 05/31/2006
* USD 352,485.00

The general goal of this experimental research program is to design and
synthesize organic receptor molecules with useful supramolecular functions, and
to employ analytical, biochemical and physical chemistry methods to evaluate the
success of the designs. The current proposal has three research objectives that
build on discoveries made in the previous grant cycle. The structure and
reactivity of ion-pairs has been a major chemical research topic for many
decades, however, the majority of studies have been complicated by the inherent
lability of the ion-pairs. The principal investigator has developed synthetic
receptors that bind and solubilize isolated contact ion-pairs in non-polar
solvents. These complexes provide a unique opportunity to characterize ion-pair
structure and dynamics using NMR and X-ray crystallography. The major question
to be addressed is how do biologically important, anisotropic anions with pi
-electron density such as RCO2-, CN-, N3-, and NO3-, simultaneously interact
with receptor NH residues and the bound metal cation. It is hypothesized that
the receptor NH residues form hydrogen bonds with anion pi -electrons.

Another objective is to develop synthetic membrane transport carriers for
chloride salts. Biologically, anion transport is a ubiquitous process in nearly
all cells and defective Cl- transport is related to a number of disease states.
One example is cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease that afflicts 1 in 2000
Caucasians. Some researchers think that synthetic Cl- conductors have potential
as therapeutic agents. As a first step towards testing this hypothesis, low-
molecular-weight salt carriers will be synthesized and evaluated for their
abilities to selectively transport sodium chloride or potassium chloride across
vesicle membranes. And finally, Professor Smith will demonstrate how rotaxanes
can be used in novel prodrug strategies. An anion template method will be
employed to prepare interlocked molecules known as rotaxanes with crown ether-
containing wheels and acetal-containing axles. The molecular design allows
conjugation of the rotaxane wheels with molecular entities that improve tissue-
selective targeting. Thus, the rotaxane wheel can be thought of as a novel drug
carrier that is equipped with target recognition capability, as well as a
reductively activated drug-release trigger.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program (OMC) will
support the research of Professor Bradley Smith of the University of Notre Dame.
Professor Smith's work in the supramolecular chemistry field has many potential
applications in biochemistry, such as uses in membrane transport and control
released prodrug systems. The research may offer benefits to society as
potential therapeutic agents for cystic fibrosis and as control released
prodrugs for curing tumors or cancers. An important human resources outcome of
this program is that the project workers (students and postdoctoral associates)
receive broad multidisciplinary training, which enables them to successfully
pursue a range of scientific career choices.