* 0208573
* High-Performance Adaptive Receivers for Broadband Multi-User Communications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Ali Sayed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2006
* USD 398,000.00

High-Performance Adaptive Receivers for Broadband Multi-User Communications

High speed communications over wireless channels has emerged as a key feature of
future communications systems due in part to the explosive interest in
information technology applications, including wireless sensor networks, mobile
wearable systems, mobile computing, wireless location (E911), high-speed mobile
internet, and video transmission over wireless channels. The demand for higher
information capacity in these applications has motivated the use of broadband
wireless channels in order to provide wider bandwidth and higher data rates.
This demand has also motivated the development of multi-user communication
schemes in order to allow users to share the same physical channel; thereby
contributing to even higher data rates. A key challenge that limits the
performance of such multi-user communications systems is the distortion
introduced by the coupled communication channels, by the interference among
users and by the channel fading conditions. This research aims at studying and
developing adaptive receivers that can combat such distortions by adapting their
performance in accordance to the communications environment. The research
studies and develops efficient adaptive receivers for broadband multi-user
communications by exploiting spatial, data, and model structures in order to
reduce computational complexity and increase performance level. In so doing, it
is expected that the resulting schemes will help increase data rates, lower
overhead due to training, lower bit-error-rate, improve signal-to-noise ratio,
and help mitigate the ombined effects of inter-symbol interference, inter-user
interference, and noise. Such schemes would increase the capacity of broadband
wireless networks by allowing multiple users to share the same time slot and
frequency band in an efficient manner. This study focuses on both time-domain
and frequency-domain equalization techniques, with the latter receiving
increasing attention since it has been accepted as IEEE 802.16 Standard for
Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks. The research is also relevant to other
wireless applications such as wireless location (E911), which has emerged as an
essential public safety component of future cellular systems. This is because
this work enables the development of enhanced adaptive techniques that are
robust to fast channel fading, low signal-to-noise ratio conditions, and severe
multipath propagation situations, all of which are characteristic of the E911
environment