* 0208883
* Communicating by Information-embedding: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

0208883 Kannan Ramchandran University of California - Berkeley

Communicating by message-hiding or steganography (derived from the Greek words
steganos meaning \covered" and graphein meaning \to write") goes back over two
thousand years ago to the ancient Greeks as a way of communicating secretly to
send important espionage infor- mation during war 1 . The theoretical
foundations for this powerful communications paradigm are derived from the
elegant information-theoretical framework of channel coding with side
information (CCSI). CCSI refers to the problem of communicating over a noisy
channel with some partial knowledge about the transmission channel (in the form
of side information) avail- able at the encoder but not at the decoder. For
example, in the multimedia data-hiding or watermarking problem, the side
information might refer to a multimedia \host" signal such as an image or audio
or video clip that is present only at the encoder, in which the message may be
desired to be embedded. The rules of data-embedding are usually that (i) the
host medium is minimally perturbed, implying that the embedded message be
minimally intrusive; (ii) the embedded message can be reliably and robustly
recovered by theintended decoder even in the presence of an intermediate
\attacker" who, within the bounds of not rendering the embedded host signal
unusable, might attempt to corrupt or erase the message or watermark. While the
field of information-hiding has its origins in covert communications, the scope
of applicability ofthis paradigm is far more general, and extends to non-covert
communication systems as well. Specifically, it turns out, rather surprisingly,
that in general, the most e Ecient way to do digital broadcast is to follow the
principles of data-hiding with users' messages being embedded in one another's.
Indeed, the theoretically best-known achievable broadcast rates from
information-theory to this day date back to the (unreadable) work of Marton [1],
whose codebook construction is intimately connected to the methodology for data-
hiding. Related to this are the works of Gelfand and Pinsker [2] on CCSI, and by
Costa [3] on the so-called problem of \writing on dirty paper" where the
punchline is to embed data by adapting to the host medium rather than by trying
to \overpower" it. These ideas lay the theoretical foundations for the problem
of information-embedding and form the core of this proposal.