* 0208990
* Third Party Programmability for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Carl Gunter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2004
* USD 180,000.00

There are a rapidly-growing number and diversity of embedded processors in
general use today. In a growing number of cases the device is programmable by
its user. Programmablility varies in complexity from&lt;br/&gt;simple memory
functions, like a cell phone that remembers a list of numbers, to full third-
party programmability (TPP), where, for example, a cell phone can download new
software from the Internet&lt;br/&gt;and offer significantly new functionality.
This feature allows the device to exploit some of the advantages of general-
purpuse computers like personal desktop computers or Internet servers. The
device serves as a platform for a diversity of applications, even applications
that were not yet conceived at the time the device was
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to exploit these advantages, embedded
processor software platforms must offer a range of features well-known from
general purpose computers: flexibility, portability, extensibility,
predictability, and deliverability. Of these, a particularly unique challenge
arises in the delivery of new programs to the device.&lt;br/&gt;Installing new
code on general-purpose computers attached to the Internet is already a
significant challenge, but the support of TPP embedded processors is an even
more diverse and unsettled issue. It is often the case that smart devices are
not networked, have only intermittent Internet connectivity, or operate
primarily in networks consisting of other smart devices through local peer-to-
peer links. This makes code delivery a particular challenge and impels the need
for new architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project we will derive a
range of code delivery architectures for TPP smart devices based on the
assumption of complex connectivity requirements. In the general case issues
include small code size (for&lt;br/&gt;instance programs may be limited to one
or two kilobyte sizes), interaction with operational requirements (like naivety
of a human operator in the field or kitchen), safety requirements for TPP
devices with high-energy actuators, security issues for network communication or
when mischief is particularly threatening (like programming for automobiles),
interplay with network connectivity (like ability to&lt;br/&gt;function both
with and without access to the Internet). We will analyze architecture,
language, and analysis techniques available to deal with the
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An early basis for our study of requirements will
be the area of smart appliances for homes. A diversity of delivery options are
the subject of current research in this area. We will begin by developing a
system for programming microwave ovens using bar codes on food packages and
generalize our experience with this system to others. Existing systems in this
area assume too little (like recipes that can be expressed with 3-10 numbers) or
too much (like an attached PC that must access recipes from the Internet). An
ideal system will allow small programs to be delivered on packages that can
function as scripts or invoke network connectivity if it exists to download code
for more substantial functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research also
focuses on predictability using advanced analysis techniques such as formal
verification. Our research will identify the appropriate subsets of general-
purpose programming languages for embedded&lt;br/&gt;applications and develop
tools for applying verification techniques directly to the source code using
domain-specific and automated abstractions. &lt;br/&gt;