* 0208182
* Geochemical Controls on Carbonate Equilibria and Mass Transport in Glaciated Mid-Continent Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Lynn Walter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2005
* USD 290,434.00

&lt;br/&gt;The continuing emission of CO2 from fossil-fuel burning in the 21st
century is, volumetrically, earth's most significant environmental pollutant.
The dissolution of calcite and dolomite is very rapid and solubility is strongly
CO2-dependent, which forges a close linkage between carbonate weathering and
organic carbon respiration rates. This will be especially important in near
surface groundwaters and streams, because these systems will be the first to
respond to climatic and atmospheric changes due to the short residence time of
water in these reservoirs. Thus, factors limiting dissolved inorganic carbon
fluxes from watersheds will be very important in predicting the response of
earth's surface reservoirs to anticipated changes in biomass and carbon budgets
in the next few centuries, the timescale of most pressing human and
environmental concern.&lt;br/&gt;For North America, nearly 90% of the HCO3- flux
is derived from the mid-continent region, which has a high proportion of
sedimentary bedrock mantled by carbonate-bearing glacial drift. Importantly, the
low temperature of these temperate weathering environments maximizes carbonate
mineral solubility. Indeed, Michigan watersheds have some of the highest area-
normalized carbon fluxes in the world. This region thus provides an ideal field
laboratory in which to assess controls on the HCO3- content of streams and the
shallow groundwaters interacting with them on human timescales. Our proposed
research program involves field study of the hydrogeochemistry of 6 endmember
watersheds in the Great Lakes region, spanning the upper and lower peninsulas of
Michigan. The specific field sites were selected on the basis of water
chemistry, bedrock lithology, drainage basin type, land use and ecosystem type,
mean annual temperature, and availability of real-time USGS gauging stations.
&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to produce a high quality analytic and theoretical
characterization of the dissolved inorganic and organic carbon systematics of
surface waters and groundwaters in the glaciated mid-continent region. Our
initial studies demonstrate that surface and groundwater Mg concentrations are
excellent conservative tracers of carbonate dissolution. As such, the Mg/HCO3
ratio provides a sensitive indicator of mass balances of carbonate dissolution
versus precipitation in the streams, wetlands and lakes present within the
watershed boundaries. The new data set we produce will integrate physical
factors (type of river basin drainage, discharge, annual cycles) and with
measured inorganic and organic carbon fluxes. Identifying equilibrium versus
kinetic controls on carbonate mass transfer will permit more accurate
predictions to be made of how earth's landscapes and surface hydrogeochemical
systems will respond to increasing rates of carbon metabolism and fluxes in an
elevated CO2 world. &lt;br/&gt;