* 0208444
* Collaborative Research: Patterns of Serial Fault Rupture in Taiwan
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Charles Rubin, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2008
* USD 253,927.00

Charles Rubin EAR-0208444

This project undertakes studies of two active fault systems in Taiwan, the
Chelungpu and Longitudinal Valley faults, which ruptured during large
earthquakes in 1999 and 1951, in order to address recurrence fault behavior and
the temporal variability of rupture modes. Acquisition of rupture time series on
the Chelungpu and Longitudinal Valley faults provide constraints on physical
models of serial fault rupture and fault interactions. These results bear on
seismic hazard analysis, by considering the physical processes that lead to an
earthquake, including the interaction of adjacent fault ruptures, the effect of
prior ruptures on a fault, the influence of geologic structure and fault
geometry on rupture termination and aseismic versus seismic behavior.

Paleoseismic studies along the Chelungpu fault are characterizing its earthquake
recurrence and displacement history. For example, if the recurrence of 1999-like
earthquakes is far less frequent, then other structures at the same latitude
would have to play an important role in strain relief. Results from these
investigations have implications for understanding the physical processes of
strain relief on individual faults and of mountain building. End-member
hypotheses, ranging from unpatterned or random recurrence to highly clustered
behavior, are being tested using earthquake time histories obtained along the
Chelungpu and adjacent reverse faults.

The project also characterizes the active faults of the Longitudinal Valley
faults. Determining the elevations of shoreline angles for a select handful of
coastal marine terraces is constraining the millennial rates along the
Longitudinal Valley. Geologic mapping and dating of the fluvial terraces along
Shiouguluan River are providing the time-averaged uplift rates between the
Longitudinal Valley and the eastern coastal region.