* 0208009
* Inter-Annual Variability of the Hydrologic Cycle over North America
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Mingfang Ting, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2005
* USD 251,999.00

0208009&lt;br/&gt;Kumar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research
is to develop a better understanding of the coupling between the atmospheric and
terrestrial (land) branches of the hydrologic cycle and identifies the physical
basis of their inter-annual variability. The underlying hypothesis of the
proposed research is that the regional atmospheric moisture transport is
governed by both the large scale forcing as well as local recycling, and their
relative contributions have important implications in the inter-annual
variability of the hydrologic cycle. The relative contributions of advected and
recycled moisture may depend on the season, re-ion and the memory of the various
reservoirs such as the atmosphere. near-surface and sub-surface storage. Two
specific science objectives will be addressed in this
project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective I: Identify the modes of the observed
inter-annual variability of the hydrologic cycle and the underlying causal
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Identify the roles of land surface
and sub-surface storage (water and snow/ice) in regulating the inter-annual
variability of the hydrologic cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate variability,
natural or human induced. Have the potential to alter the moisture fluxes, which
can have significant societal impact. For example, it is speculated that
C02-induced global warming would lead to an intensification of global water
cycle (an increase in global water fluxes), leading to greater -global
precipitation. faster evaporation and a general exacerbation of extreme weather
and hydrological regimes including floods and droughts. In addition we may see a
shift in the spatial patterns of transport, resulting from the feedback between
the changes in the hydrologic cycle and general circulation patterns. Changes in
hydrologic regimes have implications for water resource management as well as
biogeochemical processes in ecosystems. A better understanding of the dynamics
of the hydrologic cycle and the underlying causal mechanism will have
significant impact in all areas of water-related processes.&lt;br/&gt;