* 0208779
* Cyberlogic
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Natarajan Shankar, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 06/30/2005
* USD 329,975.00

&lt;br/&gt;Cyberlogic is a semantic foundation for implementing
evidential&lt;br/&gt;transactions using the public key infrastructure (PKI).
Evidential&lt;br/&gt;transactions form the basis of frameworks for authorization
and&lt;br/&gt;authentication, electronic commerce, business workflow, and
digital&lt;br/&gt;government. Such transactions involve the exchange of physical
evidence&lt;br/&gt;in the form of identity cards, driver's licenses, money,
checks, visas,&lt;br/&gt;airline tickets, traffic tickets, birth certificates,
and stock&lt;br/&gt;certificates, as well as electronic evidence including PIN
numbers,&lt;br/&gt;passwords, keys, certificates, and nonces. Cyberlogic is an
enabling&lt;br/&gt;foundation for building and analyzing protocols that involve
the&lt;br/&gt;exchange of electronic forms of
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyberlogic builds on evidence, public keys, and
protocols. First, evidence&lt;br/&gt;is encoded by means of numbers using
digital certificates and nonces.&lt;br/&gt;Second, public keys are predicates so
that any information $i$ signed by a&lt;br/&gt;private key corresponding to the
public key $P$ entails that $P$ holds of&lt;br/&gt;$i$. Indeed, the signed
certificate is a proof for the assertion contained&lt;br/&gt;in the certificate.
Third, protocols are distributed logic programs that&lt;br/&gt;gather evidence
by using both ordinary predicates and digital&lt;br/&gt;certificates. These
simple building blocks can be used to&lt;br/&gt;construct a rich variety of
services in a variety of domains&lt;br/&gt;ranging from digital government to
access control in computer systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The public key
infrastructure (PKI) provides basic services for&lt;br/&gt;encryption,
authentication, trust, authorization, and digital&lt;br/&gt;certificates.
Cyberlogic is a protocol layer over the PKI that serves as&lt;br/&gt;a reliable
foundation for evidential transactions. It provides a&lt;br/&gt;standardized
semantic and computational infrastructure for exchanging&lt;br/&gt;evidence in
electronic form. With such a foundation, it is possible to&lt;br/&gt;design
secure electronic versions of transactions that currently
require&lt;br/&gt;physical forms of evidence.&lt;br/&gt;