* 0208378
* USArray and the Great Plains:  A Pre EARTHSCOPE Workshop Proposal (February 2003)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Charles Oviatt, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2004
* USD 33,623.00

0208378&lt;br/&gt;Hubbard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EarthScope is a major earth
science research initiative that will integrate scientific information derived
from seismology (US Array), geodesy (Plate boundary Observatory), subsurface
sampling and measurement (SAFOD), remote sensing (InSAR), and complementary
geology and geophysics to understand continental scale plate deformation and
evolution. Funding for the EarthScope initiative is currently being discussed in
Congress as part of NSF's FY 2003 budget. The Division of Earth Sciences has
made FY 2002 funds available for projects that qualify as pre-EarthScope
activity, i.e. activities that will facilitate or enable the construction,
fabrication, installation or operation of EarthScope once it is funded under the
MREFC (Major Research Equipment Facilities and Construction) account. Such
activities include meetings and workshops, prototype development, site selection
or characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a planning
workshop to discuss scientific objectives related to the Great Plains coverage
of the USArray component of EarthScope. The Great Plains region has had a
geologic history that includes continental rifting, marine and non-marine
sedimentation, localized basin formation and deformation, tilting and incision
of Tertiary sedimentary units in the west, mantle activity resulting in
contrasting seismic anisotropy between eastern and western regions, and
earthquake activity. To date, much of the research has been done within
disciplines and on individual aspects of the geologic history. Clearly there are
relationships between past events, and bringing workers together will foster
discussion about topics ranging from mantle activity to the Earth's surface and
from the Precambrian to the present. The workshop participants will discuss
possible multidisciplinary future collaborations to address identified questions
and can interface these collaborations with the USArray coverage in the region.
The goal of the workshop is to foster interdisciplinary discussion that is aimed
at maximizing the scientific gain from the USArray initiative in the Great
Plains region.&lt;br/&gt;***