* 0208121
* Exact Controllability and Observation of Structural Acoustics and Thermoelastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* George Avalos, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 117,901.00

0208121&lt;br/&gt;Avalos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with
studying exact boundary controllability &lt;br/&gt;properties of those systems
of coupled partial differential equations &lt;br/&gt;(PDE's) which govern
structural acoustic flow within a chamber. Exact &lt;br/&gt;and null boundary
controllability problems for two-dimensional systems &lt;br/&gt;of
thermoelasticity will also be studied. In part, the work will entail a
&lt;br/&gt;study of the dual problem; namely, the attainment of related
observability &lt;br/&gt;inequalities for solutions of homogeneous adjoint
equations. In line with &lt;br/&gt;the intended engineering applications, the
focus will be on situations &lt;br/&gt;which allow control of the structural
acoustic dynamics on as small a &lt;br/&gt;(boundary) control region as
possible. Moreover, this project is aimed at &lt;br/&gt;finding conditions on
the geometry and prescribed controls so that, with &lt;br/&gt;control
implemented on the flexible portion of the acoustic chamber only, &lt;br/&gt;one
will have exact controllability of the acoustic flow, for arbitrary initial
&lt;br/&gt;data of finite energy. It is anticipated that key ingredients in the
work will &lt;br/&gt;include the following: (i) sharp trace regularity for the
wave equation in &lt;br/&gt;the absence of the so-called Lopatinski condition
(intrinsic to the wave &lt;br/&gt;equation under Neumann boundary conditions);
(ii) microlocal analytical &lt;br/&gt;estimates which will allow the absorption
of tangential wave traces by &lt;br/&gt;time derivatives on the boundary; and
(iii) recent results involving &lt;br/&gt;Carleman's estimates for the wave
equation with controlled Neumann part &lt;br/&gt;of the boundary. In addition,
the project will focus on problems of linear &lt;br/&gt;and (globally) nonlinear
exact controllability for thermoelastic systems. In &lt;br/&gt;particular,
thermoelastic PDE's will be considered which have their &lt;br/&gt;associated
(non-Lipschitz) nonlinearities in place; e.g., the von Karman &lt;br/&gt;bracket
and the quasilinearities which appear in the modeling of extensible
&lt;br/&gt;plates. This work will attempt to use, in an essential way, the now-
known &lt;br/&gt;analyticity of linearized thermoelastic models and our recent
stability &lt;br/&gt;work for uncontrolled (but fully nonlinear) thermoelastic
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Examples of coupled partial differential
equations (PDE's), such as those &lt;br/&gt;to be investigated, have long
existed in the literature. However, recent &lt;br/&gt;innovations in smart
material technology, and the potential applications of &lt;br/&gt;these
innovations within the context of control engineering design, have
&lt;br/&gt;greatly increased the interest in these PDE models. The project is
aimed at &lt;br/&gt;obtaining information about certain qualitative properties
of these &lt;br/&gt;equations, which in turn can be used to design effective
control laws for &lt;br/&gt;the structures/interactions that these equations
govern. For example, &lt;br/&gt;structural acoustic PDE's are used to model the
interaction of an aircraft &lt;br/&gt;cabin's interior acoustic field with the
surrounding walls of the cabin. For &lt;br/&gt;the benefit of the passengers, it
is desirable to negate or control pressure &lt;br/&gt;disturbances that act
directly on the interior acoustic field. These &lt;br/&gt;disturbances typically
emanate from outside the cabin environment; e.g., &lt;br/&gt;vibrations due to
aircraft engine and propeller noise, or effects due to &lt;br/&gt;weather
turbulence. In practice, engineers attempt to control this external
&lt;br/&gt;noise by placing piezoelectric actuators/sensors on a portion of the
cabin &lt;br/&gt;wall, these devices to act in such a way so as to remove, or at
least lessen, &lt;br/&gt;the harmful acoustic pressure effects. However, the
efficacy of this &lt;br/&gt;technology is profoundly sensitive to the shape of
the cabin, as well as to &lt;br/&gt;the particular region of the cabin walls
where the actuators are placed. The &lt;br/&gt;goals of this project include:
(i) the precise mathematical characterization &lt;br/&gt;of those cabin
geometries for which active control design by piezoelectric &lt;br/&gt;actuation
is indeed possible; and (ii) when such control design is &lt;br/&gt;practicable,
the construction of a reliable method to prescribe the amount &lt;br/&gt;and
region of control actuation which will be necessary to maintain a calm
&lt;br/&gt;acoustic field within the cabin.&lt;br/&gt;