* 0208269
* Collaborative Research:  The Hydrology, Hydraulics and Hydrometorology of Flood Response in  Urbanizing Drainage Basins
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* James Smith, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2005
* USD 167,626.00

0208225&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated hydrologic,
hydraulic and hydrometeorological process that controls flooding in urbanizing
drainage basins will be examined through analyses of flood response in the
Baltimore metropolitan region. The science questions are: (1) How does the
scale-dependent flood response of urban drainage basins depend on the space-time
structure of rainfall for warm season systems of thunderstorms? (2) How does
flood response vary with land-surface properties including impervious cover and
structure of the urban drainage network? And (3) What is the relative role of
changing channel/floodplain morphology due to urbanization, as compared with
geologic controls of channel floodplain morphology, in determining the
attenuation of flood waves? Questions 1 and 2 will be examined through
hydrologic and hydrometeorological analyses of flood events in 24 drainage
basins smaller than 200 km2 for 25-30 flood events during the period 1996-2003.
Diagnostic analyses of rainfall and discharge observations for the flood events
will be used in conjunction with model analyses to address questions 1 and 2.
Hydrologic model analyses will be based on a distributed hydrologic model, the
Network Model. Hydraulic analyses of flood wave propagation will be carried out
for a subset of the 24 basins and will include 4 stream reaches, each with
upstream-downstream pairs of stream gaging stations. The 2-d depth-averaged
hydraulic model, TELEMAC, will be used for assessing hydraulic controls of flood
response in urbanizing stream channels. The key observations used in this study
are: (1) high-resolution (1 km, 5 minutes) radar rainfall estimates, (2) high-
resolution (0.6 m contour interval) topographic data sets, (3) high-resolution
(0.6 m grid, 0.15 m vertical resolution) topographic data sets derived from
airborne radar, (4) high-resolution (1 m) representations of impervious cover,
and (5) field-surveyed channel cross sections, longitudinal profiles and pebble
counts. &lt;br/&gt;