* 0208358
* Hydraulic and Geomorphic Controls on the Evolution of Cluster Bedforms in Gravel-Bed Streams
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Thanos Papanicolaou, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2003
* USD 140,000.00

0208358 Papanicolaou

Small-scale cluster bedforms are prevalent in gravel-bed rivers. An
understanding of their mechanics is needed for better understanding of river
processes, as well as the development of accurate predictions of bed roughness
characteristics, stage-discharge relations, bedload transport, and
implementation of restoration plans. Cluster microforms are one component of the
nonlinear system of gravel-bed rivers. Flow structure and entrainable sediment
produce clusters; once developed, they in turn influence sediment transport and
the surrounding flow field.

Clusters add to bed stability and delay of sediment motion. Self-organized
clusters have been called a "product of stochastic encounters among individual
grains." In natural streams, cluster bedforms are thought to form during
recession of flow events great enough to create selective mobilization of bed
sediment. Some think that clusters form in quasi-stable equilibrium so as to
maximize flow resistance, producing a wavelength to particle diameter ratio of
20. Still others suggest that clusters are a "kinematic wave" or migratory,
rather than stable structure.

The project entails extensive laboratory flume experiments to understand the
evolution of cluster microforms. A major- goal is to define the near bed
turbulence structure to improve the understanding of the coupling between near-
bed turbulence and sediment transport when clusters are present. A series of
experiments will be conducted for non-unisized spheres to examine the cluster
geometry, the flow ranges under which clusters form, remain stable, and
disintegrate, and the interaction between near-bed hydraulic parameters and
clusters bedforms. The reduced number of variables in the laboratory experiments
will allow specific relations between the hydraulic parameters, sediment supply,
and resulting particle clusters to be isolated and quantified. Recent advances
in high-resolution cameras and acoustic sensors for measuring turbulence around
clusters, combined with the development of hardware for image analysis and bed
scanning will allow simultaneous measurements of local sediment transport and
adjacent near-bed flow at turbulence-resolving frequencies without disturbing
the flow.