* 0208301
* International Conference in Reliability and Survival Analysis 2003
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Edsel Pena, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 07/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal ID DMS-0208301&lt;br/&gt;International Conference
in&lt;br/&gt;Reliability and Survival Analysis 2003&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(PI:
Edsel Pena, Ph.D.; Co-PIs: James Lynch, Ph.D., William Padgett, Ph.
D.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of
Statistics, and its Center for Reliability and Quality Sciences, at the
University of South Carolina in Columbia will organize the International
Conference on Reliability and Survival Analysis 2003 (ICRSA2003) to be held on
the University's historic campus from May 21-24, 2003. The objectives of this
conference are to bring together senior and established researchers and young
and promising researchers from around the world who are working in the
theoretical and applied aspects of reliability, survival analysis, and related
topics in order to share recent advances and current research, as well as future
research trends, in these areas. Through this conference, it is expected that
interaction and/or collaborative work among reliability and survival analysis
researchers will be fostered, which will enhance and accelerate developments in
both areas. As it currently exists, the reliability and survival analysis
disciplines have developed somewhat separately, but there is much to be gained
by recognizing similarities between them since both deal with the stochastic
modeling and statistical analysis of failure-time data, usually in the presence
of incomplete information. This conference, which will be the first since 1998
to be held in the United States focused simultaneously on reliability and
survival analysis, will enable many researchers in the United States to
participate, especially new researchers and graduate students, as the cost and
accessibility for participation is more viable. Plenary talks and invited talks
will be given by leading researchers in reliability and survival analysis, and
contributed talks and poster sessions will be solicited from advanced graduate
students and new researchers, especially from under-represented groups. The
funding provided by the National Science Foundation will enable partial
financial support of the plenary speakers, new researchers, and graduate
students. New researchers and graduate students from under-represented groups
will be particularly encouraged to seek funding from this NSF
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;