* 0208156
* The Evolution of Hierarchical Structure in Organisms: A Test for an Increasing Tendency
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Daniel McShea, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 35,000.00

The Evolution of Hierarchical Structure in Organisms: A Test for an Increasing
Tendency&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daniel McShea, Duke University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;EAR-0208156&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; One of the
clearest trends in the history of life is the increase in the hierarchical
structure of organisms, that is, in the degree to which they are nested, parts
within wholes. Well-known cases of hierarchy increase include the so-called
"major transitions" in evolution, such as the various origins of multicellular
organisms (e.g., plants and animals) from aggregates of free-living cells, and
also at a higher level, the origins of colonies (e.g., social-insect colonies)
from clones of multicellular individuals. The trend is clear, but we know little
about the mechanism, about what drives the trend. One possibility is that there
has been a bias, a positive tendency for hierarchy to increase, perhaps because
greater nestedness is favored by natural selection. But it could also be that
there is no such tendency, that hierarchy decreases as often as it increases,
and that the trend is the result of the passive spread of evolutionary lineages
across the hierarchy spectrum. To see how this might work, suppose that the
first organisms (presumably bacteria) were hierarchically as shallow as
possible, so that initially hierarchy could only increase. Then, as life
diversified, with both increases and decreases occurring in various groups, the
outer envelope of hierarchical structure would be pushed toward ever-higher
levels. Stephen Jay Gould argued forcefully for this mechanism in his book, Full
House. The evidence on this question - whether any increasing tendency exists -
is equivocal. We know that losses of hierarchical structure have occurred,
especially at the colony level, in the transitions back to solitary life. But
their frequency, relative to increases, is unknown. The study proposed here is a
first-ever attempt to answer the question in a rigorous way. One barrier to
investigation has been the fact that too few major transitions are known to
estimate relative frequencies of increase and decrease in a statistically robust
way. This study solves the problem by employing a recently developed high-
resolution hierarchy scale. The scale identifies intermediate levels between the
major levels (e.g., between multicellular individual and colony), in effect
interpolating a series of "minor transitions" within the major transitions and
thereby increasing the number of transitions available to be studied. To test
for an increasing tendency, the study will examine minor transitions across the
spectrum of hierarchical organization, from bacteria to supercolony. Modern
phylogenetic methods will be used to reconstruct the history of hierarchy with
each group studied, to count numbers of increases and decreases in hierarchy,
and to assess their relative probabilities. &lt;br/&gt;