* 0208959
* Sequential Architectures for Quantum Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Igor Markov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 08/31/2006
* USD 306,000.00

During the last decade, a revolutionary new computer paradigm has emerged that,
unlike conventional ones such as the von Neumann model, is based on quantum
mechanics rather than classical physics. Quantum computers can, in principle,
solve some hitherto intractable problems including factorization of large
numbers, a central issue in secure data encryption. The quantum unit of
information is the qubit and n qubits can store 2^n binary numbers
simultaneously thus facilitating a type of massive parallelism. Qubits support
powerful forms of interaction such as entanglement that have no counterpart in
classical computers. On the other hand, quantum states are fragile, nanoscale
entities, whose measurement is inherently nondeterministic and does not retrieve
all 2^n stored numbers simultaneously. As a result, quantum and classical
computers pose fundamentally different design problems. Although several
promising physical technologies for quantum computers have been demonstrated,
they can handle only a small number of qubits and their scalabilty is severely
limited. The logic circuits they employ are essentially combinational quantum
circuits, which function as a kind of co-processor within an otherwise classical
computer. Once quantum computers with 15 -20 qubits can be built, quantum
architectures that fully exploit their computational capabilities and also meet
practical design and implementation constraints will be needed. These issues
motivate the research proposed here, as well as related problems in classical
computers that are implemented using nanoscale technologies such as molecular
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this proposal is to
develop practical methods to design sequential quantum circuits that require
much less hardware than current quantum circuits and can be more easily
interfaced with classical architectures. The time-space trade-off achievable in
classical logic design by using sequential rather than combinational methods is
well-known. In the quantum domain, however, it is not obvious that such a trade-
off is even possible, since the act of measuring a register's state can destroy
its contents. As a result, little or no research has been directed at sequential
design methods. However, recent theoretical work on quantum automata by Ambianis
et al. demonstrates the feasibility of such methods and points to the
possibility of substantial cost savings over conventional approaches. We propose
to study the design of quantum sequential circuits starting with exponentially
more efficient counters and culminating with application-specific processor
designs that realize important applications such as Grover's search algorithm.
We will pursue multiobjective optimization, including minimization of the number
of qubits, the number of gates, or the circuit depth. We will also take into
account the constraints imposed by the most promising physical technologies.
Moreover, we will study ways to combine small quantum circuits with large
classical circuits to obtain scalable hybrid architectures. Both quantum
performance speed-up and conventional scalability then become possible. Novel
hybrid designs of this type are expected to play a central role in interfacing
quantum processors with classical computers, both conventional and nanoscale. As
in traditional computer architecture studies, simulation and other computer-
aided design (CAD) methods will, along with the appropriate analytic methods,
serve as our principal research tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;