* 0208992
* System-Level Approaches to Reducing Energy Consumption in Real-Time Embedded System Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Xiaobo Hu, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2005
* USD 119,973.00

Hu, Xiaobo&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0208992&lt;br/&gt;Title: System-Level Approaches to
Reducing Energy Consumption &lt;br/&gt; in Real-Time Embedded System Design
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power-manageable hardware devices are essential for
reducing system energy&lt;br/&gt;consumption. In order to benefit maximally from
such devices, new and innovative approaches must be developed to fully exploit
the dynamically adjustable power v.s. delay characteristics. The proposed
research aims at developing techniques employed at the system level to reduce
energy consumption in battery-powered real-time embedded systems composed of
power-manageable hardware resources. This project strives to obtain a
fundamental understanding on the effect of power-manageable resources on both
performance and energy consumption during the execution of real-time tasks. Non-
ideal features of real-world power-manageable devices will be considered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major activities include i) devising high-level
allocation and scheduling schemes for systems composed of power-manageable
devices, ii) designing and analyzing voltage scheduling algorithms for variable-
voltage processors, and iii) developing techniques to predict power/energy
consumed by hardware resources at the micro-architectural level. Training
students to prepare them for energy-conscious design challenges is also a major
component of the project, which will be achieved through course development and
active involvements of both undergraduate and graduate students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;