* 0208842
* Practice-Oriented Provable Security for Higher-Layer Protocols: Models, Analyses and Solutions
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Phillip Rogaway, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 06/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This research is about using the "provable-security approach" in the design and
analysis of high-level cryptographic protocols. The aim is to gain assurance for
practical cryptographic schemes by finding the right definitions, and then using
modern techniques (reductions and their concrete-security analysis) to analyze
selected schemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific problems to be investigated
include: (1) Storing a user's private information on an untrusted server. Here
one wants to store user data in such a way that the user can recover it by
presenting a password, but an adversary must invest an amount of interaction
proportional to the guessing-complexity of the password. (2) The authenticated-
encryption scheme in SSH. Though the method used by SSH is not, in general,
correct, the situation for SSH itself is far from clear. (3) Delegation of
authority to a secondary signature key by a primary one. A well-known approach
in security practice, the problem that this solution aims to solve is without
any provable-security treatment. (4) Relating the "prescriptive" approach to
formalizing authenticated key exchange and the simulation-based approach. (5)
Moving to an enriched model of computation, an envelope model, to investigate
authenticated key exchange. (6) A systematic investigation of the "game walking"
approach to analyzing cryptographic scenarios. Here two adversarial views are
compared by writing out a sequence of pseudocode "games" each of which may set
some Boolean flag. One bounds the difference in adversarial views by bounding
the probability that the flag gets set. &lt;br/&gt;