* 0208786
* Design and Deposition of Electroactive Polymers for LEDs and Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Lewis Rothberg, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2005
* USD 484,633.00

This project focuses on three areas important to the development of polymeric
light-emitting di-odes (PLEDs), polymer based photovoltaic devices, and to
elucidation of the structure/property relationships that govern the performance
of the active polymer layers in these devices. The ap-proach is to develop a new
layer-by-layer deposition technique that is compatible with deposition of
polymers or oligomers from organic solvents. This deposition technique combines
the fine control of device structure now available in LEDs prepared via the
evaporation of small organic molecules with the mechanical integrity and
solution processability of polymers. The ability to engineer device structure
via precise control of several polymeric layers is expected to improve the
performance of PLEDs and photovoltaics, and aid in the investigation of the
science that un-derpins their performance. Also, the approach includes synthesis
of an array of novel polymers and oligomers that will be utilized to build PLEDs
and photovoltaic devices with the new layer-by-layer deposition technique.
Additionally, fundamental studies of the role that struc-ture/property
relationships, such as energetic disorder, play in device performance will be
pur-sued. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research
issues in areas of electronic/photonic materials sci-ence having technological
relevance. An important feature of the project is the emphasis on edu-cation,
and the integration of research and education. The available resources provide
special op-portunities for education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary forefront research.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;