* 0208100
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Duana Fullwiley, Fullwiley, Duana
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 11/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This post-doctoral research and training grant queries the emergence of
"tailored medicine" as rationales of population-specific biological differences
are varyingly taken up by professionals in the medical sciences, researchers in
biotechnology, strategists in pharmaceutical planning and lay publics. The
persistent confusion over the place of "race" in the sciences as well as its
social, biological, genetic, and epidemiological validity, or invalidity, will
be explored. Taking the example of African-American hypertension and heart
failure, the research component of this postdoctoral grant will consist of an
ethnographic, multi-sited study on the appearance of, and justification for, the
first ethnically marked pharmaceutical drug called BiDil. This "African-American
drug" is currently in its first year of a two-year medical trial at over 100
clinical sites in the U.S. and is produced by Bedford, MA based NitroMed, Inc.
Relying on methods of multi-sited fieldwork (Heath et al. 1999; Rapp 1999), I
will conduct participant observation at one or more trial sites in the New York
area to learn how both doctors and patients understand "African-American
hypertension" as a different disease than that of its "Caucasian" counterpart.
This aspect of the fieldwork will be complemented by participant observation and
interviews with geneticists researching SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms)
as markers of biological difference crucial to pharmacogenomics. The controversy
over whether or not phenotypic traits can scientifically belie one' genetic
constitution regarding drug metabolizing enzymes has recently brought the usage
of race in science to the fore in The New England Journal of Medicine (Exner et
al. 2001; Yancy et al. 2001) where many of those working on BiDil have published
key papers justifying their all Black study, The African-American Heart Failure
Trial (Dries et al. 1999; Exner et al. 2001). Geneticists publishing in Nature
Genetics have upped their criticism of race as a surrogate marker for genetic
difference due to the NEJM debates (Editorial 2001). By interviewing
spokespeople for biotechnology companies working on SNP mapping for
pharmacogenomics purposes, scientific advisors on NitroMed, Inc.'s BiDil trial,
cardiologists, hypertension specialists, members of the Association of Black
Cardiologists (ABC), patients, and patient advocate group members, I will
chronicle the deployment of race and other markers (such as SNPs) as each
potentially inflect new social understandings of difference, identity, and
health in the post-genomic age. This Postdoctoral Research and Training
Fellowship, to be carried out at New York University under the sponsorship of
senior Professor of Anthropology Rayna Rapp for 18 months, and at the University
of London, Goldsmith College with Professor of Sociology Nikolas Rose for 6
months, is both timely and pertinent. The field of pharmacogenomics is just
emerging, while questions on the responsible use of the concept of race
--selectively resisted in both the life and social sciences--demand more
detailed interdisciplinary scholarship. This project will build upon the work of
researchers in medical anthropology and sociology interested in the intersection
of various social and biological markers of difference, such as ethnicity and
disease genes. It will furthermore contribute to research in the social studies
of science concerned with the co-production of disease, identity, technology,
and market.