* 0208996
* Collaborative Research:  Formal Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Carl Gunter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 06/30/2005
* USD 231,999.00

Growing pressure to collect information on the Internet has created a need
for&lt;br/&gt;more sophisticated ways to characterize privacy rights and balance
them against&lt;br/&gt;legitimate commercial and law enforcement objectives. A
wide range of businesses&lt;br/&gt;now rely on their ability to collect
information about online customers as a&lt;br/&gt;foundation of their added
value in the market place. The use or potential use of&lt;br/&gt;the Internet
for purposes such as child pornography and planning of hate crimes&lt;br/&gt;and
terrorism have heighted interest in (and loosened regulations on)
network&lt;br/&gt;monitoring. Theft of intellectual property has led to the
development of&lt;br/&gt;numerous protection mechanisms; these often involve
registrations and involuntary&lt;br/&gt;monitoring of various kinds. In order to
make security easier (and explore a&lt;br/&gt;lucrative business model), a
number of companies seek to act as third-party&lt;br/&gt;caretakers of private
information such as keys, authentication secrets, and&lt;br/&gt;credit card
numbers. Arrayed against these trends are many citizens incensed
by&lt;br/&gt;aggressive means used to collect information from them and a
variety of groups&lt;br/&gt;that champion privacy
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been many advances in technologies both
to aid information gathering&lt;br/&gt;and limit it. One important trend is
toward more advanced systems for creating&lt;br/&gt;and managing digital
credentials and authorization databases. In current&lt;br/&gt;practice
credentials are sometimes `pushed' (like presenting a ticket to get
into&lt;br/&gt;a movie theater) sometimes `pulled' (like getting access to an
airplane seat with&lt;br/&gt;a `paperless' ticket) and sometimes both (like
making a purchase at a store with&lt;br/&gt;a credit card whose validity is
confirmed online). These approaches have&lt;br/&gt;Internet-based analogs, and
technical advances have increased the range of&lt;br/&gt;options considerably in
recent years. For example, work on public key systems&lt;br/&gt;has advanced
techniques for delegation based on chains of `pushed' credentials&lt;br/&gt;and
increased the automation of credential collection. Another important
trend&lt;br/&gt;is toward more advanced systems for protecting privacy using
anonymizing&lt;br/&gt;techniques. Tools such as onion routers and anonymous web
publication servers&lt;br/&gt;provide some support but other techniques directly
aid fine-grained mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;for obtaining privileges without exposing
information unnecessarily. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to develop
formal support for characterizing privacy in the&lt;br/&gt;context of these
advances. Efforts to improve access control systems and&lt;br/&gt;credential
distribution have paid little attention to privacy mechanisms so
far,&lt;br/&gt;resulting in systems that are good at propagating credentials
reliably, but not&lt;br/&gt;tuned to do so within well-understood privacy
constraints. This collaboration&lt;br/&gt;will build on our work in credential
distribution and anonymity to create an&lt;br/&gt;integrated architecture and
protocols to provide advanced access control within&lt;br/&gt;the limitations of
privacy constraints.