* 0208765
* Docatorate Data Project
* SBE,NCSE
* 12/05/2001,12/05/2006
* Steve Knable, National Opinion Research Center
* Contract-BOA/Task Order
* Emilda Rivers
* 12/05/2006
* USD 1.00

Abstract- Doctorate Data Project 0208765

The purpose of this acquisition is to procure a data collection, file
maintenance, and analysis/ methodological research capability to collect
information on persons receiving research doctorate awards from United States
universities and to monitor their subsequent experiences in the labor force.

The Federal agency with the lead responsibility for this contract is the
National Science Foundation (NSF), which is authorized to identify and assess
the numbers and characteristics of scientists and engineers in the United
States. Other Federal agencies which have related responsibilities for
collecting and reporting on persons in other disciplines participate jointly in
aspects of this project, so that the total population of individuals of interest
is all persons receiving research doctorates, in all fields, for the Survey of
Earned Doctorates.

Several interrelated activities address the purposes of this acquisition, which
is intended to provide comprehensive services for a performance period of 5
years/cycles. Central to the project is the conduct of two major ongoing survey
systems, one of which supplies the universe from which the sample for the second
survey is drawn. Data from these surveys will be merged with the historical,
comprehensive data bases for each survey and also merged with other data bases
to provide information on the nation's human resources.

The annual census Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) entails the collection of
information on every individual receiving a research doctorate from a United
States university. Results from the survey are added to the Doctorate Records
File (DRF). The SED provides the universe from which a sample is drawn for the
Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR), a biennial survey collecting information
on the post-graduation employment related characteristics of doctorate-holders
in science and engineering. Results from the SDR are combined with other
component surveys of the SESTAT data system.

The resulting data bases are actively used by the NSF and the other Federal
sponsors and numerous other users inside and outside of government. The
contractor will also support the dissemination activities of the restricted data
files to academic researchers and other government agencies through a licensing
agreement. The information collected and maintained through this project
constitutes a major national resource, offering the only source of information
on this important population. Its accessibility and dissemination are therefore
critical. This project will be monitored by the Division of Science Resources
Statistics (SRS) as the contract technical representative for NSF and the other
Federal agencies that sponsor the SED and the SDR. For the SED, other Federal
sponsors as of FY2001 are the U.S. Department of Education (ED), the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), the
National Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA), and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture (USDA). For the SDR, the NIH is also a sponsor. In the past, SDR
federal sponsors included the Department of Energy (DOE) and the NEH. During the
course of the contract, the participation of Federal sponsors may change and
necessitate modifications to the coverage of disciplines, distribution of
communications, materials, or products related to the project.