* 0208394
* Do Porphyroblast Inclusion Trails Provide Information About Regional Tectonism?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Ronald Vernon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2005
* USD 142,213.00

The PI, Dr. Ron Vernon, was recently appointed a Research Professor at the
University of Southern California. This proposal would support research by the
PI and USC graduate student, Luke Jensen. This proposal outlines a project
designed to examine several hypotheses regarding the significance of inclusion
trails preserved within porphyroblasts and the timing and structural setting of
porphyroblast growth. It has been suggested that porphyroblast inclusion trails
may preserve information about regional orogenic events and possibly past plate
motions. If this hypothesis is correct, then porphyroblast studies provide a
powerful method of unraveling orogeny and past plate motions. However, the PI 's
studies elsewhere suggest that structural and metamorphic heterogeneities are
formed by various processes at all scales and can markedly affect inclusion
trail patterns in porphyroblasts; that complex porphyroblast growth features and
internal inclusion trail patterns can fon-n in potphyroblasts that grow during
short time intervals in contact aureoles, indicating that local complexity in
porphyroblasts does not imply regional comple xity, and that using
microstructural information preserved only in porphyroblasts to infer orogenic
processes and plate motions is generally unjustified. They hope to test these
contradictory hypotheses by examining porphyroblasts in a prograde metamorphic
sequence (chlorite to sillimanite zones),Cascades core, Washington in three
settings: regional, contact aureoles, and in folds. They will combine modem
techniques for studying poiphyroblast matrix relationships with cathode
luminescence, neutron diffraction, and limited geochronologic studies.