* 0208891
* Collaborative Research: Geometric and Algorithmic Techniques for Design and Verification of Hybrid Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Steven Lavalle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

Frazzoli - Branicky Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at the
development of new tools and techniques for the design and analysis of high-
confidence software for complex, distributed, reconfigurable aerospace embedded
systems, and to transfer these methods to undergraduate and graduate students,
other researchers, and industry. &lt;br/&gt;Problems of direct interest include
those arising in the control and coordination of multiple autonomous air and
space vehicles, and in the detection and resolution of conflicts in Air Traffic
Control. The techniques developed in this project are also applicable to other
systems which require similar levels of reliability and performance, such as
highway traffic automation systems, health care systems, power networks,
and&lt;br/&gt;financial services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
project is a better understanding of the interactions between real-time software
and dynamical systems. This will lead to new and powerful tools and techniques
for the design and analysis of embedded systems, as well as an improved approach
to the requirement specification for real-time systems.&lt;br/&gt;The core of
the research is aimed at dramatically reducing the complexity of embedded and
hybrid systems design and verification by exploiting the geometric structure of
the underlying physical system in the modelling effort, and by preserving this
structure in the design of control laws and algorithms. This will make feasible
the analysis of the complete system (including its physical and software
components) by otherwise poorly scalable techniques such as abstract
interpretation and model checking, and will provide&lt;br/&gt;the means for the
effective use of techniques based on compositional reasoning. For example, group
symmetries in vehicle dynamics give rise to families of equivalent controlled
trajectories: such sets are called motion primitives for single vehicles, and
motion coordination primitives for groups of vehicles. A maneuver automaton is a
collection of a finite number of motion primitives. It provides a discrete model
of the vehicle dynamics, which leads to a dramatic reduction of the complexity
of describing and controlling the vehicle behavior, by providing a high level of
abstraction, and at the same time providing invariants which ensure that the
physical state remains within some known bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational part of the project is implemented through new course and curriculum
development, and student mentoring. The main educational objective is to provide
both undergraduate and graduate students with the knowledge and the skills to
understand the key issues and to ensure technical leadership in the current and
future aerospace information technology arenas. Finally, an interactive web site
is being developed, where it is possible to access information and software
developed in the research project and for the courses.