* 0208799
* Dynamic Modeling, Analysis, and Synthesis of Embedded Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2005
* USD 275,313.00

Biswas, Gautam&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0208799&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded systems,
which include software components integrated into physical processes, are per-
vading all aspects of our daily lives from home appliances to safety-critical
systems, such as aircraft and nuclear plants. The widespread use necessitates
the development of new engineering tech-niques that can ensure their timely and
assured development, accurate monitoring during operation, and robust control,
to ensure safety and reliability. This project develops an integrated model-
based approach to embedded system development that includes the plant, its
environment, and the embed-ded computing system. The models provide a common
framework for design and run-time analyses of system stability, liveliness,
safety, security, and real-time supervisory control. Models can also form the
basis for generating the hardware and software components of the embedded
systems, and de-fining their run-time configurations. This generative aspect of
modeling is a very relevant and distin-guishing property of the model-based
development process. Further, the ability to analyze system behavior at run-time
forms the basis for methodologies designed to accommodate deviations caused by
disturbances and unexpected changes in the environment. The goal is to ensure
that the system and its surroundings are not harmed when aberrant situations
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop technologies for run-time
analysis of embedded systems that alleviate some of the complexities of modeling
and analysis of systems with large mode spaces. Specifically, effec-tive
methodologies that address run-time dynamic analysis issues are addressed. This
includes three primary tasks:&lt;br/&gt;Developing a new concept called the
dynamic hybrid automaton (DHA) for embedded sys-tems models with large mode
spaces. A DHA is simply a hybrid automaton, which can be constructed
incrementally, on-the-fly, at run-time, as system behavior evolves. It is based
on formal compositional modeling techniques in the hybrid automata framework
that ensure model construction grows linearly (as opposed to exponentially) as a
function of the number of switching elements in the hybrid model.&lt;br/&gt;
Tracking system behavior using hybrid observers developed from the hybrid
automata mod-els. This involves techniques for updating the models of the
observer on-line when a mode change is detected while tracking the plant
behavior. Research challenges focus on model and tracking procedures that
minimize mistracking at mode transition boundaries, and devel-oping code
generation systems that allow for incremental recalculation of the observer mod-
els while satisfying hard time bounds on the generation process, and&lt;br/&gt;
Synthesizing supervisory controllers on-line in response to mode changes, some
of which may be attributed to disturbances and unexpected changes in the
environment. A new con-cept, the Active Controller Model (ACM), is proposed. The
ACM is a dynamic data structure that explicitly represents the currently active
supervisory controller (SVC), together with its generator and actuator. The SVC
can be implemented as a generic procedure that uses the ACM as its "knowledge
base" to compute what control actions to take. When the plant model changes, the
ACM is updated to address the new situation. This will involve a number of in-
novative research tasks, such as developing an expressive language to describe
control ob-jectives, definition and incremental update procedures for the ACM
models, and "anytime" re-source-bound algorithms for synthesizing supervisory
controller code on-line. Robust super-visory controllers will extend the concept
of adaptive control into the hybrid-systems domain, and adjust to configuration
changes in the plant and environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of all
three components of this project is very heavily dependent on handling computa-
tional complexity issues in incremental model generation, code generation for
the hybrid observer, and on-line supervisory controller synthesis based on
desired objectives for the plant. Therefore, complexity studies of the synthesis
and code generation algorithms is an important component of the project. The
goals are ambitious, but the success of these methods will offer new flexibility
in embed-ded applications while addressing issues of reliability and safety
during run-time operation. &lt;br/&gt;