* 0208364
* BAC Libraries from Diverse Crustacean Taxa
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* William Thomas, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2005
* USD 350,000.00

.0208364&lt;br/&gt;Thomas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the fundamental goals of
biology is to understand how genome structure and function evolves in response
to environmental change and how genetic constraints limit the natural
distribution, abundance, and adaptive evolution of species. Toward these goals,
Dr. Thomas is proposing to develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC)
libraries for diverse crustacean taxa. These libraries are specifically intended
to support both comparative developmental studies and investigations into how
organisms respond to environmental change. The Crustacea are ideal for
comparative developmental studies because of their extraordinary morphological
diversity, and close relationship to the premier developmental model organism,
Drosophila melanogaster. Crustacean taxa are also the focus of many ecological
studies aimed at understanding the fundamental interactions between organisms
and their environment. The proposed BAC library resources and their distribution
will provide critical tools in support of developmental evolution and
environmental genomics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Thomas is specifically
proposing to develop BAC libraries for three taxa representing three crustacean
classes. The Branchiopods are represented by the water flea, Daphnia pulex. The
Maxillapoda are represented by a copepod Tigriopus californicus, and the class
Malacostraca is represented by an amphipod, Parhyale hawaiensis. Daphnia and
Parhyale are already the subjects of comparative developmental studies in
numerous laboratories. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will take place in
collaboration with a set of primary users who are actively participating in this
proposal by consulting on the appropriate taxa, supplying specimens for DNA
extraction and helping to make these resources available and useful to their
taxon- or discipline-specific communities. These collaborators represent
disparate fields of biological research and represent a broad spectrum of the
potential user community. The generation and distribution of each library will
take place at the Hubbard Center for Genome Studies (HCGS) at the University of
New Hampshire under the direction of the PI (co-director of the center). The
HCGS has a primary focus of comparative and environmental genomics, and in
conjunction with this proposal will be offering intensive summer workshops in
genomic technologies to support the use of BAC libraries by students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;BAC library resources from each taxon will be
made available to all academic and non-academic users in two ways: 1) as
complete arrayed copies of the library; and 2) arrayed at high density on nylon
filters. The BAC resources and associated information will be accessible via the
WWW. The HCGS will maintain and distribute these resources for a minimum of five
years after the end of the granting period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;