* 0208678
* An Algorithmic Study of Optimal Multiresolution Quantization and Joint Source-Channel Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Nasir Memon, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2005
* USD 299,910.00

ABSTRACT 0208678 Xiaolin Wu and Nasir Memon Polytechnic Univ of NY

An Algorithmic Study of Optimal Multiresolution Quantization and Joint Source-
Channel Coding

In this research project the investigators will develop algorithms to improve
service quality of video and audio streaming over switched networks, wired or
wireless, in adverse network conditions such as congestion, delay, and packet
loss. The idea is to have graceful degradation in quality of service rather than
outright stoppage of audio and video playback, when the effective transmission
rate drops. This will significantly enrich users' experience with IP-based
multimedia services.

The research consists of two inter-connected studies: optimal multiresolution
(progressively refinable) quantization (MRQ), and uneven error-protected
packetization (UEPP) of scalable source code streams generated by MRQ. The
investigators' main objective is to develop efficient algorithms for optimal MRQ
design, and for optimal bit allocation between scalable source codes of MRQ and
forward error correction codes. Their approach differs from the existing rich
body of literature on joint source-channel coding and on MRQ in that the problem
is treated as one of combinatorial optimization, rather than resorting to
continuous Lagrangian optimization. The investigators will classify various
optimization problems related to MRQ design and joint source-channel coding by
their innate computational tractability, and develop either globally optimal
algorithms for those that are solvable in polynomial time, or heuristic
algorithms for those that are NP-hard. In order to obtain efficient algorithms
for MRQ and UEPP, discrete structures of the underlying objective functions of
optimization will be explored, which in turn may offer new insights into these
problems of increasing interest and immediate relevance to internet and wireless
communications.

