* 0208683
* Trusted Peer-To-Peer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Hector Garcia-Molina, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

This project will develop techniques for trusted systems that can provide
correct information and take correct actions when needed and where needed. The
focus will be on peer-to-peer (P2P) systems, where computers or nodes operate
autonomously, without any central control. In a P2P system, each node provides
storage and compute resources. It connects to other neighbor nodes, and the
community provides services like file sharing, document archiving, or data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P2P systems are especially well suited as the
"backbone" of a trusted system because nodes operate independently, without
reliance on particular network connections or on nodes with a fixed
functionality. Thus, a P2P system can adapt to a changing environment, and with
the proper mechanisms, can isolate or ignore malicious
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the project, several important problems
will be addressed such as: &lt;br/&gt; Denial of Service (DoS): How does one
protect against malicious sites that generate excess load to prevent others from
receiving resources or service?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Searching: How does one
efficiently find information without using centralized index facilities, and in
a dynamically changing environment? &lt;br/&gt;Information Authenticity: How
does one verify the authenticity of documents or information?&lt;br/&gt;
Preservation: How does one preserve information past the lifetime of the
originating node?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is high risk, but
there is also the potential for a large payoff. The research is high risk
because the problems faced are difficult: Building a trusted community out of
building blocks that may be transient and malicious, is not an easy task.
However, the only way to build a trusted system is, as proposed, by making as
few assumptions as possible about the trustworthiness of its components. The
techniques to be developed, if successful, will provide a solid foundation for
building truly reliable, secure, and trusted systems for electronic commerce,
military applications, healthcare, and many other applications.