* 0208388
* BAC Libraries for Fundamental Studies in Lepidoptera
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Marian Goldsmith, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 12/31/2005
* USD 219,797.00

0208388&lt;br/&gt;Goldsmith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
build a public facility for distribution of BAC libraries for accelerated
research in development and evolution for a set of well-established lepidopteran
insect models in two key areas: 1) developmental and functional neurobiology and
2) the genetic and developmental basis of adaptation. Readily available BAC
libraries for these species will accelerate research into the genetic mechanisms
underlying lepidopteran development, behavior, morphology, and evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the research and how they will be
achieved are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To produce 6 high-quality BAC libraries
for three different experimentally important lepidopteran species. In order to
achieve complementary overlaps and deep genome coverage, two BAC libraries
equivalent to 10X genome coverage will be made for each species by partial
digestion of high molecular weight DNA using one of two enzymes that recognizes
different base composition restriction sites and arrayed in 384-well
microplates. &lt;br/&gt;2. To characterize each library for percentage of
insert-empty clones, average insert size, insert size distribution, clone
stability, and cytoplasmic contamination to ensure high library quality.
&lt;br/&gt;3. To assess true genome coverage and provide preliminary comparative
genome data by screening each library with a set of well-conserved gene
sequences. &lt;br/&gt;4. To maintain, archive and disseminate the libraries to
the public on a cost-recovery basis through the Texas A and M University
GENEfinder Genomic Resources, one of the largest genomic resource centers in the
world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The species were chosen primarily for their
centrality as experimental models for a wide range of research problems. They
are: &lt;br/&gt;1. a Sphingid moth, the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, which
is a model for developmental mechanisms, neurobiology, cell biology, physiology,
chemical communication, and hostplant selection studied by a large international
community&lt;br/&gt;2. a Noctuid moth, the tobacco budworm, Heliothis virescens,
a genetically tractable member of a widespread group of largely agricultural
pests used as a model for investigating genes that change under differential
selection, such as resistance to chemical and biological pesticides&lt;br/&gt;3.
a Heliconid butterfly, Heliconius erato, which is a classic model for mullerian
mimicry and convergent evolutionary change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
fruits of the BAC libraries proposed here will be to provide a set of conserved
anchor loci that will serve as a framework to unify genetic studies in the
Lepidoptera and to investigate phylogenetic relationships, which are still
largely unresolved for most of the clade. For the long term, the construction of
a set of lepidopteran BAC libraries will provide critically important tools for
every aspect of insect science, especially for comparative genomics and future
sequencing of model genomes. It will also provide new insights into long-held
questions such as 1) how development constrains evolution, 2) the extent to
which patterning loci are reused in evolution, and 3) what kinds of
developmental changes are preferred by evolution, as well as how they vary
across diverse butterfly lineages and different selective landscapes.
&lt;br/&gt;