* 0208323
* Collaborative Research: Mesoproterozoic Tectonics of Inboard Laurentia: Insight Into Assembly and Configuration of Rodinia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Matthew Heizler, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2005
* USD 49,228.00

This project is investigating Mesoproterozoic (1300-1000 Ma) sedimentary rocks
in the western U.S. to test aspects of the controversial Rodinia hypotheses. The
hypothesis being tested is that the inboard record of sedimentation and
tectonics in southwestern Laurentia, preserved in well-exposed sedimentary
successions, can be used for understanding stresses at the surrounding plate
margins, nature of drainage patterns and basins in southwestern Laurentia, and
the age of possible outboard sources of detritus. The research involves
structural, petrologic, and geochronologic study aimed at correlation of, and
characterizing provenance for, several key areas and units. These areas
represent preserved remnants of once more extensive sedimentary successions;
they are well exposed, but widely separated, and correlations have been hampered
by a lack of reliable geochronology. The study concentrates on the Apache Group
(Arizona), Unkar Group (Grand Canyon), Crystal Spring Formation (Death Valley),
and Lanora Formation (Texas). The researchers are reconstructing the regional
intracratonic basinal and tectonic patterns and searching for a "fingerprint" of
possible outboard sources of detritus. The geochronological studies involve:
dating ash beds using precise U-Pb geochronology, U-Pb dating of detrital
zircons, new in situ U-Pb microprobe dating of monazite grains, and Ar-Ar laser
dating of mica grains. Sedimentary-tectonic studies are evaluating which faults
were active during deposition by looking for facies changes across faults and
relationships to syntectonic magmatism. Petrologic studies are emphasizing
provenance of siliciclastic rocks using standard petrologic techniques. Detailed
regional tests involving geochronology linked to sedimentary tectonics are
providing better understanding of the tectonic setting of western Laurentia and
hence the most likely adjacent outboard continental masses that collided with
Laurentia from 1.3-1.0 Ga.