* 0208095
* Collaborative Research: U-Series, Be, Sr, Nd and Pb Isotopic and Trace Element Constraints on Melting and Mass Transfer Processes in Arcs, Philippine Arc System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Yemane Asmerom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2005
* USD 143,071.00

Collaborative Research: U-Series, Be, Sr, Nd and Pb Isotopic and Trace Element
Constraints on Melting and Mass Transfer Processes in Arcs, Philippine Arc
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208095; EAR-0207429; EAR-0207830&lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Asmerom; Morris; Mukasa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Net material cycling
between the mantle and continental crust occurs primarily in arcs. Many
processes related to melting and mass transfer in arcs, such as the relative
contributions of melting and devolatilization in transferring elements from
sediment and altered oceanic crust or the relative roles of dynamic,
decompression or flux melting of the mantle wedge, however, remain enigmatic.
This Collaborative proposal will focus on Luzon, located in the tectonically
simpler part of the Philippines arc, to compare two different arc settings in
close proximity that may have had dissimilar geochemical histories. The presumed
difference in sediment contribution makes the proposed site an ideal setting for
studying mass transfer processes and their possible effects on mantle melting.
Combined U-series and Be isotopic data, in conjunction with long-lived
radiogenic and trace element data will be used to study these rocks. The
following goals are set forth: 1) to characterize lavas, using major, trace and
Nd, Sr and Pb isotopic data, from four volcanic centers, two from each arc in
order to delineate attributes of each subduction zone; 2) to determine the
nature and composition of the sediment component and the mechanism by which it
is added to the mantle; 3) to investigate the role of dynamic melting in arcs;
and 4) to investigate the behavior of U-series nuclides during magma
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;