* 0208404
* Workshop on Genomic Analysis of Plant-Associated Microorganisms; Washington, D.C.,  April 9 - 11, 2002
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Jan Leach, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2004
* USD 22,000.00

Microorganisms play a critical role in plant health. Depending on the organism,
microbes can cause disease or prevent it. Despite their importance to our
agricultural base and food security, we know little about them on a genomic
level. To enable the scientific community to intervene in disease and to
understand the basis of biocontrol, a concerted and well-coordinated genomic
analysis of these microbes is essential. Members of the American
Phytopathological Society (APS) have developed a prioritized list of plant-
associated microbes for genome analysis, i.e. the structural and functional
analysis of the microbial genes and the proteins encoded by those genes, with
ultimate emphasis on those genes and proteins involved in plant associations.
The APS prioritized list will serve as a foundation for a workshop with the goal
of developing a strategy to obtain the genomic information needed to understand
these important microbes and their interactions with host plants and the
environment. The Workshop on Genomic Analysis of Plant-Associated Microorganisms
will be held in Washington, D.C, April 9-11, 2002. This award will help defray
the travel expenses of about 20 experts from the genomics and microbial research
communities. These experts will be challenged to (1) detail and prioritize the
scientific and technical needs and (2) develop a plan for a coordinated and
collaborative effort for genomic analysis of these plant-associated microbes.
The results of this workshop will be disseminated to the wider APS membership
via an emailed "News Capsule" and published in Phytopathology News.
Additionally, a follow-up forum sponsored by the APS Policy Board will be held
at the Society's 2002 Annual Meeting held in August to inform members and
generate wider discussion about the issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;