* 0208075
* Igneous Petrology of the New Skaergaard Stratigraphic Reference Column
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Charles Lesher, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2004
* USD 139,855.00

Igneous Petrology of the New Skaergaard Stratigraphic Reference
Column&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208075&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lesher&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; The PI and his colleagues have established a new high-resolution
reference column of the layered series of the Skaergaard intrusion from drill
core from the Platinova exploration program in 1989-90 and surface samples
collected and located by GPS during the summer of 2000. This was done as a
collaboration between U.S. and Danish scientists, and students. Skaergaard
differentiation has been highly controversial and the divergence of opinions is
likely to remain unless new fundamental observations are brought to bear on the
problems. The primary objective of this proposal is to document the petrology
and geochemistry of this stratigraphically controlled suite of previously
collected drill core and surface samples using well established petrographical
and analytical tools. This composite stratigraphic column will provide a basis
for rigorous hypothesis testing of the mechanisms of Skaergaard evolution that
have eluded petrologists in the absence of good stratigraphic control. The main
product will be a detailed mineralogical and chemical stratigraphy at a sampling
interval of 10 m and less. Observations will be linked to the analysis of the
physical factors that govern the behavior of the crystallizing magma and its
liquid line of descent. This will provide the foundation for evaluating the
roles of crystal sedimentation, in-situ crystallization, compaction, and
infiltration metasomatism at Skaergaard and other layered igneous intrusions.
&lt;br/&gt;