* 0208169
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Retreating-Trench, Extension, and Accretion Tectonics (RETREAT): a Multidisciplinary Study of the Northern Apennines
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/2002,09/30/2007
* Darryl Granger, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 09/30/2007
* USD 298,085.00

0208169 Granger

The paradox of how horizontal contraction and extension can occur simultaneously
in convergent mountain belts remains a fundamental and largely unresolved
problem in continental dynamics. The Apennines represent one of the most
accessible "type locality" areas of syn-convergent extension. Rollback - which
describes the tendency of a subducting plate to retreat from the orogenic front
- is commonly invoked as an explanation for syn-convergent extension, but this
idea does not address how the retrograde motion of the subducting plate, which
is a mantle-based process, causes horizontal extension in the overlying zone of
crustal convergence, especially in light of the large accretionary fluxes
typically associated with continental subduction.

The goal of the project (project RETREAT) is to develop a self-consistent
dynamic model of syn-convergent extension, using the Northern Apennines as a
natural laboratory. This part of the Apennine orogen has been the site of
relatively steady orthogonal convergence and 2D (plane strain) orogenic
deformation since ~30 Ma. GPS measurements indicate that convergence is
presently active, and tomography indicates that the full length of subducted
slab is still intact to depths of 250 km. Syn-convergent extension has been
active since at least 15 Ma. The Northern Apennines are well studied, and all
important features of the orogen are onland and thus directly accessible for
detailed geological and geophysical research.

The specific objectives of project RETREAT are 1) to determine in detail the
velocity field across the orogen, including deformation in the orogenic wedge,
the motion of lithospheric plates, and the flow fields in the surrounding
asthenospheric mantle, and 2) to use this kinematic information to develop and
test specific dynamic models for deformation in the orogenic wedge and
underlying mantle. The research techniques to be used include; geodesy, tectonic
geomorphology, low-temperature thermochronometry, structural geology and
tectonic syntheses, seismic studies, and geodynamic modeling.

The RETREAT project links together a broad multidisciplinary group with eleven
PIs from six institutions, plus some 27 foreign collaborators in Italy,
Switzerland, Canada, and France. ***