* 0208059
* Micro-Analysis of Transfer in the Project-Based Science Classroom: The Influence of Classroom Practices and Culture on Scientific Reasoning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Jennifer Holbrook, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 01/31/2007
* USD 1,448,764.00

The science education community and the published American standards about
science literacy call for students to learn important science concepts and the
skills involved in scientific reasoning in ways that allow them to apply what
they are learning in new situations. The science education literature has
identified classroom practices that seem essential to such deep and transferable
learning. Several approaches to inquiry-driven project-based science have been
designed based on these recommendations, and results show that when carried out
by masterful teachers, both science content and practices are well learned. But
we don't know the developmental course of scientific reasoning skills when they
are learned in a classroom context engineered for their transferable learning.
Nor do we know the conditions that need to be in place to allow teachers and
students to make best use of project-based learning's affordances. For the past
five years, the Learning by Design group at Georgia Tech has been designing an
inquiry-oriented project-based approach to middle-school science learning
informed by research on how people learn. Our team has designed sequences of
classroom practices that, as a system, promote deep understanding and lasting
and reusable learning. The trends in our data suggest that science learning in
our LBD classrooms is more comprehensive and more likely to transfer than the
learning in more standard inquiry-oriented science classrooms. We propose to use
the infrastructure of LBD, our local LBD classrooms, and our cross-disciplinary
team to investigate issues with respect to promoting transfer using a project-
based inquiry approach, focusing especially on the learning of scientific
reasoning skills and practices. Our Quadrant 2 questions ask about the
development of scientific reasoning skills in a project-based science classroom,
aiming to provide a bridge from basic research in cognitive science on transfer,
scientific reasoning, and learning to the pragmatics of transfer and learning in
the real world of the classroom. Our Quadrant 3 questions ask about conditions
that need to be in place in the classroom for learning and transfer of science
practices to occur. Scientific reasoning skills are difficult to measure, but we
have had some success in showing the acquisition of these skills by the students
in our LBD classrooms. The challenge we take on here is to explore the
development of this type of reasoning in middle school children at a fine-
grained level. We will use a combination of design experiments and micro-genetic
analysis. We are aiming to use our LBD classrooms to find out more about the
cognitive and socio-cognitive processes involved in learning science practices
with several goals in mind: (i) better understanding of the processes involved
in learning to reason scientifically; (ii) better understanding of classroom
practices that will promote transferable learning; and (iii) the generation of
guidelines for project-based science classrooms, about how to promote
transferable learning of science practices.