* 0208066
* Model-Assisted Reasoning in Science: Effects of Model-Centered Instruction on Middle School Students' Modeling Abilities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Kalyani Raghavan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2006
* USD 1,021,343.00

The Learning Research and Development Center at the University of Pittsburgh
will conduct a longitudinal study in which researchers will create a three-year
sequence of model-centered instruction in the context of the Model-Assisted
Reasoning in Science (MARS). MARS current topics will be extended from sixth
through eighth grades. The project seeks to: (1) understand how working external
models support content and process learning, (2) develop an evaluation model to
tap strengths and weaknesses of different kinds of external models, and (3)
identify pedagogical strategies that elicit and support model-assisted
reasoning. Student content knowledge and process skills will be measured through
different test formats that include paper-and-pencil (TIMSS, NAEP, and Test of
Scientific Reasoning items), written tests, class work, and classroom computer
exercises. Student motivation will be measured at the beginning of each year. A
small sample of students will be interviewed and given some transfer tasks twice
a year. Interviews will focus on two aspects: properties of the different model
types and student's metacognitive understanding of the function of models in
science. Information on classroom implementation will be collected by direct
observation, videotapes, and interviews with teachers. Results of the study are
expected to help extend theories of model-based reasoning and its applicability
in classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;