* 0208103
* Acquisition of relational concepts: Pathway to proficient thinking in mathematics and science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Aaron Yarlas, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Gregg E. Solomon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,302,516.00

The proposed project is located in the second quadrant of the ROLE description
with links to the third and fourth quadrants. It focuses on acquisition,
representation, processing, learning and transfer of relational concepts. The
study of relational concepts is important because relational concepts are
ubiquitous in mathematics and science: ratio, proportion, and function,
velocity, acceleration, and density, mutation, evolution and growth rate,
probability and statistical interaction, and correlation and contingency are
just a few examples. The study will be guided by our hypotheses about
representation, processing, learning, and transfer of relational concepts across
ages and knowledge domains. The proposed project aims to answer several
fundamental questions. What are the basic cognitive mechanisms underlying
acquisition of relational concepts, and how are relational concepts represented
in the cognitive system? How do these mechanisms and representations change in
the course of development? Do these mechanisms differ across knowledge domains?
And how can we facilitate learning and transfer of relational concepts within
and across domains of mathematics and science? To pursue these questions, we
propose a three-year-long research project that will be conducted by a team of
researchers collaborating through the Ohio State University Learning Research
Initiative and interested in cognition, cognitive development, and the learning
of biology, physics, and mathematics. The project would be a systematic
empirical study of conceptual development across several knowledge domains. The
team will use a wide variety of methods and tasks, ranging from simple tasks
allowing participation of young children to relatively complex tasks requiring
sophisticated knowledge. The project will generate new basic knowledge
increasing our understanding of acquisition and processing of relations, as well
as our understanding of learning and transfer of relational concepts in
mathematics and science. The proposed project will be an important step towards
better understanding of conceptual development and of learning of important
concepts in mathematics, physics, and biology, and it will inform practice of
teaching of mathematics and science.

