* 0208877
* A New Approach for Securing Systems Using Automated Adaptive Intrusion Response
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Ramasubramanian Sekar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 289,923.00

Networked information systems play an increasingly important role in critical
infrastructures such as power generation and distribution, transportation,
commerce, and national security. The continuing spate of security incidents
reported by organizations such as CERT Coordination Center demonstrates that in
spite of best efforts in securing systems, "hacker" attacks will penetrate even
the best defense mechanisms. To cope with such attacks, new techniques need to
be developed that can detect and respond to such attacks. Unfortunately,
existing approaches focus primarily on after-the-fact detection of such attacks.
Moreover, intrusion response relies primarily on human involvement. These two
factors mean that fast-progressing attacks (e.g., programmed attacks) can effect
significant damage before any protective response is launched. Recovery from
such damage is labor-intensive, and will render the target system unavailable
for hours if not days. This project will develop new approach that automates
intrusion responses so that the target system can defend itself from serious
damage due to attacks. It will build on the proposer's successful research in
specification-based intrusion detection. Key technical components of this
project include: specification language enhancements to express response
actions, techniques for isolating compromised processes so that they do not
interfere with the rest of the system, and deception techniques that can provide
an illusion of success to attacker while protecting the target the system.