* 0208138
* Construction of BAC Libraries of Metazoans Occupying Key Phylogenetic Positions
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Linda Holland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,100,000.00

Large-insert libraries of genomic DNA are a valuable resource for comparative
studies in&lt;br/&gt;development evolution and genetics for addressing such
fundamental questions in biology as&lt;br/&gt;how genomes have evolved and how
evolution of genomes has resulted in evolution of body&lt;br/&gt;plans. The goal
of the proposed research is to construct 11 BAC libraries representative of
the&lt;br/&gt;breadth of the Metazoa. The focus is on animals that occupy
phylogenetic positions key to an&lt;br/&gt;understanding of animal evolution.
Preference is given to organisms with demonstrated potential&lt;br/&gt;as
developmental model organisms. Therefore, 2 deuterostomes have been chosen:
lamprey,&lt;br/&gt;basal in the craniates and pivotal for understanding the
pattern of gene and chromosomal&lt;br/&gt;duplications during vertebrate
evolution, and the cephalochordate amphioxus, the closest
living&lt;br/&gt;invertebrate relative of the vertebrates. On the basis of
molecular phylogenetics, the protostomes&lt;br/&gt;have recently been divided
into two groups, the Ecdysozoa and the Lophotrochozoa.
However,&lt;br/&gt;branching patterns of the phyla within each of these groups
are poorly resolved. Because&lt;br/&gt;representatives of the Ecdysozoa,
Drosophila and Caenorhabditis have been well-studied, we&lt;br/&gt;have not
chosen any Ecdysozoan. For the Lophotrochozoa, which have, in general, received
little&lt;br/&gt;attention in regard to genes, development and evolution, seven
organisms have been chosen.&lt;br/&gt;These include 2 annelids, one of which,
the polychaete Platynereis dumerilii, is relatively basal&lt;br/&gt;within the
annelids and the other of which, the leech Helobdella robusta, is more highly
derived.&lt;br/&gt;Platynereis is rapidly becoming a lophotrochozoan model
developmental organism, and while&lt;br/&gt;the leech is quite derived, it has
been the object of developmental genetic studies for some years.&lt;br/&gt;Two
molluscs are included-- one bivalve, (Spisula solidissima) and one gastropod
(Ilyanassa&lt;br/&gt;obsoleta). The other Lophotrochozoans include 1 nemertean
(Cerebratulus lacteus), 1 sipunculid&lt;br/&gt;(Temiste langiformis), and 1
acoel flatworm (Neochildea fusca). The phylogenetic position of&lt;br/&gt;the
acoels is controversial. On the basis of morphology, they were considered basal
Bilateria.&lt;br/&gt;However, most, but not all, molecular phylogenetic analyses
place acoels within the protostomes.&lt;br/&gt;To address bilaterian origins, we
have chosen a ctenophore (Mnemiopsis leidyi). Finally, to&lt;br/&gt;address the
origin of the metazoa, a sponge, Callyspongia diffusa, a representative of the
most&lt;br/&gt;basal Metazoa, was selected. BAC libraries will be constructed
and distributed by P. de Jong&lt;br/&gt;(Children's Hospital Research Institute,
Oakland), who has a long track-record in construction of&lt;br/&gt;BAC
libraries, including making the BAC library for the human genome project. For
organisms&lt;br/&gt;for which interest is high to sequence the entire genome,
15X coverage is proposed. For others,&lt;br/&gt;10X coverage is proposed.