* 0208307
* Collaborative Research: A test of the out-of-sequence model for the Main Central Thrust, Western Nepal
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Peter Copeland, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2005
* USD 39,618.00

One of the most interesting data sets to emerge from recent studies of the
Himalayan orogenic belt consists of U-Th-Pb ages reported by Harrison et al.
(1997) and Catlos et al. (2001a, 2001b) from monazite inclusions within gamet
crystals in the metamorphic rocks associated with the Main Central thrust (MCT)
in central and eastern Nepal. Some of the monazite inclusions crystallized and
were incorporated into the garnets during late Miocene-Pliocene time. Geothen-
nometry and geobarometry data indicate that metamorphic temperatures ranged from
500'-800'C and pressures ranged from 8-12 kbar. Because detn'tal monazite in
pelitic sediments is destroyed during burial to the depths recorded by the
mineral assemblages, the monazite ages most likely record the timing of garnet
growth during Himalayan orogenesis (Harrison et al., 1998). Thus, the monazite
ages contain information that is vital for kinematic reconstructions of
Himalayan thrust systems, particularly the MCT and its proximal footwall
rocks.&lt;br/&gt;The interpretation of the monazite ages offered in these
previous studies suggests that the MCT was reactivated during late Miocene time,
and that rocks in the footwall of the MCT were progressively incorporated into
the hanging wall and raised to the surface. A number of independent lines of
evidence suggest that this hypothesis may be correct, including 40 Ar/ 39 Ar
cooling ages (Copeland et al., 1991; Macfarlane et al., 1992; Copeland et al.,
2001); (2) levelling and GPS studies (Jackson and Bilham, 1994; Bilham et al.,
1997; Larsen et al., 1998); and (3) neotectonic and geomorphic studies of the
MCT zone in central Nepal (e.g., Bilham et al., 1997). Although reasonable, the
MCT reactivation hypothesis incorporates some surprising kinematic processes.
Paramount among these is the requirement that approximately 40 km of slip on the
MCT occurred during late Miocene-Pliocene time in order to convey the gamets and
their monazite inclusions to the surface. If the MCT was indeed reactivated, it
would be (by far) the largest out-of-sequence event on a thrust fault ever
documented. Whereas out-of-sequence thrusting is now widely accepted in thrust
belt models, it generally is restricted to relatively minor displacements (a few
km). A reactivation event of the hypothesized magnitude would significantly
alter current concepts of how the Himalayan fold-thrust belt operates, and how
foldthrust belts in general operate. It is conceivable that the extreme rate of
erosion along the MCT in Nepal has shifted the fold-thrust belt into a near ten-
ninal state of subcriticality, stalling its forward propagation and completely
reorganizing the locus of major thrusting. Thus, the out-ofsequence MCT
hypothesis is worthy of careful and critical examination. The key to
understanding the young monazite ages lies in the structure of the rocks below
the MCT from which the youngest monazite ages were obtained. Unfortunately, the
stratigraphy and structure of the rocks below the MCT in central Nepal (where
the monazite studies have been executed) are not well documented. Exact
placement of the MCT in the field is still hotly debated, such that the
tectonostratigraphic context of the samples remains in doubt. Alternatives to
out-of-sequence reactivation of the MCT can explain equally well the young
monazite ages. In this work, the PI's will implement a critical test of the out-
of-sequence hypothesis in western Nepal. They will collect samples for U-Th-Pb
monazite dating of gamet-bearing rocks and " Ar/ " Ar dating of micaccous
lithologies along north-south transacts from the Main Boundary thrust in the
south to the South Tibetan detachment in the north. They have already
established the regional stratigraphy, structure, geochronology, and Nd isotope
geochemistry of the Lesser Himalayan zone south of the MCT in western Nepal
during the past six years (DeCelles et al., 1998a, 1998b, 2000, 2001; Robinson
et al., 2001, 2002). They propose to obtain U-Th-Pb ages from monazite
inclusions in garnets collected from rocks that span the MCT zone. They will
also map the zone in detail and collect samples for U-Pb zircon and Nd-isotopic
analysis in order to locate the MCT exactly in the field. The 40 Ar/ 3' Ar
cooling ages should help to document the regional history of thrust sheet
emplacement, which will be needed to support any interpretation of what occurred
along the MCT. The proposed work should help to resolve whether the MCT
experienced major (several tens of km) slip during late Miocene-Pliocene time.
The result of the MCT question will have an impact on general models for
orogenic wedges, in particular whether 'd erosion can relocate the locus of
major thrusting on a scale required by large-scale rapi I reactivation of the
MCT. In addition, the proposed " Ar/ 3' Ar dating should provide an
unprecedented level of detail and precision for the timing of thrust sheet
emplacement in the Himalaya. Because the Himalaya is intimately related to the
growth of the Tibetan Plateau and changes in global ocean chemistry, the PI's
results should have applications beyond Himalayan tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;