* 0208311
* BAC Resources for Comparative Biology in Selected Angiosperms
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Andrew Paterson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 06/30/2006
* USD 400,000.00

0208311&lt;br/&gt;Paterson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BAC libraries for key branches
of the flowering plant family tree will greatly accelerate progress in
unraveling the 200-million year history of angiosperm evolution. Extensive prior
investments in the Poales and Brassicales make them important nucleation points
for the monocots and dicots, respectively, from which to reach out across plant
diversity to further investigate evolution of genome size, gene repertoire and
function, and plant morphology. We will make 5 libraries totaling 423,936 BACs
from carefully-selected angiosperm genomes (see below) to empower new
investigations of well-delineated questions in developmental, evolutionary, and
comparative biology. Among these, two (Ananas, Opuntia) will be the first BAC
libraries known in their taxonomic orders, and two will be the first for
important genome types (A, F) within a species complex (Gossypium) that is
especially facile for asking fundamental questions about morphological
transformations, polyploid evolution, and genome
organization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These libraries will empower new
investigations in monocots and dicots respectively, of general mechanisms
associated with plant diversification, and the specific events that may account
for major morphological-developmental transformations, by virtue of making
possible important new comparisons to many taxa already well studied. These
libraries will also offer opportunities to shed new light on the genomic
consequences of polyploidy, and new insights into the developmental genetics of
other scientifically important features that are inadequately studied at the
molecular level. All of the taxa we will study are closely-related to
economically-significant crops that exhibit features 'amplified' by human
selection, and as such comprise botanical models in their own right for various
aspects of plant growth and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
empower many scientific synergies to be realized by links with prior investments
by the Arabidopsis and Rice Genome Initiatives, NSF Plant Genome Program (in the
Poales and Malvales), USDA-IFAFS (in the Brassicales), and USDA-NRI genome
programs (Malvales). Community involvement in decisions relating to this project
has been substantial. Our research is closely-tied to strong training and
outreach programs with a successful history of engaging undergraduates and
groups under-represented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Binomial Common
name Family 1C value (Mbp) # of BACs Genome coverage &lt;br/&gt;Ananas comosus
pineapple Bromeliaceae 531 55,296 10x&lt;br/&gt;Gossypium herbaceum A-genome
cotton Malvaceae 1785 92,160 5x&lt;br/&gt;Gossypium longicalyx F-genome cotton
Malvaceae 1592 92,160 6x&lt;br/&gt;Gossypioides kirkii Malvaceae 579 73,728
12x&lt;br/&gt;Opuntia cochellinifera prickly-pear cactus Cactaceae 869 110,592
10x&lt;br/&gt; TOTAL 423,936 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;