* 0208279
* Conference:  22nd Symposium in Plant Biology; January 15-18, 2003, Riverside, California
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2003
* Natasha Raikhel, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 07/31/2003
* USD 15,000.00

"Frontiers of Plant Cell Biology: Signals and Pathways," the 22nd Symposium in
Plant Biology at the University of California, Riverside (UCR), will be held
January 15-19, 2003. The organizers are Natasha V. Raikhel and Zhenbiao Yang,
Center for Plant Cell Biology in the Genomics Institute and the Department of
Botany and Plant Sciences at UCR. Sequencing of the Arabidopsis and rice genomes
has created new research directions, experimental approaches, and opportunities.
Researchers are on the brink of elucidating the function of all the genes of
Arabidopsis and other selected plant species. These exciting advances in plant
biology are starting to reveal the molecular mechanisms underlying the
functional properties of plant cells. Integrated genetic, genomic and
biochemical approaches have led to the identification of signal transduction
pathways, signal receptors, and biosynthetic pathways for inter- and intra-
cellular communication; patch clamp studies have uncovered novel channels
involved in cellular signaling; the structure and function of complex cell walls
are being elucidated at an unprecedented pace; and more is being revealed about
the machinery involved in targeting proteins to specific cellular locations. The
aim of this symposium is to bring together students and scientists studying the
plant cell from different perspectives genomic, bioinformatic, genetic,
molecular, biochemical, and cell biological to highlight these recent advances
and evaluate emerging approaches for the dissection of plant cell function at
the molecular level. This is a rapidly developing area of plant science with
abundant opportunity for young researchers to learn and contribute. The timing
is ideal for a symposium that examines the functioning of the whole plant cell.
This symposium will be distinct from others in the plant field because its small
size is conducive to interaction among participants; such exchanges will likely
lead to national and international collaborations. There will be approximately
200 attendees.&lt;br/&gt;