* 0208568
* Applied Harmonic Analysis and Wireless Communications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Thomas Strohmer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 197,825.00

The increasing requirements on data rate and quality of&lt;br/&gt;service for
wireless communications systems call for new&lt;br/&gt;techniques to improve
radio link reliability and to increase&lt;br/&gt;spectral efficiency. The three
key technologies to achieve these&lt;br/&gt;goals are equalization, diversity,
and channel coding.&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics is of fundamental importance to these
technologies,&lt;br/&gt;providing the theoretical basis as well as the means
for&lt;br/&gt;efficient numerical implementations. The investigator derives
a&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and numerical framework for designing
equalization&lt;br/&gt;techniques for time-varying channels. Using methods
from&lt;br/&gt;pseudo-differential operator theory and time-frequency
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;he develops a qualitative and quantitative theory for
the&lt;br/&gt;approximate diagonalization of operators associated
with&lt;br/&gt;time-varying systems. These theoretical results form a
keystone&lt;br/&gt;in the construction of fast and reliable numerical
equalization&lt;br/&gt;methods that are based on Krylov subspace techniques.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator also studies the use of frame theory in
wireless&lt;br/&gt;communications. Using concepts from sphere packings and
group&lt;br/&gt;theory, he analyzes theoretical properties of special frames
such&lt;br/&gt;as Grassmannian frames. Furthermore, he develops theoretical
and&lt;br/&gt;numerical schemes in connection with multi-carrier
communication&lt;br/&gt;systems such as OFDM. This includes the design of
transmission&lt;br/&gt;signals with specific properties using a generalization
of the&lt;br/&gt;concept of prolate spheroidal wave functions. By taking
recent&lt;br/&gt;tools from harmonic analysis into the wireless
communications&lt;br/&gt;community, this project enables further advances
and&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs in wireless communications. At the same time
it&lt;br/&gt;stimulates new research areas in applied mathematics and
paves&lt;br/&gt;the road for further interactions between applied
mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;and communication engineers.&lt;br/&gt; The goal of
this project is to develop mathematical concepts&lt;br/&gt;and computational
methods for wireless communications technology.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
combines modern tools from mathematics with&lt;br/&gt;methods from information
theory and signal processing to develop&lt;br/&gt;new concepts and algorithms
for key technologies in wireless&lt;br/&gt;communications, such as coding,
transmission, and equalization.&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics is of fundamental
importance to these technologies,&lt;br/&gt;because it provides the theoretical
basis as well as the means&lt;br/&gt;for efficient numerical implementations. By
providing tools to&lt;br/&gt;improve radio link reliability and increase data
rates, this&lt;br/&gt;project is instrumental in meeting the increasing
requirements on&lt;br/&gt;future wireless communications systems. The project
produces&lt;br/&gt;conceptual deliverables in the form of new mathematical
methods&lt;br/&gt;to analyze and construct wireless transmission systems.
The&lt;br/&gt;project also produces concrete deliverables in the form
of&lt;br/&gt;numerical algorithms for use in the scientific and
industrial&lt;br/&gt;sector.