* 0208141
* Developments and Applications of Self-Consistent Models of Crystal-Melt Interaction in Molten and Partially Molten Silicates
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Yan Liang, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 273,703.00

Liang&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208141&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During their migration towards
the surface or subsurface storage areas, magmas generated deep in the Earth
interior will inevitably react with the wallrocks and their host porous
crystalline matrices. The proposed research is a combined laboratory and
numerical study of the kinetic of crystal-melt and rock-melt reaction in the
Earth upper mantle and lower crust. The laboratory part of the project involves
dissolution studies of mantle rocks and minerals (olivine, pyroxenes and garnet)
in molten silicates of andesitic to picritic compositions. Theoretical and
numerical studies of crystal-melt interaction will focus on two length scales:
grain scale and continuum scale. Once coupled with laboratory experiments,
studies of grain scale processes will help us to identify crystal-melt reaction
mechanisms, parameterize reaction rates, and improve experimental design.
Continuum scale reactive flow models using laboratory calibrated reaction rates
and thermodynamic phase relationships will allow us to better constrain melt
transport and melt-rock reaction in the upper mantle and lower crust. A combined
laboratory and theoretical study of crystal-melt interaction will also allow us
to develop new methods that can be used to estimate magma ascent rate and
diffusion coefficients in the crystals and melts. A database for chemical
diffusion in silicate melts and crystals of mafic compositions will be
constructed. This database will be integrated into the graduate and
undergraduate geology courses that are taught by the PI at Brown University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;