* 0208791
* Embedded Systems for Feedback Mixing Control in Fluid Flow
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2005
* USD 160,000.00

Mixing in turbulent flows play an essential role in diverse engineering
applications. Beneficial non-equilibrium dynamics impact on engine efficiency,
durability, stability, and emissions, on reduced drag in aircrafts and in naval
vessels. The unique focus of this research is on feedback regulation of active
mixing control. Technical challenges are an outgrowth of the complexity and
sensitivity of fluid dynamic systems, and require an integrated approach to
modeling, information technology, control theory, algorithm development, and
software and hardware implementation. Modeling will focus on dominant coherent
structures, periodicity, and concepts of Hamiltonian energy. Those provide also
possibilities for efficient parallel implementation on an embedded system.
Intended models will range from lumped point vortex models, to purely
phenomenologically derived I/O correlations of main structures. Hybrid models
arise naturally as a design framework, subject to (nearly) periodic vortex
generation and elimination. On a finer time scale, hybrid models will be used as
a means to parallelize spatially distributed control and observer
implementation. This project includes collaborations with industry, government
and academe. If successful, this high risk-high yield undertaking will include
both technology transition in critical applications and developments of
integrated embedded systems and control design methods for interesting classes
of complex, nonlinear systems.

