* 0208162
* Age and Lithogeochemistry of Volcanic-hosted Massive Sulfide Deposits of the Ambler District, Southern Brooks Range, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* William McClelland, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 131,293.00

McClelland&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208162&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern examples of
volcanic-hosted massive sulfide (VMS) deposits suggest that hydrothermal
activity associated with formation of these deposits is a steady-state process.
In contrast, ancient examples typically define distinct age groups and recent
genetic models relate VMS mineralization to specific tectonic events such as
incipient intra-arc rifting. Distinction between steady state and punctual
models for VMS mineralization requires high precision geochronologic data to
establish the duration of magmatism at the scale of individual deposits and to
establish correlation, distinction, or migration of magmatism observed at the
regional scale. The widespread occurrence of Devonian to Mississippian VMS
deposits in the northern North American Cordillera provides an ideal setting to
examine this issue. U-Pb geochronology and Nd-Sr isotope geochemistry combined
with major, trace, and REE geochemistry of felsic and mafic rocks associated
with mineralization and hydrothermal alteration will establish the age and
tectonic setting of VMS mineralization in the Ambler district, southern Brooks
Range, Alaska. The resulting database will serve as a basis for comparison with
and evaluation of broadly age equivalent VMS deposits in the Yukon-Tanana
terrane as well as sediment-hosted deposits within adjacent terranes and the
Cordilleran miogeocline. The results of this project will provide valuable
insight into the temporal and tectonic setting of VMS mineralization throughout
the northern Cordillera. This insight will potentially lead to the generation of
new genetic models for the evolution and preservation of VMS deposits in
additional settings. The project will also address the long-standing question of
the tectonic setting of mid-Paleozoic magmatism in the Cordillera. &lt;br/&gt;