* 0209605
* People on the Fringe: Exploitation of Contrasting Environments on the North American Plains
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Frederic Sellet, The Journey Museum
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 22,104.00

This project explores prehistoric human adaptations on the North American
Plains. More specifically, it focuses on the mode of exploitation of the
resources of the Black Hills of South Dakota, a prominent land feature on the
northern plains. The richness and diversity of the food resources provided by
the Black Hills contrast sharply with the surrounding barren landscape, so much
so that they have been labeled an "island in the plains". In order to
investigate how prehistoric groups of hunter-gatherers exploited such
contrasting environments, Dr. F. Sellet from the Journey Museum, and M. Fosha
from the South Dakota Archaeological Research Center, will conduct the
excavation of a rich and important archaeological site, the Movie Draw site,
located in Custer State Park. The multidisciplinary project, funded by the
National Science Foundation, will establish a chronological framework for
linking paleo-environmental data to significant changes in subsistence
strategies at the site.

The Movie Draw site is a medium size rock shelter that has yielded the most
extensive sequence of Late Woodland-Late Prehistoric occupations known to date
in the Black Hills. These were times of increased social complexity and
demographic changes, created by, or associated with, the intensification of food
production. Concomitant with the major social reorganization that took place on
the northern plains during this period was the emergence of new technologies.
Chief among them was the adoption of the bow and arrow. The Movie Draw project
will test the hypothesis that the shift from the atlatl (spear thrower) to the
bow and arrow had a significant impact on strategies of exploitation of the
Black Hills. The project will scrutinize changes in site function, or visible
shifts in hunting strategies for instance, and explore how these changes relate
to paleo-environmental circumstances or to advancements in technology.

Ultimately, the greater understanding of strategies of exploitation of marginal
ecozones, such as the Black Hills, should help refine current archaeological
models of prehistoric adaptations to the Plains. The Great Plains are often
described as a monotonous landscape. This perception has affected models of
human adaptation in a similar manner and resulted in the emphasis of a single
dimension of the diet: the reliance on bison. The Movie Draw project will test
the limitations of such an approach.

