* 0209049
* Integrating Security into Quality-of-Service Based Routing and Mobility Management in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Krzysztof Gaj, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 06/30/2006
* USD 510,000.00

Ad hoc wireless networks have the potential of supporting seamless anytime-
anywhere access to communications and computing resources on a very large scale.
Such networks, while extremely compelling for applications, pose profound
problems of security and quality-of-service provisioning. Ad hoc networks rely
on cooperative mechanisms that adapt to the dynamic changes in network topology
due to the mobility of the nodes, which are often constrained by energy
limitations. Consequently, these networks are difficult to secure and extremely
vulnerable to attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the
research is to develop a scalable and adaptive framework for integrating
security and quality-of-service (QoS) into the critical components of routing
and mobility management in ad hoc wireless networks for both commercial and
military applications. A scalable computer simulation environment is developed
to analyze the security strength of an ad hoc network with respect to its
ability to maintain quality-of-service under a variety of attack scenarios,
mobility patterns, and network traffic loadings. The research investigates the
security limitations of existing routing and mobility management schemes and
extends these schemes to incorporate security-inclusive QoS attributes. The
focus of the research is on the critical tradeoffs among security and
traditional QoS parameters such as performance, energy management, and
availability. The research investigates security mechanisms that can prevent or
mitigate the effects of hostile attacks without incurring excessive overhead.