* 0209786
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Gene Identification in the Photoperiod and Circadian Network of Flowering Control
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2007
* Richard Amasino, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 11/30/2007
* USD 882,942.00

0209786 Amasino

The initiation of flowering is a critical developmental decision in the plant
life cycle. A common environmental cue used by many plant species to initiate
flowering during the proper season is the change of day-length (photoperiod).
The perception of photoperiod relies upon the circadian clock. Genetical studies
over the past two decades indicate that a significant fraction of the genome is
involved in flowering-time control. Our project goal is to screen the
collections of T-DNA insertion lines we have created for mutants that are early
flowering in non-inductive photoperiods. These mutants will identify a set of
genes involved in the biological function of daylength perception and the
circadian rhythm network. Our preliminary results indicate that many of these
genes will be unique to the plant genome (i.e., no obvious homologs in animals
or fungi) and that large-scale forward genetic screens are the most efficient
way to identify these plant-specific genes. This area of research holds much
promise for the discovery of novel plant genes and gene families, and in the
long term will contribute to understanding the intimate link between the
circadian clock and photoperiod perception at a molecular level. Given the
central role of the timing of flowering in crop productivity, our work may also
provide strategies to manipulate flowering to enhance crop yields.

Current information on the phenotypes, map location and gene identities of the
mutants that we characterize will be available at
http://www.biochem.wisc.edu/2010flowering/ (this site will be available in
December 2002) and we will notify The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR)
(http://www.arabidopsis.org/home.html) of gene identities so that they can
update their annotation. All mutants will be deposited with the Ohio State
University Arabidopsis stock center
(http://www.biosci.ohiostate.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/ABRCHOME.HTM).

