* 0209886
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:   MSEC Correlation in Cretaceous Rocks from Egypt and the United States
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,02/28/2006
* Brooks Ellwood, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 23,028.00

0209886&lt;br/&gt;Ellwood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Brooks Ellwood, Department of
Geology and Geophysics at Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana and
Dr. Aziz Kafafy, Geology Department, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. The
investigators plan to study the correlation of Cretaceous rock sequences exposed
along the Gulf of Suez margin in Egypt and in the North American mid continent.
Using the magnetosusceptibility event and cyclostratigraphy (MSEC) method, they
will use samples collected from both regions to build a composite MSEC standard
that may be used for correlation between the two regions. Recent published MSEC
data sets have been shown to be useful for global correlation and correlation
between wells when applied to cutting samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
&lt;br/&gt;The Cretaceous Period, especially in the Middle East, is a
significant geologic period in terms of applied geology. MSEC correlation in
cretaceous Rocks from Egypt and the United States is a logical progression from
Paleozoic studies. This will advance knowledge and refine stratigraphic
correlation of Cretaceous strata in northern Africa and the western United
States, complementing and giving independent evidence for correlations within
biozones and polar reversal intervals. The research has direct application to
studies of Cretaceous strata, which hold petroleum resources in the United
States and elsewhere, and the results may have direct application in oil
exploration. Ellwood and Kafafy have experience in MSEC techniques and in
applications in the field. The project includes undergraduate students who will
benefit from taking part in an international cooperative research. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;