* 0209957
* Chemical Applications of Vibrational Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Philip Stephens, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 498,600.00

Dr. Philip J. Stephens of the University of Southern California is funded for
his research on chemical applications of vibrational circular dichroism
spectroscopy by a grant in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry
Division. Dr. Stephens will develop instrumental and theoretical methods for the
measurement and prediction of the vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) spectra
of chiral molecules and will apply VCD spectroscopy to the elucidation of the
stereochemistries of chiral molecules. A dual-modulation methodology will be
implemented for the reduction of polarization artefacts and the enhancement of
the sensitivity of VCD instrumentation. The ab initio DFT/GIAO methodology for
predicting vibrational rotational strengths will be improved by inclusion of
anharmonicity and solvent effects. Applications will focus on the
&lt;br/&gt;determination of absolute configuration and conformational
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chiral molecules exist in two forms - enantiomers
- which are mirror images. The different biochemical behavior of enantiomers of
a pharmaceutical molecule is leading to increasing development of single
enantiomer, chiral drugs. Methods for efficiently characterizing the structures
of chiral molecules are therefore of increasing importance. Dr. Stephens will
develop the methodology of vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) spectroscopy, a
technique for studying chiral molecules. New methods will be developed for
measuring and predicting VCD spectra with much greater accuracy than heretofore
possible, which in turn will greatly enhance the application of VCD spectrosopy
to the structural characterization of chiral molecules, including chiral drugs.
Graduate students and postdoctoral associates will be trained in these
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;