* 0209836
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Function of the Arabidopsis Small RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* James Carrington, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,706,331.00

The goal of this project is to determine the biological functions of a newly
recognized class of Arabidopsis regulatory molecules - the small RNAs. The small
RNAs typically contain 20-25 nucleotides and are likely generated by a dsRNA-
specific, RNaseIII-like mechanism. Recently, 125 small RNAs were identified in
Arabidopsis. Several arise from sequences in known or predicted protein-coding
genes and transposons. The vast majority, however, arise from intergenic
sequences between conventional genes. The Arabidopsis small RNAs resemble small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) associated with RNA silencing and small temporal RNAs
(stRNAs) associated with translational control in C. elegans. These Arabidopsis
RNAs are proposed to function in posttranscriptional regulation of gene and mRNA
activity by several mechanisms, including RNA silencing, translational
interference and epigenetic mechanisms in the nucleus. New libraries of small
RNAs will be prepared using different tissues, a database of small RNA
information will be assembled, and the small RNA sequences will be deposited
into GenBank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). The function of small RNAs from protein-
coding genes in posttranscriptional RNA silencing, and the function of small
RNAs from intergenic regions in translational control and modification of
nuclear DNA will be determined. Finally, the roles of each of nine RNaseIII-like
proteins in small RNA biosynthesis will be analyzed. Results will be shared in
peer-reviewed journals, at the International Conference on Arabidopsis Research,
and on a database of small RNA information. The database, which will include
capabilities for searching small RNA map positions, information about nearest
genes, whether or not a given gene is near a small RNA, and other interactive
features and results, will be made web-accessible to the scientific community
(www.cgrb.orst.edu/carrington/smallRNAs). The publicly accessible database of
small RNA information will have broad impact by providing researchers with
information about small RNAs near or within genes of interest and allowing
subsequent experiments on the roles of small RNA-based regulation of the
Arabidopsis genome. Genes are controlled by many different mechanisms. Recently,
a new type of regulatory system involving an unusual class of small RNA
molecules was discovered. The small RNAs are proposed to function by binding to
messenger RNA from specific gene targets. The small RNA would then trigger
either cleavage of messenger RNA or inhibit the function of the messenger RNA to
which it is bound. This project will result in discovery of new types of small
RNA molecules and determine how these regulators affect gene expression in the
model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana.