* 0209004
* Collaborative Proposal:   A Coalgebraic Framework for Development and Composition of Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Douglas Smith, Kestrel Institute
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00

Mislove &amp; Pavlovic&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0208743--0209004&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on mathematical foundations and design methodologies for
embedded hybrid systems (EHS). The essential feature of such systems is that
software components interact not only with each other, but also with the
physical world, through sensors and actuators. The discrete dynamics of
computation thus adds up with the continuous dynamics of physical systems.
Hybrid systems are an attempt to capture this double dynamism in a unified
framework. To limit the interference of the formidable complexities of dynamical
systems of both types, the continuous trajectories are usually encapsulated into
states, at the static points of the discrete computational paths. The methods of
continuous mathematics are then simply combined with the methods of discrete
mathematics to analyze such combined systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting
point of the planned research is a belief that the burgeoning field of coalgebra
provides methods and techniques that will allow uniform representation and
implementation methods for continuous and discrete objects and aspects. While
algebraic methods allow specifying and programming of finite objects and
inductive structures, such as expressions or well-founded trees, coalgebraic
methods allow specifying and programming infinite objects, as coinductive
structures: they include automata and various state machines on the one hand, as
well as iterative function systems, analytic functions and operators, and real
numbers on the other hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a real sense, coinduction
permeates analysis just like induction&lt;br/&gt;permeates arithmetic. The
difference is that the latter has been recognized as a fundamental logical
principle a long time ago, whereas the the former has been recognized only
recently, although it has appeared implicitly for some time (e.g. in most
existence-of-the-solutions theorems, although it has been recognized as
backwards induction in game theory).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The task is now to
make explicit and systematize the use of coinductive and coalgebraic methods,
and to apply them in analysis and design of embedded hybrid systems.&lt;br/&gt;