* 0209791
* Arabidopsis 2010: Identification, Modeling, and Prediction of Arabidopsis thaliana mRNA 3'-processing Sites
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Joel Graber, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2003
* USD 310,748.00

Post-transcriptional processing of mRNA is an important mechanism of gene
regulation. This project is concerned with 3'-processing of mRNA, a process that
includes cleavage of the precursor RNA sequence and subsequent polyadenylation.
3'-processing sites are determined by cis-acting signal elements, short control
sequences within the immature precursor mRNA. The signals in yeast have been
well characterized, but those in Arabidopsis have only begun to identify the
precise sequence and positioning characteristics of the required cis-elements.

Alternative 3'-processing of a specific mRNA, similar to alternative splicing,
is a mechanism for regulating the sequence of the mature mRNA. Unlike
alternative splicing, however, alternative 3'-processing typically changes only
the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the mRNA, leaving the protein coding
sequence unaltered. Variation of the 3'-UTR sequence results in altered
regulatory elements specific to the 3'-UTR, such as mRNA stability, translation,
or localization elements. The specific goals of this are project are: (1)
establishment of a curated database of experimentally determined 3'-processing
sites for Arabidopsis, (2) construction of a discrete state-space model (DSM)
based predictive tool for Arabidopsis mRNA 3'-processing sites, and (3) creation
of a freely accessible web server interface to both the database and the
predictive tools. DSM models are a form of Hidden Markov Models (HMM), in which
the model structure is manually, rather than automatically, designed. DSM based
models have previously been used to predict 3'-processing sites in the yeast,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has 3'-processing control elements similar to
those found in plants.

Public access to predictive tools will make it possible for external researchers
to analyze any gene or group of genes of interest, even in the absence of
experimentally determined sites in the curated database. Prediction of
3'-processing sites can also be coupled with gene prediction software to make
the prediction more complete, including probable 3'-UTR sequences. The web site
is: http://bmerc-www.bu.edu/polyA/.



