* 0209457
* Interior-Point Methods for Conic Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Michael Todd, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 264,653.00

Todd 0209457 In this project, the investigator and his students study improved
interior-point algorithms for convex, especially second-order and semidefinite,
programming problems. In particular, they investigate finding more accurate
solutions to large-scale problems of this kind, interpreting the output of
infeasible-interior-point methods as searching for infeasibility certificates
when applied to infeasible problems, using ideas of Riemannian geomentry to
develop new interior-point methods for possibly infeasible problems, and
studying new barrier functions to be used in highly asymmetric problems, where
usual primal-only or primal-dual methods would be inefficient. All these ideas
are tested out by implementing them in the software package SDPT3, developed by
the investigator and two of his collaborators, which is a competitive primal-
dual code available over the internet (e.g., at
http://www.math.cmu.edu/~reha/sdpt3.html) and within the NEOS system
(http://www-neos.mcs.anl.gov/neos/server-solvers.html) for distributed
computing. Interior-point algorithms are a new and exciting computational method
for solving large-scale resource allocation and other optimization problems. For
example, they have been used to develop better designs for truss structures,
such as bridges, that are better able to resist a wide range of external loads.
Another application is the design of antenna arrays to highlight the receptivity
in certain directions while muting that in all other directions. In finance,
they are used to develop "optimal portfolios" to balance an acceptable rate of
return with low volatility (unfortunately, these methods are only as good as the
data they employ, and past history often does not give a good indication of
future performance). In this and other contexts, the idea of robust
optimization, to find solutions to problems that satisfy all constraints even
when the data are perturbed a little, and that give good performance measures
even when the data are slightly changed, is very attractive, and this class of
methods is successful in treating some problems of this kind also. A last
application mentioned here is currently being studied by the investigator and a
statistics colleague: trying to find a good way to classify new data into one of
two classes (e.g., with or without a cancerous tumour) on the basis of some
training data (with known classification). This problem is of interest in data
mining and biomedical fields. In all these problems, there is a desire to solve
larger and larger instances (involving tens of thousands of variables and
constraints) more and more accurately. The investigator and his collaborators
study theoretically and practically ways to improve existing algorithms to
extend their capabilities in these directions.

