* 0209205
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Pointer Confinement and Access Control for Encapsulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Anindya Banerjee, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 137,464.00

In modern computer systems, computation is distributed over many host machines.
Mutually untrusted machines and users coexist, and software is built using plug-
and-play components downloaded from remote hosts. Multiple users share resources
so it is critical to ensure, e.g., that private information is not compromised.
Languages like Java and C# are designed to provide such security by enforcing
encapsulation boundaries that restrict interdependencies and information flows
between program components. Such boundaries are undercut, however, by ubiquitous
pointer aliasing which can be maliciously exploited to leak sensitive
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies ways to confine pointers
to their intended scopes. The focus is on the interplay between static analysis
and dynamic access control to achieve confinement. The technical goal is to find
confinement regimes that can be used to assure secure information flow in
systems implemented using dynamic binding, multithreading, inheritance, class-
based encapsulation, and access control. Analyses and transformations to
minimize run-time performance costs for confinement and access control are also
investigated. This work will lead to better programming methods and tools for
development of web-based services and other distributed applications that
require a high level of assurance. The work will contribute to technology for
implementing programming languages and for checking for security flaws in
application programs.&lt;br/&gt;