* 0209075
* Interaction Analysis for Integrated Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Martin Rinard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2004
* USD 180,000.00

Rinard, Martin CCR-0209075

The project will investigate a new program analysis, interaction analysis, and a
new set of implementation techniques to support future generations of embedded
systems. Instead of executing low-level code whose sole responsibility is to
control a specific piece of hardware, these future systems will be built in a
layered fashion, with the core control software surrounded by outer layers of
software that integrate the core software and the device that it controls into a
larger integrated, distributed system of devices and users. The key challenge
associated with realizing this vision is the need to effectively apply
implementation mechanisms that enable the outer layers to share the hardware
device without disrupting the actions of the time and safety critical core code.
The economics of developing large software systems will ensure that most of the
outer layers will consist of standard, off-the-shelf software components from
the world of laptop, desktop, and server computing. The outer layer software
will therefore have been developed to use implementation mechanisms that are
unsuited for use in time-critical control software. Nevertheless, the core
software and the outer layer software will need to interact. With standard
implementation mechanisms, interactions mediated by objects shared with outer
layers could easily lead to unacceptable delays and a loss of real-time control
in the core. The focus of this research is the development and investigation of
new interaction analysis algorithms that extracts the interaction patterns
between the core and outer layers, then uses these patterns to classify objects
into several categories. Each category can then use an implementation mechanism
appropriate for how it is used in the system. The end result is a system in
which the outer layers and core software effectively cooperate without a loss of
safety or predictability. The envisioned analysis has several properties that
will make it suitable for this application. First, it is capable of extracting a
meaningful result with an analysis of only part of the program. Second, it can
effectively analyze the multithreaded programs that come from the integration of
the outer layers and the core. Third, the partial analysis is goal-driven to
extract the required information with an analysis of only those parts of the
program required to obtain the result.