* 0209006
* Deriving Perceptually-Based Texture and Color Features for Image Segmentation, Categorization, and Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Thrasyvoulos Pappas, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The rapid accumulation of large collections of digital images has created the
need for efficient and intelligent schemes for image retrieval. Since humans are
the ultimate users of most retrieval systems, it is important to organize the
contents semantically, according to meaningful categories. This requires an
understandingof the important semantic categories that humans use for image
classification, and the extraction of meaningful image features that can
discriminate between these categories. Recent research efforts have addressed
the first problem, but the second remains quite elusive. This research effort is
aimed at addressing this second problem, that is, the extraction of low-level
image features that can be correlated with high-level semantics and used to
capture the semantic meaning of an image.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to this
research is the development of a new methodology for segmenting images, based on
perceptual models and principles about the processing of texture and color
information. This involves the identification of semantically important,
spatially adaptive, low-level color and texture features that can be combined
algorithmically to obtain image segmentations that convey semantic information.
The same perceptual models and principles can be used to relate the features of
the segmented regions (color and texture features, as well as segment location,
size, and boundary shape) to semantic concepts that can be used for content-
based image retrieval.&lt;br/&gt;An integral part of this research is the design
and execution of subjective experiments in order to obtain some key parameters
for the color and texture features, as well as for linking low-level image
features to image semantics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;