* 0209211
* Configurable and Composable Systems Mechanisms Supporting Multi-Property Quality of Service for Memory and Power Constrained Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Krishna Sivalingam, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,001.00

Project Abstract Embedded systems are rapidly becoming pervasive and are being
deployed on a wide range of devices for an even wider range of applications. The
chief device constraints are memory and power, and embedded applications require
a wide range of Quality of Service (QoS) properties. A serious problem with
systems software for embedded systems is that it is not yet suitable for reuse
in different situations. Commercial and research systems software typically
falls short in one or more of four ways. First, the software is derived from a
larger base or from high-level abstractions such as patterns, and does not scale
down far enough. Second, the software offers a point solution, with hard coded
constraints on both the systems software infrastructure and the embedded
device's characteristics. Third, different QoS levels are not offered or are
very limited. Fourth, power conservation is not usually considered. The goal of
this two-year research project is to develop a scientific foundation to overcome
the limitations outlined above. This research addresses fundamental questions in
four areas: baseline architectural constraints, QoS properties and their
compositions, network-wide composition, and software engineering. As a
byproduct, a new systems software framework with new and more configurable
systems mechanisms is in development to quantify and validate the answers to
these fundamental questions. The project's research on baseline architectural
constraints ascertains necessary conditions to achieve small memory and
constrained resource usage (ignoring QoS) at a fine granularity, exploring the
fundamental tradeoffs in systems software mechanisms and functionality that
enable this. This baseline is then extended for multiple QoS properties,
including new combinations of lightweight QoS mechanisms, given the fundamental
QoS costs, alternative composition strategies, and tradeoffs among them.
Research on network-wide composition investigates the fundamental interactions
in networks of devices, including techniques to predict and regulate the effect
of a given node's behavior on global system properties. The work on software
engineering investigates ways to utilize aspects, patterns, and tools in
composing middleware for embedded systems. The long- range goal is that
application code can be auto-generated in a fine-grained manner so that it does
not contain overly general or unnecessary functionality. QoS mechanisms are
being developed to address various issues. For example, computer security
encompasses many concepts (e.g., confidentiality, integrity, authorization) each
of which can be provided at multiple levels or strengths of service. Likewise,
many fault tolerance mechanisms exist. This project extends the understanding of
how multiple mechanisms from multiple QoS properties (e.g., security, fault
tolerance, real-time behavior) can be composed. The impact of this research, if
successful, is broad. First, it will enable embedded systems applications to be
more easily programmed, more robust, and more easily verified. The multi-
property QoS analysis and mechanisms from this project will be transitioned
through integration into the GridStat research effort, led by the PI under
NIST's Critical Infrastructure Protection research program. GridStat is
middleware that must deliver status information to the power grid. Exploiting
multiple QoS, properties, namely security, timeliness, and fault tolerance, can
support in better control and monitoring of the electric power grid, a critical
(and vulnerable) infrastructure.

