* 0209819
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Functional Analysis of the WRKY Transcription Factor Gene Family From Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Zhixiang Chen, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,200,000.00

Sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins containing the novel WRKY zinc finger
motifs are a recently identified superfamily of transcription factors found only
in plants. The few cases where functional studies are conducted indicate that
WRKY proteins play important roles in various biological processes unique to
plants, including disease resistance, senescence, seed germination and trichome
development. This project is aimed at determining the functions of 72 identified
Arabidopsis WRKY genes at three different levels. First, the expression patterns
of the Arabidopsis WRKY genes will be determined during plant growth,
development and responses to biotic and abiotic stress conditions. Secondly,
both loss-of-function mutants (RNAi and knockout mutants) and constitutive
expressing gain-of-function mutants for the WRKY genes will be produced and
analyzed for altered phenotypes in growth, development and responses to
environmental conditions. Thirdly, interacting proteins for all expressed
Arabidopsis WRKY proteins will be identified in order to understand the
molecular mechanisms by which individual WRKY proteins achieve their in vivo
regulatory specificity. Progress in these studies will lead to a comprehensive
understanding of the biological functions and molecular activities of plant WRKY
proteins. These studies will also provide general tools and approaches useful
for functional analysis of large gene families, particularly those encoding DNA-
binding transcription factors. Sequence and expression information of the WRKY
gene family will be made immediately available through Genbank, publications and
the project website (http://homepage.mac.com/zchen_/). The website will also be
updated with experimental data on functional analysis of each WRKY gene as it
becomes available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge obtained from the project
will enhance our understanding of the molecular basis for various important
plant biological processes in which WRKY proteins are involved and provide
potential targets for improving important agronomic traits in crop plants.