* 0209202
* Flexible and Survivable Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Lui Sha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Sha, Lui&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0209202&lt;br/&gt;"Flexible and Survivable Embedded
Systems" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a three-tiered
approach to dependable, safe, and secure software control through a strategy
that combines three elements: compiler-based protection, advanced safety
controllers, and runtime protection. The research is organized into three majre
emphases:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Code Safety Checks for Control Applications: This
research seeks to exploit the structure of control applications and develop
programming restrictions that do not hinder the development of legitimate
control applications, but facilitate compiler based static checks for critical
properties such as memory safety. The restrictions are specified in a language-
independent manner. This is the first line of defense against code, data and
process access faults and attacks. A prototype of a secure programming
environment based on the LLVM compiler system is being developed that implements
the above strategies and demonstrates their effectiveness for single plant
control applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced Safety Controllers against
Semantic Faults and Attacks: This research is developing the Invariance Control
Method for reliable switching control for safety controller designs. The focus
is theory and procedures for systematically constructing safety controllers for
online control software upgrade. The inter-dependency between compiler based
protection, controller designs and runtime protections is a key concern. The
inter-play is studied between programming restrictions, the expressiveness
needed in the design of advanced controllers, and automatic generation of
minimal and sufficient runtime assertions for dynamic behaviors that cannot be
completely checked by static analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient Runtime
Protections: Traditional runtime protections rely on the extensive use of the
process abstraction and execution time monitoring. With code safety checks, it
is now possible to develop threads that are logically protected from each other
for most applications. The process abstraction will be used only for complex
modules whose safety cannot be verified by compiler static analysis. The goal is
a new generation of efficient and fault tolerant dynamic real time architectures
that can capitalize on the integration between compiler static analysis, safety
controller and runtime monitoring and recovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimentation focuses on the next generation Telelab
demonstration facility, based on the new framework, that can measure the
following: 1) the size of the stability envelope and the reduction of safety
controller energy under the theory of invariance control; 2) the runtime
efficiency gain in storage and in CPU usage resulted from the integration of
complier support and runtime; 3) the robustness against faults and attacks of
this new framework. &lt;br/&gt;