* 0209256
* Dynamics of Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2005
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education in
polymer physics. The PI will investigate (a) polymer crystallization, and (b)
translocation of DNA and other polymer molecules through protein channels and
nanopores. Crystallization of polymers from solutions and melts is an intriguing
and longstanding research problem in polymer science. The PI will model the
shapes and sizes of lamellar crystals and their kinetics using simulation and
theory. The basic parameters of the study are (a) torsional energy along chain
backbone and chain stiffness, (b) van der Waals energy between nonbonded atoms
and solvent quality, (c) chain length, (d) polymer concentration, (e)
temperature, and (f) strength and rate of flow. These parameters will be
systematically explored in simulations of the sizes, shapes and symmetries of
formed crystals, and details of their growth fronts under different conditions.
Coarse-grained models of kinetics of polymer crystallization will be built.
These will incorporate the essential molecular features revealed in these
simulations. An aim of this work is to understand the early stages of how
polymer molecules organize into crystals in solution. The proposed research will
go beyond the models of Lauritzen and Hoffmen, and of Sadler and Gilmer.
&lt;br/&gt;How polymer molecules are transported from one location to another
under physiochemically imposed fields is also not well understood, although the
very existence of life depends on polymer translocation. Research will address
conceptual challenges associated with a fundamental understanding of
translocation of a single polyelectrolyte such as DNA/RNA through channels and
nanopores. These challenges include: (a) how confinement free energy of a
polymer is affected by interacting cavities and their connectivity, (b) how the
polymer moves in this free energy landscape due to local free energy gradients
and externally imposed fields, (c) role of hydrodynamics on polymer movement in
confinement, (d) orientational coupling of the polymer backbone with the
directionality of the pore, (e) interference from the secondary structures of
the polymer on translocation, and (f) pattern-directed controlled release of
polyelectrolyte molecules from confinement. &lt;br/&gt;This theoretical and
computational work complements experimental investigations and may also be
relevant to applied areas, such as polymer processing, fabrication of polymeric
nanomaterials, separation techniques like chromatography and electrophoresis,
signal transduction in biology, and high-speed sequencing of DNA and proteins.
This award also has a broad impact on education at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education in polymer physics. The PI will investigate
(a) polymer crystallization, and (b) translocation of DNA and other polymer
molecules through protein channels and nanopores. Crystallization of polymers
from solutions and melts is a longstanding and intriguing research problem in
polymer science. A fundamental understanding of how polymer chains organize into
heirarchical structures remains elusive. Analogously, how polymer molecules are
transported from one location to another under physiochemically imposed fields
is not well understood, although the very existence of life depends on polymer
translocation. The PI aims to build new conceptual models and discover new laws
of polymer organization and motility. This theoretical and computational work
complements experimental investigations and may also be relevant to applied
areas such as polymer processing, fabrication of polymeric nanomaterials,
separation techniques like chromatography and electrophoresis, signal
transduction in biology, and high-speed sequencing of DNA and proteins. This
award also has a broad impact on education at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;