* 0209595
* Computational Ridgidity and Motion Planning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Robert Connelly, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 198,000.00

The investigator continues work on the Kneser-Poulsen Conjecture that was
started with Professor Karoly Bezdek. This conjecture says that if any finite
collection of disks in the Euclidean plane is rearranged so that the distance
between any pair of centers does not increase, then the area of the union does
not increase and the area of the interesection does not decrease. They have
solved the conjecture in the plane, but many higher-dimensional questions
remain. For example, there is a candidate for a configuration that might be a
counterexample for the analogous statement in three-space, and there are some
interesting possible differences between the case for a union of disks and the
intersection of disks. Another major topic is the study of linkages in the plane
that are locked in the sense that they can only move a small amount without
crossing. The theory of frameworks and tensegrities plays an important role here
and can be applied to give reasonable criteria to detect when such a linkage is
locked. This is continuing work of the investigator, Erik Demaine, and Gunter
Rote, who originally solved the carpenter's rule problem, which states that any
polygonal arc can be opened without creating any self-intersection. The
investigator works on certain basic, fundamental questions about the geometry of
discrete objects. Just as physics asks fundamental questions about the nature of
matter, space, and the universe, and the physical laws they must obey, geometry
asks fundamental questions about how geometric objects interact and the implicit
constraints they satisfy. How does the area of the union of round disks change
as the centers are moved apart? The investigator (with Karoly Bezdek) has shown
that the area behaves (it increases or stays the same) as expected in the plane,
but the situation in space is not so clear. When is a robot arm in the plane
rigid, and when can it be opened? The investigator (with Erik Demaine and Gunter
Rote) has shown that arms open as expected in the plane, but what about more
complicated linkages? What can be said about the rigidity of packings of round
balls as a granular material? The investigator is an expert in such matters, but
there are delicate questions about the rigidity in a container with a small
number of disks. The volume enclosed by a flexible surface is constant, but what
about other geometric invariants? These are concrete tangible objects, but
accessible to the appropriate geometric insight. These questions are both
relevant and potentially quite useful for subjects as wide-ranging as cell
biology, protein folding, kinematics, and granular materials. For example, it is
widely believed that the geometric structure of a cell has a great deal to do
with its function. So the rigidity of appropriate discrete objects is relevant.
As has been shown over and over again in physics and mathematics, if the
questions are to the point, applications follow.

