* 0209997
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Household Intensification and Agrarian States:  Excavation of a House and Terraced Field in a Mixtec Cacicazgo
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Stephen Kowalewski, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

With National Science Foundation support Ms. Veronica Perez Rodriguez will
conduct archaeological and ethnohistorical research in the Mixteca Alta region,
Oaxaca, Mexico. The Mixteca Alta is a mountainous region in southern Mexico,
known for its late prehispanic cacicazgos or kingdoms. This project will study
economy, social stratification, and agricultural intensification in Postclassic
Mixtec society (AD 800-1521). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ancient Mixtec adapted
to their mountainous environment by building terraces and intensifying
agricultural production in ways that were sustainable over many centuries;
historical accounts suggest that the commoners worked these terraces, but little
else is known about their lives or roles in intensive agricultural production.
Scholars usually explain agricultural intensification as a response to
population growth, or the demands of elites and the state. Ms. Perez Rodriguez's
study takes a "bottom up" perspective by looking at the food-producing commoner
households and their role in the system of intensive agricultural production.
Mixtec dynastic history contains accounts of political rises and falls. But what
actually supported Mixtec society over the long term was the stable agricultural
production of commoner households. How was Mixtec agricultural production
organized and sustained over centuries? How did food-producing commoner
households contribute to the system of intensive agricultural production? What
lessons are there for today's issues of population growth and environmental
degradation? This study will investigate the proposition that food-producing
commoner households could have self-directed the Mixtec system of intensive
agricultural production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Perez Rodriguez will map,
survey, and excavate a Postclassic Mixtec site-Nicayuhu-a densely populated
hilltop terraced site surrounded by still-standing prehispanic agricultural
terraces. Mapping and survey data will be used to identify commoner residential
occupations and other areas for excavation. Excavations in residential and
agricultural terraces will provide information on terrace construction and will
determine whether commoners lived on or had usufruct rights over these terraces.
Continuity of occupation in the excavated residential area would support the
hypothesis that commoner households could have created and self-directed
intensive agricultural production. Agricultural terrace construction that was
consistent with gradual accretion by household labor (i.e., households secured
their tenure rights through occupation and use of agricultural terraces and
associated residential areas) would lend further support. Ms. Perez Rodriguez
will study Colonial documents at State and National archives in Mexico City to
derive an ethnohistorical model of prehispanic agricultural production, land
use, and land tenure that will be used to interpret the excavation
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will provide
data on the role of the state in the creation and implementation of intensive
agricultural production. It will explore the possibility that sustainable
intensive agricultural systems may have originated from household-level
initiatives and decision-making that can only come from very intimate knowledge
of the local environment. This study would be the first systematic excavation of
Postclassic commoner households and nearby agricultural terraces in the state of
Oaxaca. The results will provide a time-depth perspective to measure terracing
sustainability and erosion control; and will generate data on the social
organization of agricultural intensification and the food-producing
class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;