* 0209312
* Development of 'Non-Destructive' Radiocarbon and Stable Carbon Isotopic Analyses on Perishable Archaeological Remains
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Marvin Rowe, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 66,208.00

With National Science Foundation support, Professor Marvin Rowe, his graduate
student, Ph.D. candidate Karen Steelman, and their archaeological and
accelerator mass spectrometry colleagues will conduct research attempting to
demonstrate that plasma-chemical extraction (PCE) of organic carbon can be
accomplished virtually non-destructively for many sorts of perishable
archaeological artifacts. The team brings expertise developed over the past
decade and a half, a time in which Dr. Rowe and his graduate students perfected
the PCE technique for removal of minute amounts (about 0.1 milligrams of carbon)
organic carbon from rock paintings to allow accelerator mass spectrometric
radiocarbon dating of those images. That laboratory remains the sole laboratory
capable of direct dates on pictographs independent of the pigments used.
Advantages of non-destructive analysis of rare and valuable archaeological
artifacts are noteworthy and are more or less obvious. Many archaeological
samples are inherently rare and precious. For example, four notable examples are
the Shroud of Turin, the Vinland map, the Kenewick man and the 'Iceman'. Non-
destructive dates and non-destructive stable isotopic determinations (d13C)
would provide useful information on such artifacts without destroying even small
portions of these objects. And archaeologists often find preserved perishable
artifacts, e.g., textiles, baskets, wood carvings, seeds, or papyri, that need
require study, especially dating. But because of their rarity, they should be
conserved, curated and displayed. Their destruction presents both practical and
ethical problems for archaeologists. In all these cases, non-destructive
radiocarbon dates and stable carbon isotopic measurements would provide data
without destruction of even a small part of the artifact under question. We have
obtained various samples from the Fourth International Radiocarbon
Intercomparison study to test the PCE radiocarbon and stable isotopic analyzes
for accuracy and degree of non-destructiveness. Other samples have also been
obtained for evaluating the accuracy of radiocarbon dates and stable carbon
isotopic measurements with non-destructive PCE. &lt;br/&gt;There has already
been some interest expressed by archaeologists about the possibility of non-
destructive radiocarbon dates. With National Science Foundation support, we thus
hope to demonstrate beyond question that we can produce accurate dates and d13C
values utilizing plasma-chemical extraction of minute amounts of
carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;