* 0209174
* Operating System and Architectural Implications of Programmable Network Interfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Vijay Pai, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 303,400.00

Networking server performance has improved substantially in recent years, due
mostly to rapid developments in application and operating system level software
and, to a lesser extent, improved hardware in the network interface. These
developments have greatly reduced the CPU load of network&lt;br/&gt;servers, the
amount of main memory used for networking, and the bandwidth requirements of
data transfers between the CPU and its main memory. However, when the server
prepares to send its data out onto the network, the network interface must still
use DMA to fetch each piece of data to be transmitted&lt;br/&gt;from the main
memory of the host processor, and this overhead increases work for both the
local interconnect (for example, the PCI bus) and the main memory system. As
network capacities increase, the bandwidth of these resources will become a
performance bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many network interfaces
continue to use special-purpose hardware, several programmable network
interfaces exist. These programmable network interfaces are currently used to
offload computations such as TCP/IP checksum calculation from the CPU. Such
optimizations provide substantial benefits, but they underutilize the
flexibility of programmable network processors by using them only for fixed
functionality that is already implemented efficiently in special-purpose
hardware. A key deficiency is&lt;br/&gt;that current network interfaces use
storage primarily as buffer space for incoming and outgoing transmissions, thus
retaining the logical semantics of a simple wire. In reality, however, a
programmable network interface is a node in a heterogeneous multiprocessor
system, where the CPU and main memory&lt;br/&gt;form one node and the network
processor and its local memory form another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
exploit the heterogeneous multiprocessing capability of a server with a
programmable network interface through better utilization of both storage and
computation. First, we intend to use some of the local memory on the network
interface as a cache of frequently-served content.&lt;br/&gt;This will
substantially reduce the load on the local interconnect, the system memory, and
the CPU for setting up DMA transfers. Second, we intend to explore ways to
utilize the flexible computation provided by network processors in the network
interface. This will further improve server performance by offloading demanding
networking tasks from the CPU and also enable additional services beyond those
offered today by our richer use of storage on the
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, we will consider the impact of these
proposals on network processor architectures. Network processors today have been
designed primarily for routers and low-level packet processing. However, our
proposals lead to substantially different workloads for programmable network
interfaces in&lt;br/&gt;servers, requiring systems with flexibility akin to
modern high-performance microprocessors along with the packet processing
efficiency of network processors. We plan to investigate various hybrid designs,
as well as tighter coupling between the CPU and network processor.&lt;br/&gt;