* 0209042
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Data Distribution Schemes for Secure and Reliable Networked Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jehoshua Bruck, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 119,998.00

The rise of ubiquitous computing has prompted the need for a change in the way
we store and access information. It calls for the study of data storage systems
that distribute information over wide area networks, enabling users to store and
access critical data in a continuously available and highly trustable fashion.
The problem of data distribution, i.e., storing data in networked storage
systems while achieving data reliability, confidentiality and performance is
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data distribution schemes based on (n,k) error
correcting codes are investigated. The research will focus on two key questions:
1) how to achieve strong and computationally efficient data encryption while
storing data over a distributed networked environment? and 2) how to place
encoded data segments in networked systems, while considering the structure of
the network topology, to enable high performance and reliable data retrieval?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights and results from this research program will
provide guidelines for efficient, secure and reliable data distribution schemes
for wired and wireless networks, as well as make significant contributions to
related theory study, such as cryptography, coding theory, graph theory and
combinatorics. In addition, efforts will be made to integrate this research
program into educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;