* 0209145
* Improving Sequence Proximity Search
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 03/31/2006
* USD 185,001.00

Finding sequences similar to a given query sequence in a large data
set&lt;br/&gt;is a fundamental problem in many database applications
including&lt;br/&gt;computational genomics and proteomics, computational
finance, audio, text&lt;br/&gt;and multimedia image processing. This proposal
considers proximity search&lt;br/&gt;problems for strings and sequences in such
applications where existing&lt;br/&gt;methods typically employ distance
functions based on character edits only&lt;br/&gt;(commonly unweighted edit
distance) and modify off-the shelf index&lt;br/&gt;structures to improve search
efficiency. However, in many applications&lt;br/&gt;block edit operations such
as translocations, deletions and copies, as well&lt;br/&gt;as linear
transformations on strings are as common and important&lt;br/&gt;as character
edits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, computation of distance measures that
allow block edits&lt;br/&gt;are generally known to be NP-hard. Thus the
investigators propose to work&lt;br/&gt;on practical methods for approximating
the block edit distances and performing&lt;br/&gt;approximate searches under
such measures. These measures are many times&lt;br/&gt;not symmetric
(transforming a long sequence to a short one may be&lt;br/&gt;performed through
a single deletion whereas transforming the short&lt;br/&gt;sequence to the long
one may require many copy operations) or do not&lt;br/&gt;satisfy the triangular
inequality (string space under edit operations is&lt;br/&gt;fundamentally
different from Euclidean space) and thus do not provide a
metric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However many of them can be proven to be almost-
metrics, i.e.,&lt;br/&gt;the symmetry and/or the triangular inequalities may be
satisfied within&lt;br/&gt;multiplicative constants. This property can be
fundamental in sequence&lt;br/&gt;proximity search as it seems possible that
known distance based indexing&lt;br/&gt;methods for metric spaces could be
extended for use in almost-metric&lt;br/&gt;spaces. Thus a main component of the
proposal is the investigation of&lt;br/&gt;the limitations and extendibility of
distance based indexes for&lt;br/&gt;almost-metrics and other string/sequence
measures which may be&lt;br/&gt;non-symmetric or fail to satisfy the triangular
inequality because they&lt;br/&gt;allow block edits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
alternative/complementary approach to distance based indexing is
based&lt;br/&gt;on approximate random mappings of the space of items to be
searched to&lt;br/&gt;Euclidean spaces. This general strategy has received
considerable&lt;br/&gt;attention in the context of vector spaces. The mappings
used guarantee&lt;br/&gt;(with high probability) to reduce the number of
comparisons during search&lt;br/&gt;from linear to poly-logarithmic, provided
some error of approximation can&lt;br/&gt;be tolerated in the answers obtained.
This approach was later generalized&lt;br/&gt;to sequence spaces through a
mapping of sequences under block edit distance&lt;br/&gt;to binary strings under
Hamming distance. The error tolerance is not&lt;br/&gt;very practical. Thus a
second component of this proposal is to obtain&lt;br/&gt;novel mappings of
sequence spaces to Euclidean spaces within smaller&lt;br/&gt;approximation
errors. The goal is to generalize such mappings to both&lt;br/&gt;character and
block based edit distances, especially those which assign&lt;br/&gt;weights to
edit operations (that reflect the likeliness of that&lt;br/&gt;particular
edit).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;