* 0209282
* RUI:   Independent and Simultaneous Tailoring of Surface Topography and Chemical Structure for Controlled Wettability
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Wei Chen, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2006
* USD 114,000.00

The funds requested in this proposal will support the PI's efforts in uniting
productive research and excellence in teaching in the Chemistry Department at
Mount Holyoke College. Over the next three years, a research program that
involves the independent and simultaneous tailoring of surface topography and
chemical structure for controlled wettability will be established and several
teaching initiatives that aim to promote polymer chemistry at the undergraduate
level will be implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed
research are to nationally control wettability of surfaces by manipulating
surface topography and surface chemical structure and to provide a fundamental
understanding of the basis of wettability. The research involves: (1) the
adsorption of charged polystyrene latex particles to oppositely charged
poly(ethylene terephthalate) surfaces to form surfaces with different
topographies/roughness, (2) the introduction of discrete functional groups to
first smooth and then rough surfaces through organic transformations. The two
research stages combine to form a method for preparing robust stable surfaces of
variable wettability. The combination of surface topography and density,
location and identity of surface-chemical functionality should, in principle,
control wettability. Holyoke College undergraduate students will be involved in
all phases of this project, from latex particle adsorption, characterization o0f
surface topography, organic chemistry transformations of surface functional
groups, determination of surface composition, to measurement and interpretation
of wettability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction of polymer chemistry to
chemical education at Mount Holyoke College is also proposed in order to respond
to the new demand of the rapidly changing nature of chemical sciences. We need
to get students excited about chemistry, and to reinforce the traditional
disciplines of chemistry and show how they can be used. Over the next three
years, the PI's efforts in this area will be focused on the following
initiatives: mentoring undergraduates carrying out independent research in
polymer surface chemistry, designing and teaching a polymer chemistry course, an
integrated laboratory course, and a first-year honors tutorial on polymer
chemistry, incorporating polymer chemistry into undergraduate introductory
courses.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;