* 0209793
* Collaborative Arabidopsis 2010 Project: Genomics and Proteomics Approaches to the Function of Tyrosine Phosphatases in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Donald Hunt, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 572,655.00

&lt;br/&gt;Reversible protein phosphorylation is the most common mechanism for
cellular regulation in eukaryotic systems. Studies have demonstrated that
serine/threonine phosphorylation plays a key role in the regulation of plant
physiology and development. However, tyrosine phosphorylation, despite its
overwhelming importance in animals, was largely neglected in higher plants.
Recently the first protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) has been characterized
from higher plants. Furthermore, a diverse group of 21 genes encoding putative
PTPs have been identified from the Arabidopsis genome. Genetic analyses of 4
PTPs have demonstrated that they serve critical functions in plant development,
hormone signaling, and stress responses. These studies have broken new ground in
the understanding of tyrosine phosphorylation in plants and opened up a new area
of signal transduction research. In this project, a multifaceted approach is
taken that combines most advanced technology in proteomics and genomics with
existing procedures in biochemistry, molecular and cellular biology, and
genetics to address the function of tyrosine phosphatases in Arabidopsis. The
cDNAs for all PTPs will isolated, enzymatic properties of these putative PTPs
will be characterized, their expression pattern and subcellular localization
will be determined, and genetic models will be produced and characterized. To
understand the molecular mechanism underlying PTP function, the in vivo
substrates of PTPs will be identified using mass spectrometry. A useful database
on phosphoproteome of Arabidopsis will be built and will be publicly accessible
through PlantP website (http://plantsp.sdsc.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to understand the function and interplay of all tyrosine phosphatases
in plant growth and developmental processes at both whole plant and molecular
levels. Such information will contribute to the overall goal of 2010 program: to
understand the function of all Arabidopsis genes. This project will also
integrate educational activities into the research program by establishing a
summer workshop for high school biology teachers.&lt;br/&gt;