* 0209562
* RUI:   Inverse Spectral Problems in One and Two Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Maeve McCarthy, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2006
* USD 105,899.00

This work investigates the numerical and analytic solution of
inverse&lt;br/&gt;spectral problems in one and two dimensions. In one dimension,
the&lt;br/&gt;appearance of an eigenparameter in the boundary condition of
a&lt;br/&gt;Sturm-Liouville problem causes a loss of self-adjointness.
Although&lt;br/&gt;uniqueness of the inverse problem has been established, there
are no&lt;br/&gt;constructive schemes available that lend themselves to
numerical&lt;br/&gt;computation. This work (with William Rundell) develops and
analyzes two&lt;br/&gt;constructive schemes involving to recover the potential
in this type of&lt;br/&gt;problem. In two dimensions, the eigenvalues of
particular membranes are used&lt;br/&gt;to find an approximation to a function
representing the nonhomogeneity in&lt;br/&gt;the boundary value problem
governing the elastic membrane. Projection of the&lt;br/&gt;boundary value
problem and its coefficients onto appropriate vector spaces&lt;br/&gt;leads to a
matrix inverse problem, which is solved using optimization&lt;br/&gt;techniques.
This work will consider various domains and investigate the&lt;br/&gt;recovery
of multiple coefficients. Theoretical questions regarding
circular&lt;br/&gt;domains will also be investigated. In particular, the
recovery of a radial&lt;br/&gt;density using techniques from differential
geometry and the properties of&lt;br/&gt;the radial spectrum of a vibrating
circular membrane will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many
situations in which it is not practical to measure an object's&lt;br/&gt;
properties directly. Doctors do not perform surgery to determine the
size&lt;br/&gt;of a brain tumor prior to a patient's treatment. An engineer does
not&lt;br/&gt;dismantle an airplane to determine the level of corrosion in its
wing.&lt;br/&gt;Instead external measurements of an object are made and used to
determine&lt;br/&gt;the internal properties of the object. This research focuses
on the use of&lt;br/&gt;vibrational information to determine physical parameters
of an object. If&lt;br/&gt;these parameters are known, the vibration is modeled
mathematically by a&lt;br/&gt;boundary value problem. If the parameters are not
known, but the vibration&lt;br/&gt;is known, then the problem to be solved is an
inverse boundary value&lt;br/&gt;problem - also known as an inverse spectral
problem. This project develops&lt;br/&gt;several constructive algorithms for the
solution of this type of problem. It&lt;br/&gt;is important to realize that
while mathematical inverse problems often have&lt;br/&gt;multiple solutions,
their physical counterpart may not. Choosing the&lt;br/&gt;"correct" solution is
also addressed in this work.