* 0209546
* Atomistic Studies of Reactions on Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Robert Madix, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 07/31/2006
* USD 540,000.00

This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, addresses the question of the effect of the spatial and temporal
organization of adsorbed reactants and reactive intermediates on the kinetics of
surface reactions. Using scanning tunneling microscopy, Professor Madix and his
coworkers in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University,
examine the spatial distribution of adsorbed species in static and time
dependent measurements. Studies of oxidation reactions on silver, auto-catalytic
surface explosions on nickel and palladium, and poisoning and promotion by
selected surface reaction modifiers are examined. In addition, the steady state
distribution of adsorbed intermediates in surface oxidation reactions are
studied. Information from this experimental project provides input into the
development of detailed models of surface reaction kinetics, as well as
fundamental insight into the nature of the dynamic catalytic surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the effect of the organization of reactive
intermediates in two dimensions on the overall kinetics of surface reactions is
the goal of this research project carried out by Professor Madix at Stanford
University. Using tools that allow the atomic level imaging of the reacting
surface, detailed information about the role of adsorbate structure on the
surface reaction kinetics is obtained. This information is crucial to our
detailed understanding of a range of important catalytic reaction systems, and
extends to the understanding of surface reactions in a variety of
technologically important contexts. &lt;br/&gt;