* 0209769
* Arabidopsis 2010: Using Functional Genomics to Determine How and Why Plants Synthesize Diverse Triterpenoids
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Bonnie Bartel, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,692,279.00

This multidisciplinary collaborative research is aimed at determining how and
why plants synthesize diverse triterpenoids. This project will integrate reverse
genetics in Arabidopsis, heterologous expression of cDNAs in yeast,
spectroscopic and chromatographic structural determination, and gene expression
analysis to elucidate the function of Arabidopsis triterpenoid biosynthetic
genes and thereby triterpenoid biosynthetic pathways, control mechanisms, and
biological function. Three of the characterized triterpenoid biosynthetic
enzymes convert a shared substrate to different compounds; other enzymes to be
studied may similarly provide structural diversity, metabolize different
substrates, or provide means to spatially or temporally control expression and
thus product formation. The effects of the mutations on plant growth,
development, and triterpenoid composition will facilitate linking each
triterpenoid biosynthetic gene with an enzyme of known catalytic activity and a
specific biological role. Genes to be studied include apparent oxidosqualene
cyclases, farnesyl pyrophosphate synthases, squalene synthases, squalene
epoxidases, and cycloeucalenol isomerase. This work will provide a comprehensive
accounting of triterpenoid skeletons synthesized by Arabidopsis, establish which
compounds are derived from each gene product, and determine the spatial and
temporal expression patterns of the various biosynthetic genes. These
experiments will not only elucidate the biological importance of triterpenoid
diversity, facilitating future modifications for agricultural benefit, but will
provide students with broad interdisciplinary training that bridges modern
chemistry and biology. The data from these studies will be publicly available on
the project web site (http://www.bioc.rice.edu/~bartel/At_triterpenoids.html),
and the knockout seeds will be deposited in the ABRC at Ohio State University
for distribution to the community.

