* 0209719
* CRC:  An Integrated Approach to Understanding the Air-Water Interface In Atmospherically Relevant Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Douglas Tobias, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,679,466.00

Barbara J. Finlayson-Pitts, Donald Dabdub, R. Benny Gerber, John. C. Hemminger
and Douglas J. Tobias of UC Irvine are jointly supported by the Division of
Chemistry, the International Programs Office and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate for their
interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at significantly advancing our
understanding of chemistry at the air-water interface. More specifically, they
will be looking at the interaction of gases such as SO2, oxides of nitrogen
(NO2, N2O4, HNO3), CO2 and HCl with water in films of varying thickness. In
addition, interactions of these thin films with surfactant layers will be
studied. Both theory and experiments will be applied to understand the chemical
and physical interactions at the air-water interface in these systems. The
potential importance of such processes at interfaces involving particles and
other surfaces in the troposphere will be probed using a comprehensive airshed
model. This award includes international collaborations with Pavel Jungwirth,
Czech Academy of Sciences, and Leon Phillips, University of Canterbury, New
Zealand, that will include international training opportunities for the students
and postdoctoral researchers involved with this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC) awards are given
to interdisciplinary teams of scientists working on problems of broad chemical
interest. The emphasis in these awards is on new collaborative modes of research
and training.&lt;br/&gt;