* 0209411
* Dissertation Research:  The effect of exercise on the morphology of muscle attachment scars
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Christopher Ruff, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,977.00

uscle insertion scars, or entheses, are easily observable but poorly understood
features of bones and fossils. There is a long-standing assumption in the field
of paleontology that large or obvious muscle scars are indicative of heavy
muscle use. However, this assumption has never been thoroughly tested. This
study will be the first to directly examine the relationship between known
levels of muscle force and numerous aspects of enthesis morphology. The goal of
this study is to examine if and how muscle use influences enthesis morphology so
paleontologists may more confidently interpret these features on bones or
fossils.

This study will compare a variety of features of the entheses of sedentary and
exercised adult sheep (Ovis aries). Preliminary work has indicated that moderate
exercise induces no change in some aspects of enthesis morphology. Therefore the
exercised sheep in this study will be run at a fast pace while carrying
moderately heavy loads on their backs. This exercise regime is by design
relatively intense, as one goal of the study is to determine whether intense
muscle use is indeed related to large or obvious insertion marks.

A variety of features will be measured on seven muscle insertion scars. Six of
the scars are those of limb muscles that will be used in the running cycle. The
seventh is that of the masseter muscle insertion on the mandible. This muscle
should not be loaded differently in the two groups and thus its insertion will
be studied as an internal control. The forces produced by each of the muscles
will be quantified using force buckles and sonomicrometry. Thus this study will
be the first to examine the morphology of entheses that had been subjected to
known levels of muscle force in vivo.

This study will develop the first objective, quantitative methods for
describing the various features that are typically used to describe entheses.
These methods will be used to test the hypotheses that increased muscle use
significantly affects the size and rugosity of insertion scars. The first method
is a previously tested latex molding method for measuring the three-dimensional
surface area of insertion marks. The second method, to be heavily developed in
this study, will measure enthesis rugosity, a feature that is often observed on
bones and fossils but rarely quantified. The insertion scars will be scanned
using a 3D-laser scanner and their topology will be analyzed using ArcView GIS
3.2, a Geographic Information System (GIS) software package.

The rate of bone deposition under the insertions in both treatment groups will
be measured using periodic administrations of fluorochrome labels. This
information will provide insight into some of the physiological responses that
occur in the bone beneath muscle insertions due to variations in muscle forces.
It will also serve as a longitudinal measure of these responses and thus help
control for pre-existing individual variation in enthesis morphology.

In sum, the proposed study will provide much-needed insight into the
relationship between muscle use and enthesis morphology. It is the first study
to test the assumption that muscle use affects insertion scar morphology, and
will demonstrate which aspects of this morphology are so affected. It will also
provide the first method to objectively quantify the features of entheses. The
results of this study should allow paleontologists to more confidently interpret
the functional morphology of muscle insertion scars.