* 0209856
* Nearly Axisymmetric Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* James Howard, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 94,000.00

Nearly axisymmetric systems occur in many physical problems, including the
motion of charged dust grains in planetary magnetospheres, plasma fusion
devices, ion motion in Paul traps, and the complex orbits of asteroidal moons.
In all these examples the motion is well described by an autonomous Hamiltonian
with an approximately conserved canonical momentum, for which an averaged
effective potential exists. For small deviations from axisymmetry the motion
remains essentially two-dimensional, simply averaging over nonaxisymmetric
perturbations. This effect has major consequences for the long time confinement
of orbits, such as pairs of ions in a Paul trap. In this research we will
develop new analytic methods for describing this transition from two- to three-
dimensional behavior using canonical perturbation theory, Morse theory, and
Birkhoff normal forms. Global bifurcations of critical points and Arnold
diffusion will also be investigated. The results are expected to have immediate
impact on several fields under active investigation, such as high-performance
computers utilizing quantum computation and the confinement of charged dust
grains under the influence of solar radiation
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axisymmetric systems have circular symmetry about
an axis; a communication satellite in geosynchronous orbit about Earth is an
example. In reality the Earth has small longitudinal deviations from sphericity,
causing a geosynchronous satellite to wander in the sky rather than remain
directly overhead, unless it is carefully placed at a stable longitude.
Nevertheless, its orbit remains very nearly circular. This simple example
illustrates a nearly axisymmetric system with quasi-two-dimensional behavior.
This project investigates the detailed dynamics of such nearly axisymmetric
systems. The resulting increased quantitative understanding will greatly aid in
design, numerical simulation, and operation of such systems. Other (much more
complex) examples include two-ion motion in ion traps, which are often
constructed to be slightly elliptical rather than circular, and the orbits of
small moonlets that have been recently discovered about many asteroids.
&lt;br/&gt;