* 0209583
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:  Studies of Large and Angle Anomalies in Pion-Nucleus and Alpha-Nucleus Scattering
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2008
* F. Bary Malik, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 30,000.00

0209583&lt;br/&gt;Malik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This award
is for support of a joint research project by Dr. F. Bary Malik, Department of
Physics, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois and Drs. Mahmoud
Hasan and Zuhair Shehadeh, both of the Physics Department at the Applied Science
University, Amman, Jordan. Many large angle elastic scattering pion-nucleus data
have remained unexplained for decades. Preliminary calculations done using
Klein-Gordon equation (KG) indicate that these data could probably be explained
provided one uses KG, rather than Schrodinger equation. The investigators will
attempt to analyze many of these unexplained anomalous data using full KG
equation. To facilitate such analyses, they propose to determine some of these
potentials using an inverse scattering theory at a fixed energy developed by
Shehadeh, Malik and others for cases where phase shift analyses are available. A
detailed study of the solution of the KG equation in the presence of an external
Coulomb potential will also be done. Additionally the underlying cause for the
difference in p +- cross section and some inelastic scattering cross sections
will be investigated. Concurrent to this investigation actual and virtual
-excitation possibilities will be investigated. The inverse scattering theory at
a fixed energy will also be applied to determine some alpha-nucleus potentials,
which will then be used to analyze relevant data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring two senior and
well-established scientists and a young scientist (Shehadeh) to collaborate on
the problem of large angle anomalies of pion-nucleous and alpha-nucleus
scattering. Each of these investigators have special expertise and analytical
skill, thus the collaboration is likely to be beneficial for the scientific
research and to the United States and to Jordan.&lt;br/&gt;