* 0209818
* Arabidopsis 2010: A Transposon-Based System for Site-Specific Recombination in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Thomas Peterson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 916,068.00

The goal of this project is to develop a method for efficient homology-
dependent site-specific recombination (SSR) in Arabidopsis. The approach used is
based on the recombination-inducing properties of transposable elements, coupled
with alternative methods of delivering recombination substrates to plant cells.
In previous research, the PI and co-PI have shown that DNA and RNA transposable
elements can stimulate recombination. First, excision of maize Ac/Ds DNA
transposons greatly induces homologous recombination in plants, including
Arabidopsis. Second, retrotransposons can generate high levels of cDNA that
recombine readily with genomic sequences. This project will develop two-
component (recipient and donor) transgene constructs that contain partially-
overlapping visible and selectable marker gene fragments. The recipient
component contains, in addition, a maize Ds element inserted between the marker
genes. The recipient construct is integrated into the Arabidopsis genome; upon
expression of Ac/Ds transposase, Ds excision generates a recombination hotspot
in the recipient construct. The donor construct sequences are delivered into the
plant cells via several alternative methods, including Agrobacterium T-DNA
transformation, particle bombardment, ectopic chromosomal position, and
retrotransposon-generated cDNA. Recombination of recipient and donor sequences
can be detected in somatic cells by the visible marker, and events transmitted
to progeny can be genetically selected. Heritable recombination events will be
characterized by molecular and genetic analysis to gain a greater understanding
of SSR mechanisms in plant cells. Project results will be available at the
following web site: &lt;http://www.public.iastate.edu/~voytas/rec_arab.html&gt;.
All reagents (seeds of transformed lines, plasmid vectors) will be made
available upon request.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homology-dependent recombination is
a powerful tool for genetic modification in many organisms; however, methods for
routine SSR are not yet available for higher plants. An explicit goal of the
Arabidopsis 2010 project is the development of methods for directed mutations
and SSR. Successful completion of this project will provide an important new
means for making precise changes in plant genomes for both fundamental research
and practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;