* 0209374
* CAM 2002:   Conference on Applied Mathematics, October 25-27, 2002, Edmund, OK
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2003
* Charlotte Simmons, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/2003
* USD 12,000.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0209374 PI: Simmons, Charlotte Institution:
University of Central Oklahoma Program: Applied Mathematics Program Manager:
Catherine Mavriplis

Title: CAM 2002: Conference on Applied Mathematics

CAM 2002, a conference on applied mathematics, will be held on the University of
Central Oklahoma campus on the weekend of October 25 - 27, 2002. The conference
will focus on two related areas within applied mathematics with applications to
telecommunications, and electrical and computer engineering: wavelets/signal
processing and error-correcting codes. As a result, this conference will be of
interest to engineers and physicists as well as to mathematicians. A major
emphasis of the conference will be "coding theory": Much of signal processing is
about source coding while the theory of error-correcting codes is channel
coding. Wavelets are now the most applicable tool in signal processing. For
instance, wavelet filters were recently adopted as the JPEG-2000 image
compression standard. Wavelet packets, a mathematical shorthand for compressing
and restoring virtually any image or sound, have been used by the FBI and
Scotland Yard to compress their fingerprint files to a more manageable size.

CAM 2002 will foster interdisciplinary communication between mathematicians,
computer engineers, and signal processors; i.e., this conference will bring
together theoreticians and practitioners. Moreover, the conference will provide
an opportunity for students (undergraduate & graduate) and faculty from the
region to share their research with each other and interact with world-class
experts in the areas of wavelets/signal processing and error-correcting codes.
Error-correcting codes provide the means for the reliable transformation of
speech, audio, images and video into digital content. Deep space communication,
wireless phones, high speed data networks, the Internet, and products like
compact disc players, hard drives, and high speed modems make essential use of
coding and data compression to improve speed and reliability. The federal funds
will be used primarily to provide travel support for students, recent doctoral
recipients, junior faculty, women and other underrepresented groups in
mathematics, science and engineering.

Date: May 14, 2002