* 0209936
* EXPLORATORY: Microrheology of Particulate Gels
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Eric Furst, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/2004
* USD 155,000.00

Understanding how interactions, microstructure and microscopic mechanics
determine&lt;br/&gt;the macroscopic properties and responses of complex fluids
is a fundamental problem that&lt;br/&gt;impacts materials processing and
development, biology and medicine. For particulate gels&lt;br/&gt;that occur in
the manufacture of ceramic parts, coatings, mineral recovery and
lubricant&lt;br/&gt;degradation, we seek to understand the microscopic origins
of viscoelastic, yield, and non-&lt;br/&gt;linear behavior that ultimately
affects processing and final properties, such as the thermal&lt;br/&gt;and mass
transport characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
explore the use of direct microscopic manipulation&lt;br/&gt;and imaging to
understand the relationship between microscopic and macroscopic
properties&lt;br/&gt;in particulate gels. The PI will develop and employ new
experimental tools based on optical&lt;br/&gt;micromanipulation and
visualization, including optical trapping in combination with
video,&lt;br/&gt;fluorescence, and confocal microscopies. Because the techniques
will allow investigation of the&lt;br/&gt;basic, microscopic mechanisms of
rheological and mechanical behavior by quantifying struc-&lt;br/&gt;tural
rearrangements, stresses and interactions in situ, they are powerful complements
to&lt;br/&gt;scattering and rheological methods used by other
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research aims are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Directly measure the micromechanical properties of models of the gel
back-&lt;br/&gt;bone. To understand fundamental mechanisms of gel elasticity,
shear and compressive&lt;br/&gt;yield behavior in particulate gels, the PI will
develop optical trapping and microscopy tech-&lt;br/&gt;niques to measure the
bending stiffness, frequency response, and relaxation timescales&lt;br/&gt;of
model aggregates of the gel backbone. With videomicroscopy, the PI will
characterize&lt;br/&gt;particle rearrangement mechanisms that are relevant to
creep, yield and non-linear be-&lt;br/&gt;havior. The PI will systematically
vary interparticle interactions, particle concentration,&lt;br/&gt;and
polydispersity, and characterize surface heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Measure the mechanical properties of flocs and floc- floc interfaces.
Using&lt;br/&gt;the experimental techniques designed for measuring gel backbone
properties, the PI will&lt;br/&gt;measure the frequency response and rupturing
mechanics of flocs formed during the&lt;br/&gt;aggregation process. Concurrent
videomicroscopy and optical trapping will enable the PI&lt;br/&gt;to
characterize and correlate mechanics and structural rearrangements in flocs that
give&lt;br/&gt;rise to strain-hardening in fractal colloidal gels. The PI will
measure mechanics between&lt;br/&gt;flocs to distinguish the contribution of
internal and floc- floc mechanics in the rheology&lt;br/&gt;of
gels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop optical trapping and microscopy for dense,
gelling suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;Establishing the relationship between individual
aggregate mechanics, microrheology&lt;br/&gt;and rheology of particulate gels
will require micromechanical measurements in bulk&lt;br/&gt;suspensions. The PI
will develop the appropriate core-shell particles and
experimental&lt;br/&gt;techniques to take advantage of simultaneous optical
trapping and confocal microscopy&lt;br/&gt;in dense suspensions. This will
enable the PI to directly visualize structure while inducing&lt;br/&gt;local
deformation and stresses in the concentrated, bulk gel, ultimately providing
a&lt;br/&gt;means of characterizing mechanisms of stress relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;