* 0209777
* Arabidopsis 2010 -  Collaborative Research: Discovering Transporters for Essential Minerals and Toxic Ions in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Kendal Hirschi, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2008
* USD 915,788.00

Plant growth, development, and survival depend on the uptake, translocation, and
sorting of 15 essential nutrients and countless metabolites to specific organs,
cells and intracellular compartments. However, it is not known how plants
regulate and coordinate the complex network of long-distance and cellular
transport patterns. The first complete genome sequence of a plant, large mutant
collections, and extensive databases provide opportunities to generate new
resources and tools to discover the functions of ~800 transporters in
Arabidopsis. The bulk of unknown transporters are secondary active transporters.
The major objectives of this project are to determine the ion specificity, the
tissue and subcellular distribution, and the biological roles of 56 H+-coupled
cation transporters, including the CaCA, CPA1, and CPA2 families. With the
availability of genomic sequence and the identification of transport homologs
through bioinformatic analyses, heterologous expression in yeast will be used to
quickly delineate the function of the entire complement of H+-coupled cation
transporters. Regulatory mechanisms will be determined by mutation of putative
autoinhibitory domains. Transport in isolated membranes will be used to verify
ion specificity of representative transporters. Tissue and subcellular
distribution will be determined using promoter-reporter proteins expression in
transgenic plants, and GFP-tagged transporters in a protoplast model. Biological
and physiological functions of transporters will be analyzed using insertional
knockout mutants. New methods and information resulting from the study will be
distributed through a site at http://www.cbs.umn.edu/2010 with several updates
each year. To assure that results and resources are available to the community,
data will be depositied at TAIR and mutant Arabidopsis lines will be available
through the ABRC after results are confirmed.&lt;br/&gt;Transporters impact all
life processes, including reproduction, metabolism, movement, and responses to
hormonal and environmental stimuli, thus resources and information generated
from this project will directly facilitate progress towards the goals of the
2010 project. Programs are in place to attract and provide opportunities for
students, including under-represented minorities, to solve problems in health,
agriculture, and the environment using experimental and bioinformatic
approaches.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;