* 0209283
* Workshop:   Student Research in Computational Linguistics at the Joint ACL/NAACL 2002 Conference, July 7-12, 2002, Philadelphia, PA
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Susan McRoy, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 03/31/2003
* USD 18,000.00

This award subsidizes expenses of student participants in the Student Research
Workshop organized in conjunction with the 2002 Association for Computational
Linguistics Conference, to be held July 7-12 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization in the field of natural language processing and language
engineering, with two regional chapters, Europe (EACL) and North America
(NAACL), of approximately equal size. The Association's annual conference, which
rotates between North America and Europe, is the major international meeting in
the field. The workshop format allows students to present their research and
receive feedback from a panel of established researchers in the field. It will
provide students with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work
at a critical time in their professional development, through feedback from the
panel and other student participants. The ACL Student Workshop is an inexpensive
yet highly effective means of encouraging young and upcoming computational
linguists. The intimate format encourages the student participants to begin
building a rapport with established researchers. This nurturing effort should
pay dividends by more effectively guiding students in this rapidly changing
research field. In addition, by building a supportive environment for these
students, it is more likely that down the road they will in turn lend a
supporting hand to other students who follow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational lingustics is a multidisciplinary field of
increasing importance to science, commerce, and society. This workshop
contributes to the professional development of young scientists who will lead
this growing field in the coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;