* 0209868
* RUI:   Halide Oxidation by Peroxometal Complexes:   Mechanism and Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Martha Reynolds, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2005
* USD 32,360.00

Dr. Martha Reynolds, Department of Chemistry, Colgate University, is supported
by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division for a study of the oxidation of halide ions by metal-bound
peroxides. A series of new molybdenum(VI), vanadium(V), and tungsten(VI) peroxo
complexes with ligands that vary systematically in their electron-donating
properties will be synthesized and the reactivity toward bromide oxidation will
be measured spectrophotometrically. These experiments will test the hypothesis
that the electronic structure of a chelating ligand controls the strength of the
peroxo bond in predictable ways, which in turn governs the reactivity of the
complex as an oxidant. The reactivity of complexes that contain both peroxide
and bromide or chloride directly bound to the metal will be examined. Such
species represent possible intermediates in the peroxometal-mediated oxidation
of halide ion. Because of the sensitivity of peroxo and metal-oxo vibrational
frequencies to chemical changes, infrared spectroscopy will be used to obtain
more detailed information on the mechanism of bromide oxidation and infrared-
spectroelectrochemistry will be employed to compare the molecular details of the
one- and two-electron oxidation chemistry of peroxometal
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peroxide-containing metal complexes find
application as catalysts for the oxidation or bromination of a variety of
organic compounds. A biological example of such a catalyst is vanadium
bromoperoxidase, an enzyme found in seaweed that produces oxidized bromine for
the purpose of protecting the seaweed against predators or microorganisms. This
project will provide an increased understanding of peroxometal complexes - and
thereby of vanadium haloperoxidase enzymes - and holds promise for the
development of new oxidation and bromination catalysts that may prove useful in
the synthesis of anticancer, antimicrobial, and insulin-mimetic pharmaceuticals,
and of oxidized or brominated organic compounds more generally. Students
undertaking this research will gain facility in chemical synthesis,
spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques, and chemical kinetics. &lt;br/&gt;