* 0209556
* NER:  Development of a Novel Low Cost Nano-lithography Technique using a Nanometric High Transmission Optical Antenna
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. The objective of this project is to
develop a novel low cost nano-lithography technique. Conventional nano-
manufacturing equipment, using electron beams or other radiation sources and
operating in vacuum, costs well above $1,000,000. In contrary, this technique is
based on a laser device and its accessories; its total cost will be less than
$100,000. The key component in this nano-lithography system is a nanometric
optical antenna capable of transmitting an incoming micrometer size laser beam
into a nanometer size domain with high transmissivity (efficiency). This nano-
lithography system can be further developed into a parallel manufacturing
system, so that the time needed for the manufacturing process can be
significantly reduced compared with other techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the rapid progress in nano-technology, it is crucial to develop low cost
manufacturing techniques with high throughput. Only with rapid and low cost
manufacturing techniques could the nano-technology translate itself from
research to industry, and to impact the society. The success of this work will
provide a low cost nano-lithography technique for nano-manufacturing. This
research will also provide training to undergraduate and graduate students,
including underrepresented groups. The results of this research will be broadly
disseminated.