* 0209393
* Psychology of Mathematics Education:  An International Conference to be Convened in Honolulu, Hawaii in July, 2003
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Joseph Zilliox, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2004
* USD 95,748.00

This grant will support Pacific island scholars attendance at the joint meeting
of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics (PME) and its North
American Chapter (PMENA) to be held in Honolulu, Hawaii in July, 2003. The
Pacific island scholars will be selected mathematics specialists from the
departments and ministries of education and college level mathematics
instructors from the colleges and universities in Hawaii and on the U.S.
affiliated Pacific island communities of American Samoa, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Commonwealth of
Northern Mariana Islands and the Republic of Palau. NSF support will enable the
Pacific island scholars to engage with the PME community for the first time,
thereby enhancing national and international collaboration among mathematics
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pacific island scholars and mathematics
specialists will be introduced to the international mathematics education
community at a reception to be held in conjunction with the opening of the
conference. Following the delivery of the first plenary, which will be given by
a Pacific islander, the Pacific scholars and mathematics specialists will
present an overview of their islands' culture and the challenges faced in
teaching mathematics in their island communities. During the conference a
special panel discussion will give the participates the opportunity to obtain
feedback from the international community of mathematics educators concerning
these challenges. Daily "Theory to Practice" sessions will provide opportunities
for the Pacific scholars to actively contribute and receive professional
development throughout the conference. The Principal Investigators will attempt
to establish a Pacific Network of Mathematics Educators as a result of the
conference activities.&lt;br/&gt;