* 0209681
* Chemical Analysis Of Ancient African Glass Beads
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Peter Robertshaw, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2006
* USD 77,067.00

Glass beads have been found at innumerable archaeological sites in sub-Saharan
Africa. However, obtaining information from glass beads found on sites that date
to before European contact has proven difficult. Since glass was not
manufactured from raw materials in sub-Saharan Africa (with one possible
exception), archaeologists know that glass beads were trade items that linked
large parts of the Old World in an early version of the global economy. If
archaeologists could establish where the glasses used to make particular beads
were manufactured, then they could study patterns of trade that linked Africa to
the wider world over the last two millennia. Experience has shown that the only
way to discover the sources of the glass is through chemical analysis. This was
tried thirty years ago but without much success because of imprecise analytical
techniques and a lack of comparative data from glass-making centers outside
Africa. However, much has now changed: accurate chemical analyses have been
undertaken of ancient European and Asian glasses, including material found at
glass factories, while a new technique, laser-ablation inductively-coupled-
plasma mass-spectrometry, has been developed that permits quantitative analysis
of numerous chemical elements found in glass beads without damage to the beads
themselves. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Peter Robertshaw, with
the assistance of scientists at the federally funded University of Missouri
Research Reactor Center, will analyze about 1000 glass beads from sites
throughout sub-Saharan Africa to answer two sets of questions of central
importance in understanding the African past. First, they will examine beads
found at sites along the coast of eastern Africa and in the southern African
interior to answer several questions: Where did the glass come from - north
Africa, southwest Asia, India, China, or southeast Asia? What changes in
patterns of Indian Ocean trade occurred in the millennium preceding the arrival
of the Portuguese in East Africa? Did different African ports obtain their glass
from different sources? Did sites in the interior of Africa, such as Great
Zimbabwe, receive beads from many ports and many sources? Did patterns of trade
between the interior and the coast change through time? Second, Robertshaw and
colleagues will seek to discover the trade routes that connected Igbo-Ukwu in
southeastern Nigeria to the wider world. Igbo-Ukwu is famous for its ninth-
century bronze vessels of local manufacture. Here too were discovered 160,000
glass beads. Nobody knows how this wealth was amassed and in which direction lay
the trade route that connected Igbo-Ukwu with the likely glass manufacturing
centers. Some scholars think that the beads came across the Sahara from the
north African coast (Islamic Ifriqiya) or even Spain, others argue for an origin
in Cairo via the Christian kingdoms of the Sudan, or perhaps India. This
research will investigate these competing hypotheses and also explore whether
some of the glass was manufactured by an indigenous African glass industry,
possibly in northern Nigeria. The results of the research will permit historians
to place Africa more firmly within the context of a global economy that existed
prior to European expansion.