* 0209260
* Coarsening Kinetics and Morphological Evolution of Ni-X \(Solid Solution\) Precipitates in Ordered Ni3X Alloys \(X = Al, Ge, Ga\)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Alan Ardell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2006
* USD 294,001.00

This project is aimed at a greater understanding of fundamental aspects of the
coarsening kinetics and evolution of morphology of disordered precipitates in
Ni-al, Ni-Ga and Ni-Ge alloys using extensive electron microscopy coupled with
image-analysis software. The Curie temperatures of the solid-solution
precipitate phase will also be investigated to determine whether the
compositions of the precipitate phases change during aging. This will be the
first time any attempts made to investigate the changes in the composition of
precipitates themselves during a precipitation reaction. An ultimate objective
of the proposed research is better understanding of the detailed factors
affecting coarsening kinetics, morphology and spatial correlation in Ni-base
alloys that find applications in varied technologies that require high
temperature materials for the structures. An objective of the study is to obtain
quantitative experimental evidence for the slower kinetics of coarseing of Ni-Al
and Ni-Ge precipitates believed to arise from more complex diffusion of these
atomic species. In addition to the interfacial energy and lattice mismatch that
were considered so far, the possible role of antiphase boundary energy in the
evolution of precipitate morphology will be explored. The funding for this
research provides graduate researchers a continued exposure to research in the
forefront of materials science.

This research develops new and better understanding of the underlying reasons
and mechanisms of precipitate coarsening and morphologies. The research will
make significant contribution to the development of Ni-base alloys with optimum
properties.