* 0209892
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research:  Collaborative Proposal Rapid Response to the November 14, 2001 Kunlun Fault Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2004
* USD 5,722.00

EAR-0209434/EAR-0209892&lt;br/&gt;Shen Zheng-
Kang/Freymueller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientist from the University
of Alaska, University of California Los Angeles, and the China Seismological
Bureau are carrying out a a rapid response to the November 14, 2001 Mw~7.9
Kunlun fault earthquake in Tibet. This earthquake provides a unique opportunity
to measure the postseismic deformation of an M~8 earthquake that occurred within
a pre-existing geodetic network in which relative site velocities are known to
about 1 mm/yr., Three continuously recording GPS sites near the rupture and a
fourth about 150 km away were established one week after the event by the China
Seismological Bureau. Also, 17 existing and new GPS sites along the Qinghai-
Tibet highway were surveyed in December, 2001. A second field campaign is
extending GPS network westward from the Qinghai-Tibet highway, adding new sites
along the fault on either side of surface rupture in the near field. This survey
is repeating measurements at all of the sites surveyed in November-December,
providing the initial postseismic results. These measurements will lead to a
better understanding of the rheological structure of the exceptionally thick
northern Tibetan crust as well as the postseismic processes triggered by such a
large event.