* 0209542
* FRG:  X-Ray Scattering Studies of Structure and Dynamics of Polymer Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Sunil Sinha, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 495,000.00

This is a Focused Research Group award between the University of California in
San Diego, Northern Illinois University, and Yale University. Its aim is to
carry out detailed structural and dynamical studies of polymer films, using the
non-invasive proves of x-ray and neutron scattering at national synchrotron
radiation and neutron scattering facilities, in order to achieve a better
scientific understanding at the microscopic level of the static and dynamic
behavior of macromolecules at solid/liquid interfaces and at free (liquid/vapor)
surfaces in the fluid state and around the glass transition. This scientific
understanding is needed because at present there is a considerable divergence of
results from experiments and also of theoretical views regarding the nature of
the fluctuations at polymeric surfaces and of the glass transition in thin
polymer films. The roles of confinement (e.g. when the film thickness is
comparable to the radius of gyration of the polymer chains) and of the polymer-
substrate interactions need to be elucidated in more detail to achieve such an
understanding. The techniques to be brought to bear on these problems include
x-ray and neutron reflectivity, diffuse x-ray scattering, small-angle neutron
scattering and x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific interest driving this project stems from our present limited
knowledge of how the conformation and mobility of polymer molecules are affected
by confinement to a thin film and by interactions with the substrate and how
these materials transform into the glassy state. It's technological importance
is related to the important role played by polymer films in industry and
technology in the form of coatings, adhesives, filters for chemical separations,
packaging materials, lithographic masks for microelectronic devices, etc.
Further, it will provide an opportunity for students and postdoctoral
researchers at three different educational institutions to be trained in this
important area of materials science and in the use of advanced research methods
utilizing the nation's premier national facilities for research using
synchrotron x-ray and neutron beams.&lt;br/&gt;