* 0209036
* High-Level Optimization for DSP Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Steven Carr, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 249,964.00

Embedded systems require maximum performance from a processor within significant
constraints in power consumption and chip cost. Using software pipelining, high-
performance digital signal processors can often exploit considerable
instruction-level parallelism (ILP), and thus significantly improve performance.
However, software pipelining sometimes fails to utilize the processor
efficiently and may hinder the goals of low power consumption and chip cost.

The problems with software pipelining can be ameliorated by using advanced
compiler loop transformation techniques. However, current methods for applying
loop transformations are lacking. Metrics for applying loop transformations do
not model high-performance digital signal processing (DSP) architectures and the
effects of software pipelining effectively.

This research will address the above problems by developing and experimentally
validating the following:

1) A performance metric that accurately models software-pipelined loop
performance on high-performance DSP architectures.

2) A prediction of the register pressure of a software-pipelined loop before
high-level loop transformations are applied.

As a result of this research, more ILP will be exploited in DSP applications,
resulting in an increase in performance and a savings in the overall energy
required to execute an application. Improvements in performance and energy usage
will allow better and more computationally expensive algorithms to be used in
embedded systems.