* 0209371
* Spin and Other Electronic Properties of InSb Quantum Wells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Ryan Doezema, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 453,000.00

This project addresses electron spin properties and ballistic transport effects
in InSb quantum wells, and aims to optimize such structures for applications
that rely on these phenomena. Large spin effects such as the Rashba and Zeeman
terms are correlated with narrow band gaps. Because InSb has the smallest band
gap of any III-V semiconductor, spin effects are expected to be amongst the
largest. The approach involves a range of experiments to study these effects in
InSb heterostructures. First, energy splitting due to the Rashba effect will be
probed using an electron spin resonance technique. By varying the structural
parameters of the quantum well, factors that influence the Rashba effect will be
identified. This is expected to contribute to a more complete understanding of
the Rashba effect with the goal of optimizing structures for large Rashba split-
ting. Second, point-contact techniques for studying spin splitting in 1D
channels will be ex-plored. In these 1D channels the Rasbha effect has been
predicted to lead to a much richer con-ductance spectra. InSb is well suited to
this study due to both the large Rashba term and the small effective mass that
leads to large confinement energies. Third, quantum Hall ferromagnets will be
sought by exploiting the large Zeeman effect in InSb. Studies of ferromagnetism
in quantum fluids may improve understanding of ferromagnetism in general.
Lastly, a newly proposed spin filter that takes advantage of the large Zeeman
effect will be developed. Experiments on the bal-listic transport properties of
InSb quantum wells will be performed. The small effective mass of InSb leads to
long mean free paths. Preliminary data suggests ballistic transport even at
185K. Although unrelated to spin, ballistic transport is required for some spin
devices. It is planned to develop structures that exhibit ballistic transport at
room temperature and structures that have low-temperature mean free paths
sufficiently long for electron focusing experiments. Continued improvement in
the quality of heterostructures will be aided by ongoing excitonic studies which
provide values of materials parameters important for device design.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in
areas of electronic materials science having technological relevance. An
important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. This research effort enlists
contributions from un-dergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs. These
experiences will contribute to the prepara-tion of students and staff for
employment in areas of technologically importance. The combined resources of
collaborations among the PI and two co-PIs provide special opportunities for
educa-tion and training in highly interdisciplinary forefront
research.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;