* 0209874
* U.S.-FSU-EU Geology Field Mapping Course in the Kyrgyz Tien Shan, Central Asia
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2008
* Ray Weldon, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2008
* USD 192,095.00

This international field camp will bring together students from the United
States, European Union and Central Asia to learn geologic mapping skills. The
principal investigators are Dr. Ray J. Weldon from the University of Oregon
Eugene and Dr. Kanatbek Abdrahkmatov from the Kyrgyz Institute of Seismology.

The Tien Shan Mountains offer superb exposure and complex geology where the
students will be able to address some of the most fundamental questions on
mountain building and interactions of older and younger deformational events.
The Tien Shan will introduce the students to a completely new class of
structures that are not well exposed in the US. The mapping projects are
designed to answer specific scientific questions about the active deformation in
the Tien Shan, as well as to provide excellent learning situations for the
students. This project will also further understanding of the geology and
geodynamics of the Tien Shan orogen, that currently absorbs half of the
shortening caused by the collision of Eurasia and the Indian subcontinent.

This project in earth sciences research will train students in field mapping and
will enhance the development of ties between the next generation of
geoscientists. This project also fulfills the program objectives of bringing
together leading experts in the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.