* 0209889
* Photodissociation Dynamics of Transient Species
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Hanna Reisler, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 578,600.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Reisler will undertake a detailed study of binary
intermolecular interactions that range from weak covalent to van der Waals
couplings. Systems to be studied include weakly bound dimers of free radicals,
hydrogen-bonded dimers of ammonia with weak pi-acids, and adducts of strong
Lewis acids and bases. Several techniques will be used: pair-correlated velocity
and angular distributions of dissociation fragments and IR-UV
excitation/detection; recently developed resolution and detection sensitivity
schemes will be employed for images of the velocity and angular distributions of
dissociation fragment; and REMPI and photoelectron spectroscopies will be
applied to study the fragment properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
deals with the question of how molecules interact with one another. The results
of such interactions depend on the strength of forces between the interaction
partners. This research uses several experimental techniques to investigate the
reaction dynamics for several select systems that exhibit different strengths of
interactions. The research is directed to obtain detailed quantitative
information of the behavior of interacting molecules and the results will bring
about a better understanding of gas phase chemical reactions. The work will be
conducted with students and postdoctoral research associates. An effective
outreach program is part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;