* 0209877
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Environmentally Friendly Technology for Production and Modification of Cellulose Products
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Surya Kalidindi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0209877&lt;br/&gt;Gobran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: &lt;br/&gt;This award
is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Riad Gobran, Department of
Materials Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Dr.
Houssni El-Saied, Cellulose and Paper Department, The National Research Center,
Cairo, Egypt. Production of cellulose from bacteria (Acetobacter xylinum) is
considered as one of the most beneficial developments in meeting environment
regulations. The objective of this proposed project is to investigate the
potential of the bacteria for the production of cellulose products, on both
laboratory and pilot plant scale. This project is also to explore the production
of cellulose derivatives by using bacteria from the nascent stage of cellulose
production. Further reduction of the production cost and pollutant materials
will be also investigated by applying certain agro-industrial wastes, including
molasses by-product and black liquors of rice straw and sugar cane bagasse
pulping, as cultivation medium for production of bacterial cellulose (BC). The
applications of the produced BC in preparation of cellulose derivatives, high
quality paper, and in health food industries will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: &lt;br/&gt;There is a great amount of
pollution caused by paper and cellulose industry effluents, especially those
produced from non-wood fibrous materials, e.g. rice straw and sugar cane
bagasse. Using new technologies or redesign of products will help meet new
environmental criteria and reduce this pollution. This project is funded by the
Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of
Bioengineering and Environmental Systems.&lt;br/&gt;