* 0209193
* System Level Design of Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Warren Alexander, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

A. Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop and demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;capabilities for analyzing complex
interactions between heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems specification
domains. Three research activities are&lt;br/&gt;being undertaken: (i)
development of domain models for important&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems
requirements domains; (ii) development of semantics&lt;br/&gt;for combining
heterogeneous embedded systems specifications; and (iii)&lt;br/&gt;development
of techniques for predictive analysis of composed&lt;br/&gt;specifications. The
results of this research are being evaluated&lt;br/&gt;using problems from the
Ambient Computing Environments (ACE) research&lt;br/&gt;center at The University
of Kansas / ITTC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facet-based approach being
investigated involves modeling and&lt;br/&gt;integrating heterogeneous
specifications using domain specific&lt;br/&gt;semantic systems. Each system
model, or facet, is defined by&lt;br/&gt;extending a domain. A domain provides a
vocabulary and model of&lt;br/&gt;computation for describing a system from one
perspective. Facets use&lt;br/&gt;domains as modeling semantics and are composed
to describe components&lt;br/&gt;and systems. Specifically, individual models
are composed to define:&lt;br/&gt;(i) multiple aspects of the same component;
and (ii) heterogeneous,&lt;br/&gt;multi-component systems. Projection functions
and morphisms support&lt;br/&gt;specification transformation and composition
using category and&lt;br/&gt;institution theoretic semantics. Special projection
functions, called&lt;br/&gt;interactions, model how and when models from one
domain interact with&lt;br/&gt;models from another. Interactions support
integrated component&lt;br/&gt;analysis and modeling communication between
heterogeneous components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing domain models, domain
interaction models, and prototype&lt;br/&gt;analysis tools demonstrates the
effectiveness of the facet-based&lt;br/&gt;approach for modeling embedded
systems. The first and second research&lt;br/&gt;tasks encompass the development
of domain and domain interaction&lt;br/&gt;models for defining embedded
components. Both functional and&lt;br/&gt;performance constraint models are
being supported. Domain models are&lt;br/&gt;being developed to represent basic
models of computation and&lt;br/&gt;vocabularies for specification. Interaction
models consisting of&lt;br/&gt;projection functions and specification morphisms
are being defined to&lt;br/&gt;move information between domains. The third
research task is the&lt;br/&gt;development of software systems for analyzing
specifications. Two&lt;br/&gt;complimentary approaches are being explored: (i)
formal analysis; and&lt;br/&gt;(ii) simulation. Formal analysis is achieved by
mapping domain&lt;br/&gt;definitions to existing formal analysis environments.
Specification&lt;br/&gt;simulation is achieved by mapping domain definitions to
communicating,&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous simulation
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Challenge problems from the NSF and DARPA
sponsored Ambient Computing&lt;br/&gt;Environments (ACE) research infrastructure
at ITTC are being used to&lt;br/&gt;evaluate ongoing research. ACE provides an
environment where&lt;br/&gt;computing moves seamlessly with individuals within a
physical&lt;br/&gt;environment. ACE is implemented as a collection of highly
mobile,&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous embedded systems that perform tasks including
personal&lt;br/&gt;data management, control of robotic devices, and various
sensor&lt;br/&gt;related tasks The results of this research have widespread
impact on&lt;br/&gt;the research and industrial communities. The Rosetta systems
level&lt;br/&gt;specification language is being used for domain models,
interaction&lt;br/&gt;definitions and system specifications for embedded
systems. Rosetta&lt;br/&gt;is being standardized by the Accellera CAD standards
organization as a&lt;br/&gt;next-generation systems level design language.
Successful results&lt;br/&gt;from this research activity are being disseminated
as a part of the&lt;br/&gt;base Rosetta domain system and are being integrated
into the&lt;br/&gt;collection of standard Rosetta domain
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;