* 0209641
* SGER:  Intelligent Computer-Assisted Instruction: The Benjamin Banneker Project
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Chin-Tang Liu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* WALTER C. ERMLER
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,250.00

A one-year study of computer-assisted instruction in the third grade classroom
at two urban schools is proposed. This project will use advanced technology to
enhance mathematics and science instruction in elementary classrooms with
computer activities that allow students to use the information problem-solving
process. The Benjamin Banneker Project, named for a famous African American
mathematician and scientist, involves the design and use of computer software
that allows students the opportunity to engage in culturally relevant
simulations, and an intelligent tutoring system will monitor their progress. The
main objectives are to design and field-test culturally relevant computer
simulations and to provide professional development to support computer usage in
the classroom. To accomplish this goal, the Temple University PI/Co-PI team of
mathematics, science, early childhood, and social policy teacher researchers
will collaborate with software developers and elementary teachers to carry out
this one-year project. During Phase I two engineers will design the software
which will be pilot-tested with third graders. The software will provide
students with grade-level specific simulations and intelligent tutoring. During
Phase II the PI/Co-PI team will provide professional development activities for
teachers participating in this study to help them learn how to use software to
solve and integrate technology into culturally relevant lessons. The project
will be conducted in two urban, predominantly African American, charter schools.
In Phase III research (classroom observations) and project evaluation will occur
to measure the effectiveness of the project. Findings will be reported to
refereed journals and presented at conferences. This project has the potential
to "hook" the interest of African American students by contextualizing
mathematics and science computer tasks with the culture of the community.