* 0209651
* The Next Generation Organic Materials Oligoacenes, Heteroacenes and Cyclacenes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Fred Wudl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 486,000.00

A radically new class of organic materials, the protected oligoacenes and
polyacenes are proposed. Unlike the much-explored conjugated polymers, these
unsaturated macromolecules will be electrical conductors without the need of a
dopant; they will be they first of the oligocenes, the cyclacenes may exhibit
even more exotic properties, such as superconductivity at higher temperatures.
The proposed syntheses are relatively short, so that large amounts of materials
will be available for the evaluation of physical properties and device (FET,
LED, photodiode, etc.) fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic electronic
materials have just entered the commercial engineering mainstream in the form of
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodiodes (plastic solar cells) and thin film
transistors (TFTs). The LEDs produce brighter and cooler light than standard
incandescent lamps wand will have a large impact on society in terms of energy
savings both in manufacturing and in use. The manufacture of organic TFTs will
also be much more energy-efficient than the equivalent, current, silicon-based
devices. Another important societal benefit of the research proposed here will
be the considerably advance in the education of the graduate and undergraduate
students supported by these funds. Development of these organic electronic
devices will provide a truly interdisciplinary educational foundation for our
future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;