* 0209246
* NER: Separtation of Nano-Sized Aquatic Particles by Electrically Assisted Tangential Flow Filtration:  System Evaluation and Metal Speciation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Chin-Pao Huang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 08/31/2004
* USD 83,900.00

&lt;br/&gt;0209246&lt;br/&gt;Huang &lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative NSF 01-157,
category NER.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquatic particulates, regardless of their
chemical composition, have two very important properties that are closely
related to water quality: particle size and surface charge. Chemical species,
e.g., metal ions, are readily accumulated at the solid-water interface, which
can affect the assessment (or determination) of "soluble" concentrations of
chemical species in waters. Currently, the "insoluble" and "soluble" chemical
species are determined by filtering water samples through 0.45-um filters;
things that pass through the filter are "soluble" and things that are retained
by the filter are considered insoluble".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Accurate
assessment of "soluble" or total chemical concentrations in waters requires an
effective solid-water separation technique. As water quality standard becomes
increasingly stringent, demand for effective separation of nano-sized particles
from waters or wastewaters will increase. This will over-burden the current
filtration practice of filtration with 0.45-um filters and render it
ineffective. The proposed research project will test two hypotheses: (1)
Electrically assisted tangential flow (EATF) filter can perform independently of
membrane selection; (2) The distribution of metal ions in natural waters is
affected not only by the particle size but also by the surface charge condition
of naturally occurring particulates. The following specific objectives are to be
achieved with carefully designed laboratory experiments: (1) design and
evaluation of the performance of an electrically assisted tangential flow
filtration system; (2) separation of selected nano-sized aquatic particulates
both naturally occurring particles and pathogenic microorganisms, exemplified by
Cryptosporidium, by EATF filtration, and (3) elucidation of the effect of
surface charge and particle size of naturally occurring particulates on the
distribution and speciation of selected meal ions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success
of this project will (1) contribute to theoretical development of EATF
filtration process, (2) lead to the development of an innovative process for the
separation of aquatic particles according to their size and surface charge
conditions, (3) gain insight into the effect of particle size and surface charge
conditions on the speciation of metals in natural waters, and (4) train two
doctoral students with a multi-disciplinary program. The proposed research has
the potential to eliminate or minimize membrane-fouling, promote reuse of
electronic chip processing wastewater, and enable nano-scaled metal
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;