* 0209304
* Collaborative Research:   Three-Dimensional Numerical Investigation of Density Currents
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Paul Fischer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

The oceanic thermohaline circulation is strongly affected by
localized&lt;br/&gt;dense-water formation in high-latitude oceans. Such dense
water masses&lt;br/&gt;are released into the large-scale circulation in the form
of ocean bottom&lt;br/&gt;density currents mostly from localized regions (e.g.,
Denmark Strait,&lt;br/&gt;Strait of Gibraltar for the Mediterranean overflow,
Bab el Mandep Strait&lt;br/&gt;for the Red Sea overflow). Because of the small
space and time scales&lt;br/&gt;required to resolve their dynamics, such density
currents form the&lt;br/&gt;``bottle neck'' of the thermohaline circulation
investigation. Despite their&lt;br/&gt;importance, we have a limited
understanding of the dynamics of bottom&lt;br/&gt;density currents, and at
present, the oceanic density currents are poorly&lt;br/&gt;represented in global
climate simulations. The main goal of this proposal&lt;br/&gt;is to enhance the
understanding of the dynamics of ocean bottom density&lt;br/&gt;currents from
laboratory scale, to geophysical scale, through three-
dimensional,&lt;br/&gt;nonhydrostatic numerical simulations. The investigators
accomplish this&lt;br/&gt;in three stages. First, benchmark a parallel high-
order spectral element&lt;br/&gt;Navier-Stokes solver, Nek5000, by reproducing
existing laboratory results&lt;br/&gt;of bottom density currents by direct
numerical simulations. Second,&lt;br/&gt;explore dynamics for which there are
few or no laboratory results, in&lt;br/&gt;particular dynamics of bottom density
currents protruding into a stratified&lt;br/&gt;fluid, and in a rotating
environment. Third, bridge the gap between&lt;br/&gt;laboratory scale and
geophysical scale by using large eddy simulations.&lt;br/&gt;Geophysical scale
calculations are configured for the Red Sea overflow,&lt;br/&gt;and confirmed
with data from the Red Sea Overflow Experiment. Various&lt;br/&gt;metrics are
used to quantify density current dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variation of
solar heating with latitude, and other factors, drive the&lt;br/&gt;so-called
``thermohaline'' circulation in the ocean, which is closely&lt;br/&gt;linked to
the role that the ocean plays in climate dynamics. This
complex&lt;br/&gt;geophysical problem, with its range of scales, physical,
mathematical and&lt;br/&gt;computational constraints can only be approached
through an orchestrated&lt;br/&gt;effort involving cross-disciplinary expertise.
The investigators conduct&lt;br/&gt;physically-guided numerical simulations,
quantify dynamical behavior of&lt;br/&gt;ocean density currents, and describe
the impact of density currents on&lt;br/&gt;the climate. The investigators
integrate this research project with&lt;br/&gt;education of three graduate
students and contribute to the training of&lt;br/&gt;US technical workforce for
the 21st century. This research project&lt;br/&gt;enhances the scientific
understanding of oceanic density currents, and&lt;br/&gt;helps improve the
representation of ocean density currents in global&lt;br/&gt;climate simulations
and contribute to the climate change research.