* 0209405
* Conference: Support for SRBR Meeting, Jacksonville, Florida, May 22-25, 2002
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2003
* Rae Silver, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2003
* USD 16,100.00

The Society for Research on Biological Rhythms is now the largest society in
the world &lt;br/&gt;for those interested in biological rhythms, and this award
supports their biannual &lt;br/&gt;meeting. Biological rhythms are an important
feature of life on this planet, and so the &lt;br/&gt;topic has major
importance, and there have been rapid recent advances in
&lt;br/&gt;understanding underlying mechanisms of rhythmic biological activity.
&lt;br/&gt; The conference is highly interdisciplinary in the approaches
discussed, including &lt;br/&gt;molecular biology, physiology and behavior,
computational neuroscience and &lt;br/&gt;neuroendocrinology, and in topics
spanning subsecond oscillations in motor systems, &lt;br/&gt;intertidal rhythms
in invertebrates, reproductive cycles, human sleep and shift-work
&lt;br/&gt;schedules. The format is an excellent combination of lectures,
workshops, and poster &lt;br/&gt;sessions, emphasizing interactions between
workers from different fields, and women &lt;br/&gt;are well represented, along
with the international community. The biannual timing allows &lt;br/&gt;a good
perspective, and this year will cover some of the most exciting current issues,
&lt;br/&gt;such as the recent discovery of a link between the circadian clock
gene Per (from the &lt;br/&gt;fruitfly) and a genetically controlled sleep
pattern in humans. &lt;br/&gt; The potential impact of this conference is high
in the fields of neuroendocrinology and &lt;br/&gt;behavioral neuroscience,
because of the focused discussions shaping future work, the &lt;br/&gt;potential
to develop new cross-disciplinary collaborations, and the likely interactions
and &lt;br/&gt;introductions essential to career development of young
investigators. Funding from NSF &lt;br/&gt;will be important to help students,
postdocs, and young researchers without access to &lt;br/&gt;other funding to
attend the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;