* 0209478
* Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education (EDGE): A Transition Program for Women in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Rhonda Hughes, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 03/31/2006
* USD 115,000.00

This award supports several aspects of the second phase of the EDGE Program,
"Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education." Core funding for the first phase of
the program was provided by the National Science Foundation from 1998 to 2001,
with additional support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the National
Security Agency. The goal of the program is to increase the number of women and
minority students who successfully complete graduate programs in the
mathematical sciences, by strengthening the ability of the targeted student
population to successfully negotiate the transition from undergraduate to
graduate education in mathematics, and to succeed in their respective graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The EDGE Program has two basic components: an
intensive summer program prior to graduate school enrollment, and a follow-up
mentoring program. In the first phase of the program, the summer component
alternated between Bryn Mawr and Spelman Colleges. The second phase of the EDGE
Program will&lt;br/&gt;consist of three major
components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[1] a centrally administered program with a
core staff consisting of the Co-Directors Rhonda Hughes of Bryn Mawr College and
Sylvia Bozeman of Spelman College, as well as an Administrative Assistant. The
core staff would maintain data on all EDGE participants, manage advertising and
selection of participants, select host sites for the summer program, and
coordinate the follow-up mentoring program;&lt;br/&gt;[2] a portable design for
the EDGE Summer Program. By involving a core group of select institutions as
EDGE sites, the program will be made more visible, it will reach a wider
audience of students, and the number of undergraduate and graduate programs
aware of the goals of the program would necessarily
&lt;br/&gt;expand.&lt;br/&gt;[3] a biennial EDGE Symposium. This event would
include an EDGE Reunion of past participants, as well as a forum to promote the
advancement of women, and in particular minority women, involving a broader
segment of the mathematics community. The first symposium will be hosted by
Spelman College in 2003.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award will specifically
support several aspects of the proposed activities: travel funds for prospective
Local Coordinators, who will participate in the expansion of the program to
other sites; support of the EDGE Symposium, as well as smaller reunions for past
participants who have strongly expressed the need to return to the program in
the year following their participation; participant support costs for two
"returning" women who have interrupted their academic careers for a variety of
reasons and wish to attend a graduate program in mathematics; and consultant
support for an improved and expanded web site.