* 0209272
* Spatio-Temporal Emergence of Morphological Patterns in Liquid Crystalline Polymer and Rigid-Rod Polymer Systems during Solidification
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Thein Kyu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The present proposal entails experimental and theoretical elucidation of (i)
dynamics of hollow fiber (or nano-tube) formation during solidification of main
chain liquid crystalline polymers (MCLCP) and/or rigid-rod polymer solution,
(ii) dynamics of nano-porous membranes of monomeric mesognes during pattern
polymerization, (iii) dynamics of microfibril formation during dry-jet spinning,
and (iv) hybrid-composites. The well-established time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau
TDGL (Model C) will be applied in conjunction with the advection term for the
tracking of solvent evaporation and flow. The physical significanace of all
parameters pertaining to the governing non-linear reaction-diffusion equations
will be clarified, and their predictive capabilitieis will be demonstrated. The
dynamics of pattern formation will be investigated by comparison with the recent
experimental observations made in dry-jet and/or electro-spinning. Recognizing
the possible control of domain morphology and improved understanding of
mesogenic interactions, the proposed study will be extended to microporous
membranes and nano-composites. The theoretical scheme proposed here demonstrates
the spation-temporal evolution of the order parameters (such as density,
concentration and orientation fluctuations) based on the local free energy and
non-local gradient (diffusive) terms. The numerical simulation further
illustrates the emergence of the local internal structures during
solidification. Moreover, this methodology can applied to elucidating the
microfibrillation dynamics in spinning of semicrystalline polymers and hydrogen
bonding systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is encouraging to discern unique
morphological features encompassing (i) nano-tube formation, (ii) concentric
rings/spiral-breakup leading to microfibrillation and (iii) viscous fingering
patterns. The observed phenomenon of spiral breakup is one of the most debated
topics in the no-linear dynamics of excitable media and biological systems.
Furthermore, it clearly demonstrates a new approach to the decades-old problem
of predicting morphology development in solution-spun fibers such as rough
skin/core structures, collapsed kidney shape morphology, and microfibrils. This
methodology has potential for modern technological applications including
electro-spinning of nano-fibers/tubes, microporous membranes through pattern
photopolymerization induced phase separation, and nano-hybrid composites. It is
anticipated that these microporous membranes have widespread applications usch
as fuel cell membranes, filtration, and drug delivery. Furthermore, some of the
simutaion programs have been written in C++ and can be shown on live-mode with
the aid of an LCD projector. Such interactive programs are proven to be useful
for classroom teaching and demonstration to the public.&lt;br/&gt;