* 0209754
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Genomics Approaches to Finding Transcriptional Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Philip Benfey, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,242,829.00

Transcription factor networks are the genetic blueprint by which plants and
other organisms orchestrate the proper activation and timing of gene expression.
A first step in deciphering transcriptional networks is to determine the
expression pattern of all genes at cell-type resolution. To accomplish this
goal, this research project will develop a new genomics approach, which involves
sorting cells from transgenic lines in which a fluorescent protein is used as a
cell-specific marker. The sorted cell populations will then be used as a source
of RNA that is hybridized to microarrays. The project focuses on genes expressed
in the Arabidopsis root, which is a tractable model because of its simple and
highly organized structure. The gene networks in question will be primarily
those that involve DNA-binding transcription factors. The regulatory regions of
these genes will be fused to fluorescent proteins to determine the ability of
these sequences to confer tissue-specific expression. In addition, translational
fusions of the same DNA binding factors will be made, enabling an analysis of
post-transcriptional events that affect protein localization. Bioinformatics
tools will be developed that refine expression patterns based on multiple
sources of data. These analysis tools will be made available through links at
the Benfey lab website (http://www.biology.duke.edu/benfeylab/at2010.html) at
Duke University. The list of all transcription factors with their root cell-type
specific expression profiles will be made available in regular updates of this
site. Thus, the research will determine the specific expression domains of a
vast number of genes, which is an important first step in determining gene
function. The research will also provide the input for emerging analysis tools
that can decipher the controls of gene regulation based on detailed expression
patterns. This will help establish the function of transcription factors in
terms of how they affect the transcription of other genes. &lt;br/&gt; To
harness the power of gene function discoveries, it is critical to find ways to
gain greater control over the expression of genes. Targeted modification of gene
expression is likely to be one of the most important ways to improve plant
performance. This research will identify a large number of genes with highly
specific expression patterns whose specific regulatory "code" will be of
significant use in many areas of plant research and improvement. The detailed
information on where and when many genes are expressed and the proteins that
control their expression will help advance the understanding of how all plants
control their growth and development. Another important part of the project will
be to train the next generation of scientists to integrate computational
approaches into plant biology. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate actively in the research. Duke and NYU have very diverse student
populations with excellent representation of minority and women students. The
PIs also will participate actively in outreach efforts such as programs for
local high school teachers.