* 0209686
* Arabidopsis 2010: RUI: "Functional Genomics of Alpha-Helical Scaffold Proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana"
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* David Kerk, Point Loma Nazarene College
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 637,060.00

An enhanced understanding of protein-protein interactions is important to the
successful elucidation of multiprotein pathways, which mediate such vital
processes as the response of cells to their environment, metabolic regulation,
and development. Alpha-helical scaffolding domains form extended surfaces for
protein interactions by stacking together multiple small repeat units. In this
project, computer-assisted bioinformatic techniques will be used to predict
alpha helical scaffold domains encoded by the fully sequenced genome of the
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Lines of mutant plants will then be obtained
where these genes have been knocked out, and the effects of this change upon the
function of the plants will be assessed by testing their growth, gene
expression, and biochemical activity. Proteins, which interact with these
candidate scaffold domains, will be detected by their ability to bind to them in
a yeast or bacterial protein interaction assay system. The identified
interaction proteins will then be analyzed by a similar series of computational
and plant functional tests. The goal of the 2010 Project is to discover the
function of every encoded protein of Arabidopsis by that target date. This
project will provide the plant research community with an inventory of
Arabidopsis scaffolding proteins, their protein interaction partners, functional
hypotheses, and a set of characterized mutant seed stocks. This project will be
executed primarily by undergraduate students, who will receive hands on training
in cutting edge research techniques. More information can be obtained at the
project web site: http://www.ptloma.edu/Biology/Grants/NSF 2010 Project.htm ,
where data will be posted as the project progresses.