* 0209915
* NER:   Microscopic Modeling of the Surfactant Mediated Reactive Assembly of Nanostructured Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,09/30/2003
* Sanat Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 09/30/2003
* USD 75,000.00

Microscopic Modeling of the Surfactant Mediated&lt;br/&gt;Reactive Assembly of
Nanostructured Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sanat K.
Kumar&lt;br/&gt;Department of Materials Science and Engineering
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Department of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania
State&lt;br/&gt;Univ., University Park,
PA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evangelos Manias&lt;br/&gt;Department of
Materials Science and Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State
Univ.&lt;br/&gt;University Park, PA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Executive
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop highly integrated
multiscale simulation tools to model the surfactant-mediated synthesis of
nanomaterials. The proposed research will focus on a prototypical example of
this methodology, the synthesis of ordered arrays of metal nanodots. The
development of the proposed multiscale simulation approach is essential for two
reasons. First, these synthesis methods involve reactions and self-assembly
which span a variety of length [and hence time] scales, from the molecular [A
and fs] to the macroscopic [m and s]. Second, since current synthesis routes
were developed by empirical methods, predictive strategies for creating
materials with desired structures are missing. This is, perhaps, the biggest
bottleneck to the broad-based use of these novel materials. As a first step
towards providing a predictive understanding of these syntheses, in this NER we
shall model molecules as catenated strings of structureless beads so as to
examine (a) if multiscale methods can be developed to successfully span from
local, nanoscopic length and time scales to the macroscopic and (b) more
importantly, if these coarse grained models can qualitatively capture the
essential physics in these situations and identify the rate limiting mechanisms
in each synthetic method. If this exploratory research is successful, then, the
long term goal will be to include the critical molecular-level details so as to
gain quantitative insights into synthesis strategies. These will directly aid in
the development of new, generally applicable paradigms for synthesizing
nanostructured materials which are relevant to a variety of interdisciplinary
contexts that cross the boundaries of physics, chemistry, biology, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;