* 0210777
* NIRT: Combinatorial Engineering of Nanomachines: Building Novel Membrane Proteins via De Novo Design and Directed Evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Mark Goulian, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,395,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the announcement NSF 01-157.

The overall objectives of this proposal are to: a) develop novel methods and
tools for design and engineering of membrane proteins and protein assemblies
based upon the integration of sophisticated computational chemistry techniques
with in vitro directed molecular evolution; b) engineer novel membrane pores
based upon the bacterial porin OmpF for controlling membrane vesicle
permeability; c) engineer novel membrane fusion machines based upon influenza
virus hemagglutinin for regulating bilayer fusion and membrane protein display;
d) further the understanding of the physical and chemical properties underlying
membrane protein structure and activity; e) train science and engineering
students in these interdisciplinary nanoscience research methods. To incorporate
stable proteins that span the ~4nm thickness of the lipid bilayer and that can
mediate enzymatic functions or changes in conformation requires control of
protein structure at the nanometer (and sub-nanometer) scale. In their proposal,
novel membrane proteins will be constructed by combining rational design,
partially random design via combinatorial libraries, and directed evolution. Two
different systems will be focused on as starting points: bacterial porins, which
are large permeability membrane pores, and the influenza virus protein
hemagglutinin, which is a pH inducible membrane fusogen. A great deal of
structural and functional data has been accumulated for both of these systems,
and enormous potential exists for using them to build useful membrane based
devices. Channels with altered and regulated permeability could be used to
selectively deliver compounds to the ambient environment or selectively
internalize and process external substrates. Similarly, gated fusogens could be
used to control mixing between vesicles containing two different reactants and
could also be engineered to act as switches that regulate the display of protein
domains. Both gated pores and fusogens could also be incorporated into synthetic
lipid assemblies in order to construct new "smart" materials, whose bulk
elasticity and/or permeability are modulated in response to environmental
signals. Beyond the specific utility of the proteins that they will engineer,
the tools that they will develop and the new membrane proteins that emerge will
provide valuable insight into the relatively primitive field of membrane protein
design. The engineering of soluble proteins has burgeoned into an enormous field
that is moving rapidly and is far ahead of the corresponding field for membrane
proteins. In particular, the powerful tool of directed evolution, which has
given rise to a wide range of new soluble proteins, has not been applied to the
design of membrane-active proteins.