* 0210750
* NER:  Dynamics of Quantum Control with Dissipation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Bruce Barrett, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 07/31/2004
* USD 58,000.00

his proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF01-157.
Quantum&lt;br/&gt;computing offers the prospect of computational power far
beyond that&lt;br/&gt;which could be obtained merely by scaling current
technologies to&lt;br/&gt;ever-smaller scales. However, recent "proof-of-
principle"&lt;br/&gt;realizations of quantum computers do not appear to be
amenable to&lt;br/&gt;large-scale integration, like current solid-state
technology. One&lt;br/&gt;of the outstanding unsolved problems in materials
theory is&lt;br/&gt;understanding the feasibility of a solid-state quantum bit
(qubit),&lt;br/&gt;the fundamental building block of a quantum computer. The
proposed &lt;br/&gt;research will study the possibility to use a pair of
extremely&lt;br/&gt;small semiconducting islands (with diameters less than
20&lt;br/&gt;nanometers) as a solid-state qubit. The dynamics of
quantum&lt;br/&gt;control in this system will be investigated
theoretically,&lt;br/&gt;including the coupling to the environment, which tends
to "collapse&lt;br/&gt;the wavefunction" of the qubit. This problem is an
example of a&lt;br/&gt;very general problem in quantum mechanics, that of
tunneling in the&lt;br/&gt;presence of a dissipative environment. It is closely
related to an&lt;br/&gt;analogous problem in nuclear physics, the decay of a
superdeformed&lt;br/&gt;nucleus. Progress in understanding the proposed
mathematical model&lt;br/&gt;is thus likely to impact not only nanoscience and
quantum&lt;br/&gt;computing, but also nuclear physics (femtoscience).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a testbed for the solid-state qubit, it is proposed
that such a&lt;br/&gt;double quantum dot can be operated as an electron pump
with a&lt;br/&gt;quantized electrical current. Because the operating frequency
of&lt;br/&gt;the proposed electron pump would be much greater than that of
&lt;br/&gt;previous quantized current sources, it could be significant
for&lt;br/&gt;metrology. The accuracy of the current quantization in this set-
up&lt;br/&gt;is a measure of the fidelity of the qubit under repeated logical
&lt;br/&gt;manipulations. This research is cofunded by the Divisions
of&lt;br/&gt;Materials Research and Physics.&lt;br/&gt;