* 0210258
* NIRT -  Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Investigations of Fluid Interactions/Transport in Nanodomains and Around Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2007
* W. Grant McGimpsey, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 03/31/2007
* USD 622,350.00

This grant is made under the Nanoscale Sciences and Engineering initiative, NSF
01-157, category NIRT, to address the growing interest in developing
manufacturing processes and systems that involve fluids at the nanoscale. There
also is continuing evidence that fluid phenomena that occur at the nanoscale are
unlike macroscopic behavior. For example, some hydrophobic channels will permit
liquid water to exist, while only slightly narrower channels will only permit
water vapor to exist. Similar phenomena are expected to manifest when evaluating
fluids other than water. The proposed experimental, theoretical and
computational investigations will focus on the confinement and transport of
water, alcohols, amines, and other interesting organic compounds in
nanochannels. We will investigate both rectangular and cylindrical geometries
with length scales from 1 nm to 1000 nm, and diameters, or widths, from 0.1 nm
to 15 nm (or even larger). Surface materials will span the regime from
hydrophobic to hydrophilic, considering amorphous and crystalline inorganic
materials, and polymeric materials. Additionally, transport rates of fluids
through nanochannels will be evaluated. It is anticipated that fluid flow
properties and transport rates will be governed by fluid-surface interactions to
a far greater extent than observed in macroscopic channels. The investigations
at WPI will be complemented by research on flow behavior of nanoparticles in
conventional, rotating and circulating fluidized beds performed by the NIRT
group at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
generic geometry of the nanofluidic system and fluids to be considered are
representative of important manufacturing systems and processes. The outcomes of
the research have significance to nano-rheology, nano-lubrication, control of
nanosurface properties, modeling and simulation at the nanoscale, lab-on-a-chip
technologies, and other nanofluidic devices. Biosystems and environmental
processes that involve nanofluidic transport through membranes and channels will
also benefit from the expected outcomes. The research will be performed by an
interdisciplinary team of PIs and graduate students at WPI that will collaborate
with the NIRT group at NJIT. Additionally, we have collaborations with
researchers in Taiwan, Germany, and Canada that will be of benefit to this
effort. This investigation also has a strong educational component and will take
advantage of WPI's project-based educational system that requires each
undergraduate to conduct a technical team-project (called the Major Qualifying
Project, or MQP) and a team-project involving Society/Technology interactions
(called the Interactive Qualifying Project, or IQP). Each MQP or IQP is
equivalent to a three-course workload. The integration of undergraduate
education and research will be pursued with MQPs to be conducted by teams of
undergraduates from the three departments where the three PIs reside. In
addition, the societal impacts of nanosciences and nanotechnologies will be
pursued by a team of undergraduates conducting IQPs. These undergraduate
projects will provide means for educating young scientists and engineers in new
emerging technologies in interaction with an interdisciplinary research team.
&lt;br/&gt;