* 0210579
* NIRT: Carbon Nanopipes for Nanofluidic Devices and In-situ Fluid Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Haim Bau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,734,307.00

The proposal was submitted under Solicitation NSF 01-157 "Nanoscale Science and
Engineering," under the Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT)
category. Carbon nanotubes (nanopipes) offer a unique opportunity for
fundamental studies of fluid transport in the spatial regime between molecular
and continuum behavior. This research includes: (a) fabrication,
characterization, and modification of carbon nanopipes, (b) performance of
chemical and fluidic experiments, and (c) fabrication of experimental setups
that would allow transport and measurements of various liquid flows in a
controlled fashion. Both actuation and imaging of the fluid are done in a
transmission electron microscope, and offer a unique opportunity for studying
the behavior of fluids in nanosize channels at conditions corresponding to sub-,
near- or super-critical regions of the thermodynamic diagram. The hydrothermal
growth technique will be optimized to produce desired tube structure and
geometry (internal/external diameter, length, and shape) for incorporation into
experimental devices that allow the transmission of liquids through nanotubes.
Fluid behavior in channels ranging from 5 to 100 nm in diameter will be
investigated, both by following the dynamic response of visualized fluid
interfaces to external thermal stimuli and by well controlled experiments, in
which pure liquids and liquids laden with macromolecules will be transmitted
through the tubes. The chemistry of high-temperature interactions between carbon
nanopipes and aqueous fluids will be studied. Chemical modification,
metallization, and opening of nanopipes will be done using bipolar
electrochemistry. The experimental work will be supplemented by modeling based
on parallel molecular dynamics simulations. It is believed that the proposed
research will advance the fundamental understanding needed for the design and
fabrication of a new generation of nanofluidic devices, such as nano-pumps,
chemical factories on a chip, biochips, and nano-analytical systems. The
research team will also coordinate and expand the existing education and
outreach activities of the individual investigators into a cohesive and wide-
ranging program. The work involves investigators at Drexel, the University of
Pennsylvania, and the University of Illinois at Chicago. NSF support is being
provided by the Chemical and Transport Systems Division and the Design,
Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate,
and by the Chemistry Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.