* 0210968
* SGER:   Molecular Design of Intelligent Sensors for Selected Chemical Warfare Agents using Support Vector Machines
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Omowunmi Sadik, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 05/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This SGER grant is awarded to Professors Omowunmi Sadik and Walker Land of SUNY
Binghamton by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program (MPS) to apply
Support Vector Machines (a computational intelligence technique) to analytical
data on chemical warfare simulants. The analytical data originates from a hybrid
sensor based on gas chromatography coupled with microarrays of conducting
polymer sensing elements, a so-called electronic nose. The data from these
arrays is complex and is appropriately studied using advanced pattern
recognition techniques. This collaboration connects an analytical chemist with a
computer scientist. The exploratory aspect is the opportunity for analytical
chemists to take advantage of the advent of the new computational intelligence
method, which has been successfully applied by the coPI to breast cancer
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;So called "electronic nose" devices have the
potential to serve as sensitive and selective detectors of mixtures of
chemicals. There are many applications of sensors, including homeland security,
ascertaining food quality, environmental monitoring, and production process and
transportation engineering. More sophisticated data analysis is required to
bring next generation sensors into fruition. The application of computer
intelligence methods is promising in this regard.