* 0210178
* DDIG: The Effects of Economic and Cultural Capital on Perceptions of Environmental Risk and Quality of Life among Rural Industrial Community Members in Southwest China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Stevan Harrell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 16,070.00

Since the economic reforms of the late 1970s, industries located in rural areas
(township and village enterprises, TVEs) have accounted for a growing percentage
of China's Gross Domestic Product. However, because of a lack of appropriate
technology, proper pollution monitoring and sufficient capital, TVEs emit 60% of
China's carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide and suspended particulates. These
pollutants lead to increased levels of emphysema, asthma, bronchitis and lung
cancer in China's rural areas. At the same time that TVE laborers and community
residents are faced with relatively increased environmental risk, including
harmful effects on soil, water, air, plants and animals, they are also
experiencing a marked improvement in their material standard of living. This
research project, conducted by a Ph.D. student in anthropology at the University
of Washington, will be conducted in Futian Township, a small industrial
community located in China's Sichuan province. The student will perform basic
tests for air and water quality, and collect data on community perceptions of
quality of life and environmental risk based on survey questionnaires and
ethnographic data. Drawing upon the theoretical approaches of political ecology
and environmental risk perception, these data will be used to test hypotheses
regarding perceptions of environmental risk. The study will allow general
extrapolations to be made about similar rural industrial communities throughout
China and in other countries where rapid development coincides with
environmental degradation, and will contribute to understanding those factors
that may mitigate or exacerbate environmental degradation.