* 0210790
* Strongly Correlated Low-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Matthew P.A. Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 381,000.00

New growth and fabrication techniques, together with chemical and electrostatic
doping, are enabling an unprecedented control and manipulation of electrons in
solids. Examples range from chemically synthesized semiconductor nanowires to
doped buckeyball crystals. In many cases of interest the motion of itinerant
electrons is intentionally restricted by sample geometry or by strong lattice
commensurability effects. Under these conditions, correlation effects are
strongly enhanced and transitions into "localized" Mott or Wigner crystal states
are possible. Itinerant electrons proximate to such localized phases often
exhibit unusual behavior, in apparent conflict with standard Fermi liquid
theory. Disentangling the subtle correlation effects and identifying the
underlying physics in such technologically important systems presents a
formidable challenge.

In this theoretical award, the quantum physics of correlated electrons will be
explored by focusing on the behavior near, or even in, the localized regime.
Specifically, the following will be studied:

Transport in carbon nanotubes proximate to superconductors, studying the
interplay between Luttinger liquid correlations and superconducting proximity
effects;

Studying unidirectional charge density waves (stripe phases) in single- and bi-
layer quantum Hall systems at higher Landau levels. The goal is to describe the
interstripe quasi-particle dynamics in such phases by exploiting the connections
between chiral Luttinger liquid and composite Fermion approaches;

Continuing to develop a theoretical framework for describing the pseudogap
regime of the cuprates - and Mott insulators more generally - by quantum
disordering a superconductor via a proliferation of vortices. In particular, the
physics and implications of the 2D Bose metal," a normal (non-super) fluid of 2D
quantum bosons, will be explored;

Obtaining and analyzing microscopic models of 2D electrons with large ring
exchange interactions which exhibit fractionalized quantum phases. O finterest
are the statistics of the particles and the experimental implications of the
topological order. %%% New growth and fabrication techniques, together with
chemical and electrostatic doping, are enabling an unprecedented control and
manipulation of electrons in solids. Examples range from chemically synthesized
semiconductor nanowires to doped buckeyball crystals. In many cases of interest
the motion of itinerant electrons is intentionally restricted by sample geometry
or by strong lattice commensurability effects. Under these conditions,
correlation effects are strongly enhanced and transitions into "localized" Mott
or Wigner crystal states are possible. Itinerant electrons proximate to such
localized phases often exhibit unusual behavior, in apparent conflict with
standard Fermi liquid theory. Disentangling the subtle correlation effects and
identifying the underlying physics in such technologically important systems
presents a formidable challenge.

In this theoretical award, the quantum physics of correlated electrons will be
explored by focusing on the behavior near, or even in, the localized regime. The
results will be of great fundamental interest and will also influence the
development of devices based on these phenomena. ***

