* 0210449
* NIRT: Epitaxial Magnetic Oxide Structures for Nanoscale Spin Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Xiaoqing Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,577,000.00

0210449&lt;br/&gt;Eom&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative, Program
Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NIRT category. The proposal focuses on
understanding intrinsic phenomena governing spin transport at the nanoscale, and
the development of new methods for its manipulation for future spin-controlled,
magneto-electronic, devices. It addresses one of the most exciting aspects of
current research on next-generation electronic devices: the manipulation of
spin, rather than only electrical charge. The advantages of these
magnetoelectronic devices include nonvolatility, faster switching in static
memory elements, and higher density due to a simpler device structure. These
issues become even more important as technology drives device sizes toward the
nanoscale, where new fundamental physical effects emerge that alter spin
transport, as well as high-frequency dynamics and switching times. &lt;br/&gt;An
understanding of these issues at the nanoscale requires single-crystal magnetic
heterostructures with atomically-sharp interfaces, patterned to nanometer
dimensions. This proposal probes nanoscale spin transport phenomena in epitaxial
magnetic oxide nanostructures grown with atomic-layer control, whose magnetic,
electronic, and interfacial properties are tuned at will. Layers with defined
electronic, magnetic, and morphological characteristics positioned with atomic-
layer control in epitaxial systems are used to address crucial fundamental
questions in magnetic nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;This research program consists
of 1) design, growth, and characterization of epitaxial magnetic oxide
heterostructures with atomic layer control by pulsed laser deposition with in-
situ real-time structural analysis 2) high-resolution and analytical TEM to
determine atomic structure and electronic properties of the interfaces; 3)
nanoscale patterning of novel magnetic heterostructures below 50 nm; 4) scanning
probe measurements of topography and local electronic properties; 5) education
and outreach efforts with a focus on introducing young people to modern,
multidisciplinary science and technology, using the research direction as a
vehicle. &lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary, multiuniversity/industry team
consists of members working in Materials Science, Physics, Electrical
Engineering, and device development. Research, education, and outreach all
follow the theme of nanoscale structures, novel phenomena, and spin transport
control. This work will build a scientific foundation for the understanding of
new phenomena in nanoscale spin-controlled devices. The PIs industrial and
multidisciplinary interactions will be very beneficial in advancing research as
well as in educating students. This study will also provide fundamental
guidelines in the atomic-scale control of nanoscale systems such as
ferroelectrics and oxide-semiconductor integration that are important for next-
generation technology.&lt;br/&gt;