* 0210002
* Ontological, Epistemological, Linguistic and Pedagogical Considerations of Language and Science Literacy: Empowering Research and Informing Instruction;  Canada, September 2002
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Brian Hand, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* WALTER C. ERMLER
* 04/30/2003
* USD 63,000.00

A conference on "Ontological, Epistemological, Linguistic and Pedagogical
Considerations of Language and Science Literacy: Empowering Research and
Informing Instruction" is proposed. The emphases of the conference are (1) the
development of theoretical framework for understanding and developing language-
science literacy connections and (2) establishing a group of researchers
interested in classroom-based research projects focused on critical, practice-
derived issues language and science literacy issues. A premise is that research
needs to focus on determining what science literacy practices work in the
classroom and build explanations of why these work. The conference will address
(1) clarification of the roles of speaking, reading, writing, and listening in
authentic science learning communities in elementary, middle, secondary, post-
secondary, and post-graduate settings, (2) exploration of the influences of
information technologies on language and science literacy, (3) the establishment
of a contemporary theoretical framework involving language, information
technology, science and science literacy, and (4) the consolidation and
extension of international, interdisciplinary and intergenerational network of
professional scientists, applied cognitive scientists, language and science
researchers, graduate students, and teacher educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will begin by exploring the nature of science, the linguistic
components of doing science, the ontological and epistemological considerations
in science literacy, the influence of information technology on language
production and processing, and the critical relationships between language,
science, and science learning. It will continue by summarizing the results of
recent explorations of oral and written discourse on science literacy. The
conference will conclude by outlining some avenues for future research, some
implications for classroom practice, and some applications for teacher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;