* 0210981
* Doctoral Dissertation: Aboriginal Radio: A Political Economy of Speech and Sound in Indigenous Australia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Bambi Schieffelin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2004
* USD 5,700.00

Under the direction of Dr. Fred Myers and Dr. Bambi B. Schieffelin, Mr. Daniel
Fisher will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. His field work will
include participant-observation research on Aboriginal media production and
reception, audio recording of conversational interaction and broadcast speech
genres in Aboriginal English, and archival research on Australian multicultural
and media policies. He will investigate correlations among emergent practices
and institutions of Aboriginal media with ways of speaking, poetic and aesthetic
strategies, and changes in the political and economic circumstances of
Indigenous people. Three questions organize the project: (1) Why have indigenous
media and art achieved great success where other state-sponsored social
initiatives are assessed as failures? (2) How are new relationships to the past
and to place mediated through speech and music on the radio, both within and
across diverse Aboriginal communities? (3) How do particular linguistic, poetic,
and aesthetic strategies relate to state policies on multi-cultural
participation and Aboriginal self-determination?

This research is significant in several domains. Mr. Fisher's studies inform the
anthropology of both Australian Aboriginal cultural practices and the
appropriation of electronic audio and visual media by Indigenous and 4th world
peoples. These developments have received increasing interdisciplinary attention
as Indigenous communities around the world pursue engagements with media
production to ensure their material survival and cultural futures. This project
also contributes to anthropological and sociolinguistic research on
electronically mediated speech practices, the strategic mobilization of
register, dialect stylization, and code-switching in multilingual and/or
socially stratified language contact zones. Finally, this work will interest
scholars of pidgins and creoles by contributing to our general understanding of
the social and linguistic specificity of Aboriginal English.

