* 0210698
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Organic Circuits and Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* John White, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,638,625.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. It
focuses on organic semiconductor based nanoscale transistors, a particularly
important area of activity where much remains to be understood and discovered.
Organic nanoscale transistors make use of fabrication approaches ranging from
molecular self-assembly to advanced nanolithography. This, together with the
considerable flexibility in designing and synthesizing a range of semiconducting
materials offers hope that such devices may one day be components in a new
generation of electronic circuits. The ability to confine and manipulate
electric charges on the spatial scale of a molecule is an important advantage
for molecular electronics. The proposed project aims at combining self-assembly
and advanced nanolithography to realize two families of nanoscale transistor
devices that will enable the systematic evaluation of these devices as
components in electronic circuits. Crucial to the study is the use of advanced
high k dielectrics in organic nano-transistors. This will lower the operating
voltage of the devices as well as permit the induction of very large densities
of charge, which in turn has been shown to open up new domains in charge
transport with associated applications. The project will involve device
characterization by conventional methods as well as by scanning probe methods.
Additionally, it will involve extensive characterization of interfaces between
organic semiconductors and gate insulators, and morphological characterization
of self-assembled organic layers with a lateral resolution down to 1 nm. Large-
area organic transistors have been shown in the recent past to have unique
properties such as chemical sensing and light-emission. The chemical sensing
aspects of nanotransistors will be examined in detail for the first time This
study will combine chemical design of semiconductors with receptor groups to
bind specific analytes with detailed characterization of the chemical nature of
the interaction between semiconductor and analyte. Among other properties of
nanoscale transistors that will be explored is superconductivity.
Superconductivity has been observed recently in large-area polymer transistors
and among the suggested applications of such transistors includes quantum
information processing. Finally, a new approach to fabricate circuits is
proposed in which the organic nano-transistor circuitry is compatible with Si-
circuitry. This architecture permits (in principle) the sharing of functionality
between the Si circuitry and the organic circuitry. The key aspect of the
fabrication scheme is the use of an up-side down approach to fabricate organic
circuitry, in which the interconnects are defined first followed by the gate
level and finally the source-drain level. Thus the fragile molecular materials
are not exposed to harsh processing environments.&lt;br/&gt;