* 0210551
* NER:  Simulation Strategies for Biomolecular Assembly of Nanoscale Building Blocks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Sharon Glotzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The Principal Investigator will develop a simulation strategy that can be used
to elucidate the fundamental principles by which functionalized nanoscale
building blocks (NBBs) are assembled into ordered structures using biomolecules
as "linkers" or "connectors" between the NBBs. Recent pioneering experimental
work has demonstrated that suitably functionalized NBBs can be assembled into
rather simple ordered structures with specific properties and functionalities
using biological or synthetic macromolecules as linkers. For example, nanoscopic
gold particles ranging in size from 2 nm to 30 nm and functionalized by DNA,
biotin, or synthetic polymers have been shown to assemble into three-dimensional
hexatic close-packed structures and spheres extending over hundreds to thousands
of nanometers. DNA, in essence a "digitally programmable" biomolecule, is
especially intriguing as an "assembler" of NBBs because specific linker-linker
interactions can be programmed by inserting purposely tailored complementary
nucleotide sequences into different DNA strands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from
these exciting "proof-of-concept" studies, however, no systematic knowledge with
regard to possible synthesis and processing strategies, nor the range of
structures possible, for NBB/macromolecule assemblies has been obtained - not
even the principal axes of the vast parameter space of these complex systems
have been identified. Computer simulations will be instrumental in the effort to
define and efficiently map out parameter space and provide fundamental insight
to the assembly process. Despite advances in computational power and simulation
algorithms, however, the disparate time and length scales that govern the
staged, hierarchical ordering processes of NBBs and macromolecules in solution
prohibit the immediate application of any one "off-the-shelf" simulation
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will explore several
ideas for combining different well-known molecular and/or particle-based
simulation methodologies with the specific aim of overcoming the disparate time
scales on which the NBBs and macromolecule linkers move. She will consider the
individual and combined use of several classical molecular or so-called
"particle-based" simulation methods, including molecular dynamics, Brownian
dynamics, and off-lattice Monte Carlo, in order to develop an overall simulation
strategy capable of simulating NBB/biomolecule assemblies with as much chemical
fidelity as possible given computational limitations. The focus will be on using
DNA as assemblers, but the strategy will generally apply to other macromolecular
linkers as well. NBB geometries that the simulation approach will be capable of
modeling include spheres and polyhedra (e.g. gold nanoparticles, colloidal
silica, Buckyballs, nanoprisms, CdSe quantum dots), nanorods, nanosheets (e.g.
clays) and nanoaggregates (e.g. linear chain
aggregates).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI expects the proposed research to
provide an important and necessary advance in the ability to model programmed
macromolecular assembly of NBBs in general and DNA/NBB assemblies in particular.
At the end of this one-year project, she will have tested several strategies for
simulating DNA-assembled nanoparticle structures, and designed a comprehensive
simulation methodology capable of modeling assemblies of NBBs of arbitrary
composition and geometry joined by biomolecules or macromolecules of arbitrary
chemical structure with classical simulation techniques. This methodology will
provide researchers in the field of computational nanoscience with simulation
strategies to support detailed investigations in nanoscale systems. Without
these strategies, simulation science will likely be unable to contribute
significantly to the quest for fundamental understanding and design principles
for the self- and guided-assembly of nanoscale building blocks.&lt;br/&gt;