* 0210877
* NER:  High-Bandwidth Scanning DC SQUID Susceptometer for Characterization of Nanomagnetic Structures and Phenomena
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Martin Huber, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,883.00

0210877&lt;br/&gt;Huber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomagnetic devices for
applications such as quantum computing and high-capacity memory cannot be
developed without faster, more sensitive characterization tools to directly
probe phenomena and material structures at the nanoscale. The objective of the
proposed work is to advance the capability of a non-invasive, high-sensitivity
technique-scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
susceptometry for the dynamic characterization of nanomagnetic systems and
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will achieve this
objective through two innovations. First, spin sensitivity will be improved from
the current state of the art, a few thousand electron spins per Hz1/2, to a few
tens of spins per Hz1/2. This improvement will be accomplished by reduction of
pickup loop dimensions in a combined optical and electron-beam lithography
process and by utilizing an ultra-low-noise dc SQUID process. Second, bandwidth
will be increased from the current state of the art, tens of kHz, to tens of MHz
by the use of dc SQUID series array amplifiers as preamplifiers for the dc SQUID
susceptometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The devices will be characterized for flux
sensitivity and bandwidth at 4 K and 20 mK. The devices will have many
applications at 4 K, although operation at 20 mK will be essential for the study
of quantum decoherence mechanisms in electronic systems. Undergraduates, working
with graduate students in the collaborator's laboratory, will characterize the
spin sensitivity of the devices and their performance under
realistic&lt;br/&gt;scanning conditions by imaging individual cobalt
nanomagnetic spheres of controlled diameters ranging from 3 nm to 10 nm and
magnetic moments ranging from tens to tens of thousands of electron spins.
Further, one SQUID susceptometer will be used to image a second, identical
device to quantitatively characterize the noise generated by the
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific emphasis of this project is to
produce sensors that will have applications in the area of nanoscale structures,
novel phenomena, and quantum control and to use these sensors image both static
and dynamic properties of individual cobalt nanomagnets. Integration of a high-
sensitivity, high-bandwidth SQUID susceptometer into a scanning platform will
significantly increase the number and kind of systems that can be studied,
decrease turn-around time, and increase the number of samples that can be
studied in an&lt;br/&gt;single experiment. Thus, the successful realization of
this project will contribute to advances in nanoscale devices and system
architecture. An added benefit of this project will be the educational benefits
at both CU-Denver (PI's institution) and Stanford University (collaborator's
institution) resulting from the collaboration between CU-Denver undergraduate
students and Stanford graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;