* 0210147
* Capacity Building at CAU, Spelman College, and Morehouse Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Chung Ng, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Burley
* 12/31/2005
* USD 399,979.00

This proposal develops the curriculum and laboratory facilities that are
required to train the&lt;br/&gt;students of the three participating colleges
(Clark Atlanta, Spelman and Morehouse) in the area of Information Assurance and
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This plan:&lt;br/&gt;_&lt;br/&gt;1) Builds the
core curriculum and create necessary laboratory facilities for student education
and&lt;br/&gt;training in the area of IAS including three core courses and a
laboratory course). The CIS department at Clark Atlanta University will offer
two courses. The CS department at Spelman College will offer one course. The CS
department at Morehouse College will enhance some of its existing courses to
include IAS related topics. Students from Georgia Tech, CAU, Spelman, and
Morehouse colleges can take courses from any of the four colleges, through the
University system in Georgia, without incurring any additional
charges.&lt;br/&gt;_&lt;br/&gt;2) Creates three computer laboratories, one at
each of the participating, with the required facilities for student training in
the area of Information Assurance and Security. The laboratories will be
equipped with a network of computing systems and students will be able to
experiment with the security related software in a controlled environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the proposed program
includes:&lt;br/&gt;_&lt;br/&gt;1) Enhanced curriculum, laboratory facilities
and research activities in the area of IAS in all the three participating
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;_&lt;br/&gt;2) More opportunities for CS students of CAU,
Spelman College, Morehouse College and Georgia Tech to register for IAS related
courses.&lt;br/&gt;_&lt;br/&gt;3) Increased awareness of information security
related issues in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results are measured
using evaluations from students, professors and faculty members outside the
consortium with expertise in the area of curriculum development. We anticipate
that the students who graduate from the three colleges with concentration in IAS
will pursue higher studies at other Universities or take up jobs as security
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;