* 0210937
* Contrasting Extremes Among Homologous Transition Metal Complexes:  Eliciting Enhanced Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Kenneth Caulton, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2005
* USD 485,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
provides continued support to Dr. Kenneth G. Caulton of the Chemistry
Department, Indiana University, for the synthesis and study of complexes of an
unusually electron-rich amide ligand, (RNPR2)2N (-), and a carbene ligand,
(RNPR2)2C:, that is exceptionally electron withdrawing. Together these two
ligand classes are at opposite extremes in terms on electron donating ability.
Both ligands will be used to form complexes of mid-transition metals (largely,
but not exclusively, Re) and the ability of these complexes to cleave normally
unreactive C-H, C-C, and C-F bonds will be evaluated. The underlying hypothesis
is that the frontier orbital occupancy and energy of a metal complex can be
tailored by varying the electron donor/acceptor ability of the ligand. Thus, the
ability of a metal to effect various reactions can be tuned by proper ligand
choice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry to be studied in this proposal is
important to obtaining a basic understanding of the behavior of homogeneous
catalysts. The goal of this work is to provide a basis for the rational
development of new and useful metal-mediated chemical processes. The discovery
of new bonding patterns and reactivity modes will be followed by attempts to use
this information in the design of new reagents and catalysts for significant
chemical processes. &lt;br/&gt;