* 0210094
* NER:  Universally Programmable Intelligent Matter
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Bruce MacLennan, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson
* 06/30/2004
* USD 64,117.00

CCR-0210094 MacLennan, Bruce NER: "NER: Universally Programmable Intelligent
Matter" Intelligent matter is any material in which individual molecules or
supra-molecular clusters function as agents to accomplish some purpose.
Intelligent matter may be solid, liquid or gaseous, although liquids and
membranes are perhaps most typical. Universally programmable intelligent matter
is made from a small set of molecular building blocks that are universal in the
sense that they can be rearranged to accomplish any purpose that can be
described by a computer program. In effect, a computer program controls the
behavior of the material at the molecular level. In some applications the
molecules self-assemble a desired nanostructure by "computing" the structure and
then becoming inactive. In other applications the material remains active so
that it can respond, at the molecular level, to its environment or to other
external conditions. An extreme case is when programmable supra-molecular
clusters act as autonomous agents to achieve some end. Accomplishing the goals
of universally programmable intelligent matter will require the identification
of a small set of molecular building blocks that is computationally universal.
The SK calculus (a kind of combinatory logic) is a formal system that
demonstrates that such sets exist. It is capable of universal computation, but
makes use of only two simple operations on graphs, which are suggestive of
molecular processes. Computer scientists have investigated the SK calculus
extensively for several decades as a basis for massively parallel computer
architectures, and the translation of high-level functional computer programs
into SK structures is well understood. However, the SK calculus may not be the
best choice for programmable intelligent matter. This exploratory research
project has four principal objectives: (1) to develop a model of computation
compatible with the constraints of molecular processes; (2) to identify at least
two universal sets of building blocks for programmable intelligent matter; (3)
to develop methods for interfacing with additional molecular building blocks for
sensing conditions and causing effects in the external environment; (4) to
develop prototype simulation software to investigate characteristics peculiar to
molecular computation. Some of the methods are theoretical: (1) the construction
of a mathematical model of computation compatible with the constraints of
molecular processes, and (2) a mathematical investigation of the properties
(such as computational universality) of some simple graph operations resulting
in at least two universal sets of building blocks. The theoretical investigation
will be supplemented by (3) the development of simulation software to
investigate stochastic and other novel factors affecting computation in a
molecular context, and (4) the use of the simulator to demonstrate the use of
programmable intelligent matter to implement several useful nanostructures, such
as nanotubes and membranes with active channels and cilia. Since the resulting
building blocks for universal programmable matter are expected to be
individually simple and few in number, this project will provide the information
needed by chemists to identify or synthesize the substances sufficient to
implement universally programmable intelligent matter. This will open the way
toward the ability to produce materials with a desired nanostructure and
behavior as easily as we program computers today. This project will take a first
step toward a systematic approach to nanotechnology that will failitate its
rapid development.