* 0210415
* NER:  Acoustic Radiation Pressure Driven Atomic Force Microscope for Fast Imaging and Parallel Sensing of Biological and Chemical Processes at the Nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

0210415 Degertekin

The capability of operating in liquid environments has been one of the key
reasons for the atomic force microscope's (AFM) indisputable role in the recent
advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology. This capability has not only enabled
imaging biological samples and observation of biological and chemical processes
at the nanoscale, but also led to the development of many microcantilever-based
devices in the area of biosensing and proteomics.

The liquid environment presents significant challenges to the operation of the
AFM, especially in dynamic imaging modes such as tapping mode, and fast imaging
applications. As compared to air, the liquids provide a more efficient coupling
medium for mechanical perturbations. Hence regular piezoelectric actuation of
the AFM cantilever results in spurious resonant signals due to the liquid filled
cavity surrounding the sample and the actuator structure. Several novel
actuators, based on magnetic, electrostatic, and thin-film piezoelectric
techniques have been developed to solve this problem, but these methods severely
limit the type of cantilevers and liquids that can be used for experiments.
Furthermore, these methods are not suitable for actuation of individual
cantilevers in an array, an important capability required for biosensing
applications.

This exploratory research proposal aims to remove these important obstacles in
the implementation of a versatile AFM for applications in liquids using a novel
microcantilever actuation technique. The technique uses the acoustic radiation
force generated by collimated high frequency (100-400MHz) acoustic waves
directed to the AFM cantilever to actuate the cantilever in the DC-MHz frequency
range. Promising initial results using the technique have been recently obtained
and presented in the proposal. Based on these results, the following objectives
are proposed:

-Design and microfabrication of individual and arrays of acoustic radiation
pressure (ARP) actuators: The actuators will be fabricated on silicon substrates
using a thin Zinc Oxide film to generate acoustic waves around 250MHz and
silicon micromachining techniques will be used to fabricate acoustic Fresnel
lenses to direct the acoustic beams to AFM cantilevers.

-Integration of the actuator to a widely available commercial AFM system: A
fluid-cell including an ARP actuator will be manufactured and used on a
commercial AFM system with appropriate electronics.

-Evaluation of the capabilities and limitations of the integrated actuator: The
performance of the ARP actuator for fast imaging, as well as array operation
will be tested and compared with conventional methods.

-Study of possible adverse effects of the ARP actuator: Interaction of high
frequency acoustic waves with biological processes will be explored on several
important samples and the actuator design will be improved accordingly.
Successful implementation of this project will impact numerous areas of
nanoscience and engineering, because it will help researchers in the testing and
implementation of innovative ideas and in probing a wider variety of biological
and chemical processes at the nanoscale.