* 0210689
* NER:  Manipulation and 3D Organization of Nanoparticles Using Dielectrophoresis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Paschalis Alexandridis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER, and it addresses the manipulation and
organization of nanoparticles. The organization of colloidal particles into
one-, two- and three-dimensional ordered structures represents the first step
towards the fabrication of a large number of miniaturized products of great
technological importance. Structural attributes such as long-range order, high
packing density, high surface-to-volume ratio, and reproducible shape and
dimensions are highly desirable. Force microscopy and optical tweezers have been
used for the manipulation of a small number of individual particles, while
colloidal crystallization and templating have been used for particle
organization; however, big challenges remain. Our goal is to develop a
methodology that utilizes nonuniform electric fields (dielectrophoresis, DEP) to
direct the organization of nanoparticles into well-defined two- and three-
dimensional ordered structures (e.g., pyramids, parallelepipeds) with prescribed
length scales and composition. Such methodology is scalable and readily
automated, and would allow the manufacturing of functional materials with
nanometer-scale order that can be used for their structural properties, e.g.,
photonic materials or high density data recording devices, and/or their
structure, e.g., prefabricated blocks towards more complicated devices ("bottom
up" strategy). We will follow a systematic approach, from 2D to 3D order and
from microparticles to nanoparticles. This research is exploratory and high risk
since forces developed during the organization process may nullify the DEP
effect, and the dimensions of the electrodes required for the efficient
organization of nanoparticles may be challenging to
fabricate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research should lead to significant
advancements in the field of nanotechnology by the (a) fabrication of
nanostructures having hierarchical-order using DEP, and (b) development of
process design tools for efficient implementation of DEP in large-scale
manufacturing. The graduate and undergraduate students who will be involved in
the project will gain valuable experience, while industry (and the community)
will benefit from the expertise on nanostructures and nanomanufacturing
developed at the university through this research.