* 0210626
* NER:  Massively Parallel Electron Photoemitter Micro-arrays for Nanoscale Lithography, Imaging, and Inspection Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Jack McCarthy, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,999.00

NER: Massively Parallel Electron Photoemitter Micro-arrays for
Nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;Lithography, Imaging and Inspection
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Present electron-beam lithography, imaging
and inspection systems&lt;br/&gt;are limited to serial scanning of patterns with
only one beam. As a&lt;br/&gt;result the ability of such systems to scan
substantial areas at&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale resolution with practical throughput is
not possible. However&lt;br/&gt;if such machines were to scan using a massively
parallel array of&lt;br/&gt;independently modulated beams, the resultant
parallelism would make&lt;br/&gt;possible not only significantly improved
throughput for conventional&lt;br/&gt;applications in the nanoscale environment
but also enable faster device&lt;br/&gt;development by software changeable
patterns. However at this time there&lt;br/&gt;is no practical multiple-beam
electron emitter source available that&lt;br/&gt;will meet system-level
performance and reliability requirements. The&lt;br/&gt;goal of the proposed
research is to prove feasibility of photocathode&lt;br/&gt;microarrays for
massively parallel and independently modulated electron&lt;br/&gt;sources. A key
deliverable of the research will be a fabricated&lt;br/&gt;individually gated
array of sources with sufficient emission current&lt;br/&gt;density to expose a
line of electron sensitive resist 5 to 100nm in&lt;br/&gt;width.&lt;br/&gt; The
successful demonstration of feasibility for photocathode&lt;br/&gt;massively
parallel microarrays will require a stable, low noise and&lt;br/&gt;reproducible
photocathode and a viable scheme for fabrication and&lt;br/&gt;independently
modulating the current in each beam. As a result the work&lt;br/&gt;will focus
on two key aspects. First the extension of our previous work&lt;br/&gt;to
develop a thin film stack photocathode and pretreatments that
will&lt;br/&gt;provide the emission stability and intensity necessary and second
to&lt;br/&gt;examine schemes for producing microarrays using such
photoemitters.&lt;br/&gt; Photoelectron source arrays will make nanoscale
lithography and&lt;br/&gt;rapid e-beam review testing possible. Lithography and
testing on the&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale are necessary if the manufacturing at this
scale for&lt;br/&gt;microelectronic devices, sensors and electrical- mechanical
systems is&lt;br/&gt;to become as high in yield and rapid as sub-micron
fabrication is&lt;br/&gt;today.