* 0210619
* ANYWHERE, ANYTIME, ANYSIZE, ANY SIGNAL: Scalable Remote Information Sensing and Communication Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2002,08/31/2005
* George Markowsky, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 49,607.00

Several recent meetings have highlighted the growing interest in the biological,
ecological, environmental, and other research communities in the development and
deployment of large distributed systems for information collection, aggregation,
analysis, simulation, predictive modeling and realtime analysis within their
respective disciplines. Likewise, recent events have caused concern and raised
interest in the need for similar systems in the context of homeland security. It
seems apparent that a structured discussion of the needs for these systems could
create opportunities for synergistic efficiencies between the various user
communities. To date, however, no such discussions have been held among these
differing user communities, nor among these communities and the groups providing
and developing technologies to support their needs.

It is with the possibility of identifying such potential synergies that the
Multi-Sector Crisis Management Consortium (MSCMC) is organizing a series of
workshops to discuss the design, development and deployment of such systems
"From Sensor to Supercomputer and Back: Systems for Information Collection,
Aggregation, Analysis, Assessment and Realtime Simulation." To begin exploring
these synergies, MSCMC is proposing the following workshop.

The purpose of this workshop is to summarize the current and projected states of
sensor, communication and power technologies for collection and communication of
information from distributed sensor systems with large numbers of nodes, and to
survey the present and expected needs for such systems in environmental,
facility, medical, crisis management, public safety and national security
arenas. A succinct summary of the current and projected technologies mapped to
current and projected user requirements is envisioned to result from this
workshop.

This workshop will bring together experts in field sensor, processing, wireless,
field power source technologies, to structure solutions for the common problem
of collecting and communicating data, including from remote field locations, by
cost-effective, scalable, integrated devices and networks.

The workshop will examine the user needs and technologies involved in field
deployable systems for information gathering including sensors, wireless
communications and power supplies, up to the local aggregation point. While the
integration of "locally" gathered information into larger infrastructures for
purposes of analysis is also required, such integration is beyond the specific
focus of this workshop.

It is intended that this two day workshop will produce:

(1) understanding by participants of the current state of the art and
availability of technologies of sensors, power, integrated circuits, and
wireless, and how they may be employed in our society.

(2) determination of current and future needs for better capabilities

(3) suggested courses of action to integrate available technologies into
scalable, reliable, cost-effective devices and networks of value to meet those
needs, including for both the general scientific and research community and to
government agencies seeking better ways to protect the public from chemical and
biological incidents

(4) proposed design and production of devices not now available or suitable for
the above purposes

(5) recommendations for regulatory relief, especially for design, manufacture,
and use of workshop-proposed wireless technologies for the above purposes

(6) recommendation for further work in these ares, and identification of
potential collaborations and partners.





