* 0210588
* NIRT: Dimension Dependent Material Properties of Nanoscopic Macromolecular Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Paul Nealey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,250,046.00

Recent work has established that the mass transport and glass transition
behavior of polymeric materials can be significantly different in nanoscopic
structures than in the bulk. A structure in this case is defined as a physical
construct (e.g. a film, a line, or a post). The origin of these differences is
not well understood, and it is a subject of considerable debate. Less is known
about the mechanical properties of nanoscopic structures, although it is
precisely these properties that pose the most immediate and significant
challenges to the success of future nanofabrication processes.

The PI will conduct a comprehensive study of the thermophysical properties,
including transport and mechanical behavior, of polymeric materials in
nanoscopic structures. The work seeks to elucidate and establish the general
principles that govern the physical and thermal behavior of polymers in such
structures. To that end, advanced lithographic techniques capable of mass-
producing nanoscopic patterns with dimensions on the scale of tens of nanometers
will be developed and refined. The resulting experimental structures will permit
the large-scale characterization effort envisaged in this work. Novel
experimental strategies will be developed to measure mechanical properties and
characterize mechanical behavior. Single-molecule, photobleaching and other
spectroscopic experiments will be pursued to establish the connections between
dynamics and mechanics. Molecular modeling methods will be developed and
implemented for molecular and multi-scale simulations of nanoscopic polymeric
structures; these will be used to interpret and rationalize the results of our
experimental work.

The results generated by this NIRT will fill a serious gap in nanoscience. There
will be considerable scientific value in that it will provide much of the data
and insights required to understand soft-matter advanced materials at a
fundamental level. It will be of considerable technological impact in that it
will help the semiconductor and nanofabrication industries target materials,
processes, and strategies to manufacture deep sub-100 nm structures for
integrated circuits, photonics, sensors, nanoelectromechanical systems, and
nanobiotechnology.

The research activities will be leveraged considerably by the existence on
campus of a Center for Nanotechnology and a Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center. These centers will provide access to state-of-the-art
nanofabrication and characterization facilities, which are essential for the
proposed experiments.

A vigorous education and outreach program will be aggressively pursued to bring
nanotechnology to pre-college students, teachers and the general public. Through
a collaboration with existing, nationally-renowned educational programs at the
University of Wisconsin, it will be possible to disseminate the activities and
results of the NIRT grant in lectures, exchange programs and internships (for
both students and teachers), instructional material development, a web site, and
participation in science and technology museums.