* 0210141
* NIRT:    Nanocomposite Reactions in the Self-propagating High Temperature Synthesis of Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 07/31/2007
* USD 999,309.00

This plan integrates research and education in the area of combustion,
specifically focusing on self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS) of
new materials from nanocomposite reactants. The research objective is to
understand the influence of reactant characteristics on the combustion synthesis
process, and on the microstructure of the final product. The work has five
primary phases: (1) development of techniques to process reactants, both in
random media and multi-layered foils; (2) development of integrated MEMS-based
sensing; (3) determination of the controlling mechanisms of reaction wave
propagation; (4) characterization of the initial and final products; and (5)
demonstration of a commercial application of a combustion-synthesized material.
Temperature and pressure measurements of the reacting wave are made using micro-
fabricated test structures with integrated sensors. Measurements of combustion
behaviors are obtained using high-speed diagnostic techniques to allow imaging
of combustion waves (i.e., to determine flame speeds and to observe spinning
combustion or pulsating waves). Reactants and products are characterized using
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses. A
synthesized product material is tested experimentally on a commercial
application with our industrial partner, Solar Turbines, Inc. The experimental
effort is complemented by theoretical analysis and software development using a
commercial simulation package that contains modules to numerically solve
problems in heat transfer, multi-phase flow and reacting flows. &lt;br/&gt;The
materials developed in this plan are applied as coatings on gas turbine
components to improve the performance and durability of the system. The newly
developed material coatings act as a protective barrier against high-temperature
oxidation and corrosion, which are the main degradation mechanisms that occur in
the turbine sections. When subjected to the hot gas streams of a typical
combustion environment, the newly developed coatings will resist surface attack
and maintain the component's mechanical properties. &lt;br/&gt;The study
incorporates a "project-based" instruction component. Students will work in
teams on projects relating to this research. They learn about fabricating nano-
scale systems, perform combustion studies on the reacting samples, and
characterize the final products. The project also includes a mentoring program,
linking graduate with undergraduate engineers in a supportive work environment.
This experience guides students in making career choices, demonstrates the
relevance of their coursework to solving real problems, and contributes to their
overall preparedness. &lt;br/&gt;