* 0210915
* NIRT: Template-Constrained Magnetic Nano-materials: Synthesis and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,000,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The project aims to establish an
interdisciplinary research and training team to:1) synthesize and characterize
mono-disperse particles ranging in size from 5 to 24 nanometers prepared by
biomineralization within protein cages; 2) to assemble the magnetic particles in
two-dimensional arrays of micron size and characterize the physical structure
and magnetic properties of the assemblies; 3) assemble and characterize random
and ordered two-dimensional arrays formed from binary mixtures of magnetically
distinct nanoparticles; 4) fine tune the magnetic properties of these assemblies
by incorporating chemical cross-links and spin-coupling modulators to control
inter-particle magnetic interactions. The precise control of both particulate
properties and inter-particulate interactions will provide for immediate
applications in important areas such as superior performance magnetic memory,
sensors, and ultra-high speed device architectures. The broader impacts on
education resulting from an interdisciplinary research program using state-of-
the-art synthesis and multi-facetted characterization will be significant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued advances in ultra-high speed electronics and
super dense memory requires the synthesis, development and use of new magnetic
materials as superior performance magnetic memory, sensors, and devices. The
interdisciplinary nature of this research, containing elements of virology,
microbiology, physics, and chemistry, will not only provide new magnetic
materials for significant advances in the information technologies, it will also
provide a superb training environment for future scientists and engineers in
many other nanotechnology areas of high priority to industry and national
security. The project is jointly supported by the Division of Materials
Research, the Chemistry Division, and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;