* 0210131
* NER:  Coupled Electronic and Mechanical Properties by Conformational Statistics Tight-Binding
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Gregory Chirikjian, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2003
* USD 95,000.00

This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award on a proposal submitted through
the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Solicitation and is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems.
The research has an interdisciplinary flavor. It involves the application of
mathematical methods first developed for use in robotics to create a new
computational method to make a tight-binding electronic structure method
computationally tractable for nanoscale materials problems in which coupled
electronic and mechanical properties are of interest. This award supports
research to develop a new tight-binding atomistic method, based on the classical
Cyrot-Lackmann moments theorem and recent developments in conformational
statistics. The computational effort scales linearly with the number of atoms in
the system and takes advantage of fast numerical techniques for computing
convolutions on lattices. These numerical techniques, which are based on recent
developments in group theory and harmonic analysis, are not widely known to the
computational materials and physics communities. Most recently, these
conformational statistics methods have been used to delineate configurations of
highly articulated robot-arms and, separately, long-chain polymer molecules. The
well-known moments based tight-binding technique is based on delineating the
local topology surrounding individual atoms in a structure. The conformational
statistics method dramatically reduces the computational cost of "brute-force"
enumeration of the random-walk type paths around each atom, which are
interpreted as moments of the local density of states. The number of operations
per atom can be reduced from order K M , where K is the number of near neighbors
per atom (usually 3 or 4), and M is the number of moments (of order 50), to
order Md logMd , where d is the number of spatial dimensions. Existing numerical
methods enable the use of these computed moments to approximate the local
density of states, from which the total energy of the system and any electronic
or mechanical properties of interest can be obtained. The method will be applied
to the study of pure, doped, regular, strained, and defective carbon nanotubes.
In each of these cases chiral and nonchiral geometries can be handled. The study
of semiconductor quantum dots is another application. Several atomic scale
problems, including surface steps, quantum effects in the wetting layer, and
material intermixing, will be attacked. This award also contributes to the
training of graduate level students and the development of a new advanced
graduate level course. %%% This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award on a
proposal submitted to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering solicitation and is
jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Division of Civil
and Mechanical Systems. This award supports research with an interdisciplinary
flavor. It involves the use of mathematical methods first developed for use in
robotics to develop an efficient computational method for approximate electronic
structure calculations. The method will be applied to nanoscale materials
problems with a focus on coupled electronic and mechanical properties. Specific
applications involve carbon nanotubes: pure, doped, regular, strained, and
defective and semiconductor quantum dots. In the latter, the focus will be on
atomic scale problems, including surface steps, quantum effects in the wetting
layer, and material intermixing. New accurate and efficient computational
methods enable the prediction of electronic and structural properties of
nanoscale atomic and molecular structures and have broader applications to other
materials. This award contributes to the training of graduate level students and
the development of a new advanced graduate level course. ***