* 0210947
* RUI (Collaborative Research): Ion and Radical Beam Tailored Oxide, Nitride and Germanide Electronic Film Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Toni Sauncy, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 59,629.00

This is an RUI collaborative research project among three physics programs at
neighboring state universities: Angelo State University, Tarleton State
University, and Southwest Texas State Uni-versity. The project focuses on three
main topics: (1) correlation between electrical and optical properties and
stress in ZnO and nitrogen-doped ZnO fabricated at reduced temperatures using
radical atomic beam processing, (2) feasibility of fabricating predicted ZnO-Mn
and Zn-Co room temperature transparent magnetic semiconductors, and (3)
dielectric properties of select amor-phous or potentially epitaxial insulator
oxide alloys consisting of Pr-Al-O, Gd-Ga-O, Hf-Al-O, Pr-Zr-O and La- Hf-O (most
with possible oxynitridation and alloy-dependent band gap variabil-ity) relevant
for magnetic spin tunneling structures and next-generation CMOS gate
applications. A study towards the stabilization and characterization of
metastable Ni-incorporated Cu-Ge and Co- Ge thin film crystalline phases will
also be included. Thin film materials fabrication will be conducted using ion
beam sputter processing strategies. The approach is to implement mono-energetic
Ar + or Xe + ions (<1 keV) to control incident film adatom energy (between ~ 6
eV to ~ 20 eV), and vary the substrate angle of incidence to promote kinetic
film growth at reduced temperatures with and without reflected energetic Ar/Xe
atom bombardment. Low energy (<100 eV) reactive (O2 + /N2 + ) assist ion beams
will be compared with neutral thermal atomic radi-cals to promote optimal
oxidation (and dopant nitridation) at reduced substrate temperatures. The
implementation of in-situ low energy and/or neutral atomic radical species to
promote reactive sputtering is relatively unique for ion beam sputtering and is
not possible with magnetron sput-tering due to its higher operating pressure
regime. The group also has the capability of processing sputtered films with
rapid thermal annealing and high-energy (< 1 MeV) inert ion mixing to study
germanide formation in amorphous deposited metal-Ge films. %%% The project
addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science
having technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the
strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
Undergraduates from all three universities will be involved in multiple phases
of the research, with strong participation from underrepresented groups. In
addition to ion beam sputtering, students will be involved with rapid thermal
process-ing, electrical transport studies, ion beam analysis, scanning electron
microscopy with EDS, ad-vanced x-ray diffraction and fluorescence analysis,
magnetometry, and optical characterization (reflectivity, FTIR,
photoluminescence). In addition, students will have a chance to collabora-tively
interact with Central Texas microelectronics industry scientists and doctoral
institution re-search teams interested in the project. All three collaborating
universities are close enough to permit an active degree of inter-university
group visits and student exchanges to support the re-search. The research will
encourage students to consider pursuing research at various materials-related
doctoral programs, or consider further education in a professional masters
program. In addition, the broad thin film materials experience gained from the
project will be useful prepara-tion for student internships in the
microelectronics industry and strengthening the workforce pool of educated BS/MS
graduates for this critical industry. ***