* 0210819
* NER:  Molecular-To-Microscale Investigation Of Microbial Habitats:  Exploratory Studies Using Molecular Probes and Microcomputed Tomography and Fluorescence
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Peggy O'Day, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2004
* USD 94,735.00

O'Day&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NER- 0210819&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative NSF
01-157, category NER, and is co-funded by the GEO and BIO Directorates. A
significant challenge to integrating the study of microbiological and
geochemical systems lies in visualizing, identifying, and measuring chemical
reactions and feedbacks at appropriate length and time scales within their
natural environments. This proposal seeks to explore a novel combination of
molecular biological probes and synchrotron X-ray micro-computed tomography
(m-CT) and fluorescence to obtain complementary information about physical and
chemical microhabitats and microbial distribution in natural systems in two and
three dimensions. Microbial communities are found in pore spaces and on mineral
surfaces at length scales corresponding to individual bacteria and bacterial
communities (~1-100 mm). Chemical reactions involving microorganisms and aqueous
solutions, colloids, and minerals take place at the molecular level, but the
interaction volumes of microbial communities may range from ~5-1000 mm3 or more.
Conventional examination techniques such as electron or fluorescence microscopy
require destructive sample preparation methods that can severely alter
biological and physical structures. The aim of this exploratory study is to
investigate a method for examining the distribution of microbial communities in
situ and in three dimensions, and to develop complementary techniques for
coupling element-specific spectroscopic probes and molecular biological probes.
We propose to use nucleic acid biological probes directed against rRNA targets
and tagged with heavy elements (iodine, gold, and silver) to map the spatial
distribution of microbial communities within natural porous material using
density-contrast synchrotron m-CT. In addition, we will investigate the ability
of fluorescence m-CT measurements to map specific element distribution in two
dimensions using these target elements and those of the mineral substrates.
Based on density contrast and fluorescence mapping, we will explore the spatial
distribution of microbial communities and mineral substrates, and attempt XANES
spectroscopy of specific elements to gain chemical information. The coupling of
physical and chemical data in two and three dimensions, with information content
ranging from molecular to micron scale, will enable innovative future studies of
fundamental processes involving element cycling among geologic fluids, minerals,
and microbes.&lt;br/&gt;