* 0210487
* NER:  Molecular Modeling of Self-Assembled Nanostructures on Surfaces and in Narrow Pores
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2003
* USD 99,067.00

The self-assembly of nanostructures on surfaces and in porous media has been
studied extensively by experiment, and is of interest in a wide range of
applications, including optical and biological sensors, lithography, fabrication
of nano-scale devices, and biomimetic materials. Despite this wide interest, the
few attempts to develop theories and simulation methods for these systems give a
poor account of the formation of the nano-structures and the effects of major
variables (surfactant architecture, nature of surface, temperature,
concentration, etc.) on them; some trends (e.g. temperature dependence) are
predicted to be the opposite of those found experimentally.

The aim of this project is to carry out a one year feasibility study to develop
and evaluate a new multi-scale molecular simulation strategy to predict the
equilibrium behavior of nano-structures formed from non-ionic surfactants on
planar surfaces and in nano-pores. The simulations will cover size ranges from
sub-Angstrom to hundreds of nanometers by using a combination of ab initio,
atomistic simulation, and discretized lattice Monte Carlo simulation methods. By
optimizing the lattice discretization and intermolecular potentials, the PI
hopes to develop an approach that can predict not only the nanostructures that
form, but the influence of temperature, composition, solvent, surfactant
architecture, nature of the solid surface, and morphology of the pore structure,
on the self-assembled structures. The challenge will be to include a sufficient
level of molecular detail and sophistication in the model, while preserving
sufficient simplicity that calculations can be made in a reasonable time on
current computers.

The feasibility of the method will be evaluated by comparison with experimental
data. Criteria for success will include (a) correct prediction of qualitative
trends of property behavior (adsorption, structures, aggregate size, heats) with
variation in temperature, concentration, type of surface, etc., (b) quantitative
agreement with experiment, and (c) computational burden of the calculations.