* 0210971
* Using Artificial Correlational Selection to Evaluate the Causes of Sexual Dimorphism
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Lynda Delph, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 399,997.00

Differences between the sexes are pervasive in both animals and plants. Such
dimorphism can result from selection directly on a trait or it can be a result
of genetic correlations between traits. The investigators will test the
hypothesis that multiple characters exhibit sex differences in the dioecious
plant Silene latifolia, because of genetic correlations between traits. This
hypothesis will be investigated with two quantitative-genetic experiments. The
first incorporates a set of controlled crosses and subsequent measures of
progeny, to determine the pattern and magnitude of genetic covariances among
traits. The second experiment will involve artificial selection to investigate
how labile the genetic correlations are between flower traits and physiological
traits. They will select on the combination of traits rather than on individual
traits to alter the correlation between traits, the most powerful way of
breaking correlations.&lt;br/&gt;These experiments are centered on measuring and
altering genetic correlations. These correlations can occur because of
pleiotropy, in which one gene affects more than one trait, or because of
linkage, in which the genes affecting traits are inherited together. The first
of these, pleiotropy, leads to long-term correlations between traits, whereas
linkage can be easily broken by selection. If the investigators are unable to
break the correlation between traits, then this will lend credence to the
hypothesis that pleiotropy contributes to patterns of genetic correlation and
differences between the sexes.&lt;br/&gt;