* 0210249
* NER:  Focused Ion Beam (FIB) Micromachining and Advanced Characterization of Carbon Nanotube-Metal Junctions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Kathleen Dunn, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 10/31/2003
* USD 96,436.00

This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. The goal of the research is to develop the
methodology of localized atomic-level structural and chemical interfacial
characterization of carbon nanotube-metal junctions using high resolution
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy and
energy filtered TEM. The Focused Ion Beam micromachining will be used to
fabricate platinum metal contacts onto carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and also for
localized specimen cross-sectioning for further TEM analysis. The objectives of
the study are threefold: (1) advancement of nanoscale characterization
techniques to achieve an understanding of the effects of FIB-assisted metal
deposition on the CNT/Pt interfacial structure and chemistry at atomic level;
(2) development of a specimen preparation technique for selective (localized)
high-resolution TEM and electron energy loss spectroscopy of CNT-metal
junctions; (3) development of reproducible metal contact fabrication technique
with atomic-level control of inter-diffusion and morphology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance the nanoobject/metal junction
studies to the atomic-level of understanding of the interfacial structure and
chemistry. Development of optimized methodology of CNT/metal localized cross-
sectioning technique for high-resolution chemical and structural analysis of the
junction will be useful for studies of the majority of nanoscale objects and
future nano-devices. Controlled nano-fabrication of CNT/metal junctions with
known properties will facilitate the reliable electrical testing of the
nanosized materials and structures for variety of applications ranging from
chemical sensors to field effect transistors, thus enabling fabrication of new
devices to serve people in their everyday life. Two graduate student will be
directly involved in the program gaining knowledge in such advanced
characterization techniques as transmission electron microscopy, electron energy
loss spectroscopy, and FIB micromashining. The expertise generated by this
program will be utilized directly in the educational process to teach the
current and future scientists/technologists. The PI will organize and carry out
scientific seminars, will incorporate new data into the graduate level courses
to facilitate the dissemination of knowledge and the developed methodology.