* 0210690
* NIRT: The Development of Vault Nano-Capsules
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Leonard Rome, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,750,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project is designed to
develop a flexible, targetable nanocapsule by exploiting a naturally occurring
nanoscale structure, the vault. Vaults are large (13 MDa) ribonucleoprotein
particles composed of multiple copies of three proteins and an RNA, found in
nearly all eucaryotic cells. The vault particle is a nanocapsule honed by
millions of years of evolution with incredible potential for compound
encapsulation, protection, and delivery. The vault nanocapsule can assemble from
multiple copies of a few subunits into a stable structure that adheres to and is
transported along skeletal networks in the cell, and is likely to open and close
in response to cellular signals. Understanding how such a capsule can be
manipulated will allow encapsulation of small molecules (drugs, sensors,
enzymes, toxins etc.) and targeting the engineered nanostructures to specific
tissues, cells, or organelles.

This team plans to modify the vault using a cell-based protein production system
and test the concept that vaults can have a broad nanosystems application as
malleable nanocapsules. Seven research groups at the University of California,
Los Angeles, and other locations (California Institute of Technology; Vanderbilt
University), organized by Dr. Leonard Rome, will direct their attention to
engineered vault nanocapsules produced in a core production laboratory. Modified
vaults will be examined with molecular imaging techniques including negative-
stain, cryo-EM single particle reconstruction, atomic force microscopy, and
X-ray crystallography. This structural characterization of the vault is an
essential first step in designing new vault-based nanocapsules.

Vault nanocapsules will be produced with sequestered metal binding sites and
assessed for functional consequences of metal sequestration; for example, cells
expressing the engineered particle will be examined to determine whether they
have increased resistance to metal toxicity. In other studies, particles will be
imbued with functional properties of light emission and magnetic properties to
allow the particles to be manipulated in a magnetic field and to probe
physiological properties of the vault, i.e., the inflow and outflow of large and
small molecules. The ability to manipulate biological nanoparticles in these and
other ways offers an opportunity to assemble these particles into structures
that may have significant future applications. Spectroscopic techniques will be
applied to the engineered particles to allow assessment of the interconversion
of opened and closed forms. These studies will lay the groundwork to enable the
control of entrapment and release of specific encapsulated materials.

The participants of this team are founding members of the California Nanosystems
Institute (CNSI), established to bring together scientists and engineers across
disciplines and across institutional boundaries in order to push forward in the
area of nanotechnologies. In partnership with the CNSI, the team will establish
an educational program designed to advance the field of nanosystems research and
technology. This will include training of future researchers and decision-makers
and creation of multidisciplinary courses, to enrich school and community
resources and influence the technical capabilities of industrial scientists and
engineers. In addition, the PI and co-PIs will be involved in research mentoring
of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students, curriculum planning, and
lecturing. A vault website (www.vaults.arc.ucla.edu) will be maintained and
expanded to disseminate information about vaults and vault nanocapsule
development. This centralized source of information will include links to
published materials and lists of materials and reagents available for sharing.

Funding for this interdisciplinary project is provided through collaborative
contributions from the Directorate for Biological Sciences (Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences), the Directorate for Engineering (Divisions
of Bioengineering & Environmental Systems and Chemical & Transport Systems), and
the Directorate for Mathematics & Physical Sciences (Divisions of Physics and
Chemistry).