* 0210247
* NIRT: One-,Two- and Three-Dimensional Superstructured Materials from Well-Defined, Complex Nanoscale Components
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jill Pasteris, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,750,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project, co-funded by the
National Science Foundation Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry, and
Chemical and Transport Systems, will develop synthetic strategies and
characterization protocols for the production and study of one-, two- and three-
dimensional superstructures composed of stabilized nanoparticle assemblies. The
synthetic approach involves the systematic ordering, in solution and on
substrates, of crosslinked assemblies of copolymers, as robust core-shell
building blocks, to manufacture 1-dimensional meso-scale (~100 nm to ~1 mm),
2-dimensional micro-scale (~1 mm to ~100 mm) and 3-dimensional macro-scale
(&gt;100 mm) objects, each comprised of nanoscopic building blocks. The result
will be the creation of entirely unique composite morphologies that are not
accessible in the phase diagrams of the copolymers directly. This strategy
mimics the control of chemistry at the nanometer scale that is currently the
exclusive province of living systems. Utilization of the nanoscale organic-based
superstructures as scaffolds for the initiation of nanocrystalline growth of
inorganic materials and biomacromolecules will be a key goal of the
investigation. The mechanisms by which the organic superstructures promote
crystallization and co-crystallization will be studied in detail. The hypotheses
to be tested include: (1) organic nanoparticles will be assembled into well
defined one-, two- and three-dimensional superstructures, suitable for
fabrication into useful device applications; (2) such superstructures will
present interfacial contacts that template the crystallization events to produce
unique and controllable nanocrystalline phases, initiated from a surface or via
co-crystallization; (3) the nature of the organic superstructures and the
nanocrystalline materials will result in unique physical, optical, magnetic, and
mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;The educational and research aspects of the
proposed activities will cross several disciplines (organic chemistry, biology,
physical chemistry, polymer physics, chemical and mechanical engineering, and
materials science) to address effectively the study of one-, two-, and three-
dimensional superstructures, composed of two or more nanoscale constructs, and
of templated inorganic/organic nanocrystalline materials. The proposed research
is rich with opportunities to impact education. Students will benefit through
interdisciplinary, multi-site research activities. An outreach course developed
(Fall 2001) at Washington University for K-8 teachers will be enhanced and
implemented at the participating institutions. The focus of this NIRT also
creates an effective platform for societal education of the benefits of
nanoscience and nanotechnology. For example, the proposed nanostructured solids
may represent new advanced materials for medicine, such as "smart" hydrogel-like
coatings for controlled release of drugs, and scaffolds for tissue engineering.
These materials may also be the next generation of advanced separation media,
tough optically clear solids, catalysts or nanocomposites used in the
fabrication of nano- or micro-mechanical devices. Thermally-responsive memory
devices and complex nanoscopic coatings for cantilever-based sensor devices are
particular applications that will be investigated for the 1-, 2-, and
3-dimensional superstructures. Additionally, the proposed materials will be
evaluated as nanoscopic surfaces from which the crystallization of inorganic
salts or biomacromolecules can initiate. The controlled co-crystallization of
the superstructures will be investigated, as a model system for the
nanocrystalline phases found in bone growth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;