* 0210036
* NER:  Feasibility Study on High Yield Thermal Plasma Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes and Other Nanocrystalline Forms of Carbon
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Elihu Grossmann, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The feasibility of synthesizing carbon nanotubes and other high-value forms of
carbon will be studied using a lab-scale, nominally atmospheric pressure,
induction-coupled plasma [ICP] reactor. The rationale for this work was the
discovery of nanotubes in carbonaceous residues produced during the gasification
of polymers for monomer recovery from waste, but under conditions minimizing
solids formation. In this work, the ICP will be used to decompose solid
polymeric and low molecular weight gaseous hydrocarbon precursors [methane,
propane and ethylene] under conditions maximizing carbon recovery.
Organometallic catalysts [Fe, Ni and Co-bearing], previously shown to nucleate
and enhance nanotube formation and growth, will be injected into the feed stream
prior to injection into the hot [~10,000 k] plasma region to produce conditions
favoring nanotube formation. Several hydrocarbon precursors and catalysts will
be studied in an experimental matrix determining the influence of key process
variables such as plasma power, process gas flows, precursor feed rate,
quenching gas flows and reactor pressure on product yield and composition. Solid
products will be analyzed by electron microscopy and chemical solubility
techniques to determine the yield of nanotubes, their type(s) and any associated
by-products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICP's are flexible, capable of operating under
neutral, oxidizing or reducing conditions, and of accepting gaseous, liquid or
solid feeds. Furthermore, ICP reactors are readily scalable. While the lab-scale
system to be used in this work will feed solids at ~ 5 gm/min, potentially
yielding up to 5.8 kg of solids/day, industrial systems rated in the 600 kW to
1MW power range have already been developed. If successful, this work offers the
possibility of large-scale production of carbon nanotubes at significantly lower
cost than existing furnace, arc and laser-ablation techniques. This would enable
more of the applications proposed for C-nanotubeshydrogen storage, composite
reinforcement, therapeutics delivery etc., to be developed.&lt;br/&gt;