* 0210479
* NER:  Engineering Stable Nanoscale Conducting / Insulating Polymer Interfaces: Combinatorial Exploratory Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Carson Meredith, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/2004
* USD 99,938.00

Thin films can become unstable at thicknesses below 100 nm, due to attractive
van der Waals (VDW) interactions. This problem is particularly severe in
conducting and semiconducting polymers, which have large Hamaker constants. VDW
instability results in dewetting and must be avoided in nanoscale film
processing. Yet, robust methods for preventing VDW instability in these systems
have not emerged. A failure to develop strategies to control instability places
severe limits on the use of conducting polymer thin films at nanoscale
dimensions. To address this critical limitation, this research will explore an
innovative method to stabilize nanoscale conducting / insulating film bilayers.

Research Plan and Significance. Nanoscale conducting polymer devices require
multilayered junctions of conducting / insulating interfaces. VDW instability is
likely to occur at these junctions due to Hamaker constant mismatch. This
research will develop an exploratory method to prevent VDW instability at
polymer bilayer conductor / insulator interfaces.

The lack of previous research and theory on nanoscale conductive polymer wetting
stability leads to the exploratory, high-risk nature of this project. The risk
is increased by the experimental difficulty in maintaining consistent substrate
chemistry over the many samples needed to test hypotheses. To overcome this
limitation in experimental efficiency, a high-throughput measurement method will
be used for feasibility studies of bilayer stability.

Specific Aims: 1) The parameters required to prevent VDW instability will be
determined for a model bilayer thin film system: poly(3-undecybithiophene)
(PUBT) / polystyrene (PS), and 2) Stability measurements will be compared to a
Hamaker constant model to ascertain its effectiveness in predicting stability of
nanoscale bilayers.

Outcomes. The proposal work will provide the first systematic measurements of
VDW stability of insulator/semiconductor and insulator/conductor thin film
bilayers. This exploration will set important limitations and demonstrate the
feasibility of incorporating nanoscale conductor / insulator junctions in device
architectures.

Educational Plan and Significance. The educational goal of the PI is to increase
the content, breadth, and inclusiveness of the instructional process for surface
and colloid science at Georgia Tech. To meet these needs this research will
supplement the PI's continuing educational thrusts:

* Development of a graduate course in surface and colloid science chemical
engineering * Internet-available surface lecture examples for undergraduate
engineering courses * Active recruitment of the local community, minority, and
underrepresented students in engineering research.