* 0210651
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Agricultural and Environmental Change in Syria During the Bronze and Iron Ages: The Relevance of Archaeology to Current Agricultural Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Julie Hansen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

With National Science Foundation support Alexia Smith and Dr. Julie Hansen will
investigate the impact of climate change on agricultural practices in the Near
East during the Bronze and Iron Ages (3050-535 B.C.). A region-wide drying event
is thought to have occurred at the end of the third millennium B.C., and this
study examines its impact on food production strategies. Palaeoethnobotany, the
study of human uses of plants in antiquity, is a prime tool for investigating
ancient agriculture. Carbonized plant remains can be preserved on archaeological
sites for thousands of years and may be systematically recovered by placing a
soil sample in a large tank of water, whereby the botanical remains float to the
surface for collection. The presence of crop plants, together with their
associated weed assemblages, allow for the reconstruction of ancient
agricultural practices.

Palaeoethnobotanical remains collected from Tell Qarqur, a multi-period site on
the Orontes River in NW Syria, will be analyzed to determine how crop production
changed over time. Tell Qarqur lies just north of the Ghab Valley, where a
number of pollen cores have been examined, making Qarqur a prime location for
considering the effect of local environment upon food production. The questions
asked include: 1) What crops were grown and do cropping patterns change over
time? 2) What types of ecosystems were exploited for wild plants? 3) If the
habitats exploited change over time, does this reflect a changing environment?
Examination of the flora currently surrounding the site and collection of modern
botanical samples will greatly assist in identifying the ancient remains.

This data will then be placed into a regional context and evidence for
agricultural and environmental change from sites in Syria, Israel, Lebanon, and
Jordan will be examined based on published palaeoethnobotanical,
zooarchaeological, and palaeoenvironmental reports. Together these countries
provide a promising opportunity to examine the ways people modify agriculture in
relation to their environment, since steep precipitation gradients exist and
food productions strategies are likely to change over relatively short
distances. The questions asked include: 1) Within a given time period, do the
major crops vary with increasing distance from the coast, or along a north-south
axis? 2) If so, is this reflected in the faunal remains? 3) Can distinct "food
production" zones be identified from the data, and if so, do the boundaries of
these zones change with time?

This research is important for several reasons. First, it provides information
on Bronze and Iron Age agriculture in Syria, of which little is known. Second,
this study synthesizes a large body of published data from the Near East,
thereby providing a firm basis for examining environmental change and shifting
agricultural patterns. Finally, recent climatic data suggest that many semi-arid
regions will become drier over the next few decades due to global warming. This
study will yield a deeper understanding of how people have adapted their farming
practices in response to past climatic shifts, knowledge that would greatly aid
modern-day developers to enhance production within current low-technology or
subsistence agriculture.

