* 0210804
* Analyzing Major Sources of Variation in the Relation Between Metabolic Heat Production and Respiratory Gas Exchange
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Glenn Walsberg, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 315,000.00

Energy is vital for both the propagation and maintenance of organisms. Thus, the
use of metabolic energy and the heat that is produced as its byproduct is a
major theme in modern biology. Animal energy usage is usually measured by
"indirect calorimetry" that relies upon the exchange of respiratory gases by the
organism (e.g., oxygen consumption or carbon dioxide production). An important
complication in such analyses is that the relationship between respiratory gas
exchange at the lungs and metabolic heat production is variable. These
variations could have important consequences for our understanding of energy use
by animals by producing substantial (e.g., &gt;30%) errors in energetic
analyses. This project will quantify the relationships between metabolic heat
production in animals and their respiratory gas exchange, and determine the
sensitivity of these relations to variables most likely to importantly affect
energy metabolism. Critical variables to be explored include diet composition,
intensity of metabolism, time of day relative to the animal's physiological
cycles, and extent of time spent feeding or fasting. The most likely
physiological bases of currently unexplainable variation in the relations
between respiratory gas exchange and metabolic heat production will be explored.
This portion of the research will focus on quantifying the various fates of the
carbon dioxide that is produced by animal metabolism (e.g., exhaled through the
lungs, stored in the body). This research will be conducted using a broad range
of animals (insects, reptiles, birds) in order to evaluate the extent of
biological variation in these basic energy relations.