* 0210281
* NER: Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Devices for Future Spintronics Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Elisabeth Gwinn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
focuses on testing the feasibility of using self-assembly of organic monolayers
onto inorganic substrates to control spin phenomena, namely magnetism. The work
is a collaboration between the Gwinn group at UCSB, which has expertise in
semiconductor physics, and the Naaman group at the Weizmann Institute, which has
expertise in the assembly of organized, organic thin films (QOTF) onto inorganic
substrates. In these hybrid devices, organic molecules with large electric
dipole moments chemisorb onto an inorganic substrate, forming an organized,
close-packed dipole sheet. The energetics of forming the adsorbate favors
transfer of electrons between the organic molecules and the substrate, somewhat
similar to the effect of gates in field-effect devices, but without the need for
a gate or gate insulator. This chemically-induced charge transfer modifies the
electronic properties of both adsorbate and substrate.

The proposed feasibility experiments will test for spin-related phenomena in
hybrid devices of organized organic adsorbates on inorganics. The advantages of
using organic material is the large versatility in properties that can be
tailored relatively easily, its low cost, and the ease of production due to
self-assembling processes that can replace expensive high resolution
lithography. The enormous variety of organic molecules that self-assemble
provides a chemical ~knob" that may make possible new classes of
organic/inorganic spintronic devices.

Two lines of investigation will be pursued during this year-long project:
studies of chemical manipulation of the magnetic properties of GaAs-based
semiconductor devices via the organic adsorbate; and studies of the magnetic
properties of organic inonolayers of chiral molecules on non-magnetic
substrates. Ferromagnetic GaAs heterostructures with near-surface Mn-doped
layers will be covered with OOTF to test the feasibility of chemically
controlling magnetism in ferromagnetic semiconductors. The effects of the OOTF
will be investigated by magnetometry and by magnetotransport measurements.
Adsorption of OOTF onto the sidewalls of non-magnetic GaAs/A1GaAs superlattices
will be used to attempt to modify the sheath of edge states that appears in the
quantum Hall regime. Signatures of the effects of the OOTF would appear in low-
temperature magnetotransport experiments. Studies of chiral OOTF will
investigate further their previously observed magnetic properties, when adsorbed
onto Au; and whether the chiral QQTF retain their magnetic properties when
adsorbed onto GaAs.