* 0210195
* NER:  Fabrication of an Integrated Structure of 3D Macroporous Silica and Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 01/31/2004
* USD 95,936.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0210195&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: HENRY
DU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: STEVENS INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 3D porous
materials with highly ordered interconnecting pores and carbon nanotubes are at
the frontier of science and engineering. This Nanoscale Exploratory Research
(NER) proposal aims to integrate these two areas by exploring aligned growth of
carbon nanotubes on the pore walls of high-surface-area microporous silica.
Several tasks are being pursued to achieve the proposed goal. Specifically,
equilibrium-driven colloidal self-assembly processes as well as colloidal
epitaxy on ultra-fine TEM grids is being used to obtain opals of polystyrene
spheres as structural templates. A sol-gel route is being employed for effective
infiltration of the templates to produce inverted silica opals upon subsequent
thermal decomposition of the template opals. A synthesis strategy is also being
developed for deposition of uniform, nanometer-sized, catalytic cobalt particles
on the pore walls. The approach is being used to grow aligned carbon nanotubes
on the pore walls throughout the volume of the macroporous silica using plasma-
enhanced chemical vapor deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
represents the first known attempt to fabricate an integrated structure composed
of 3D macroporous materials and carbon nanotubes. Critical challenges are being
addressed related to the deposition of cobalt particles and the controlled
growth of aligned carbon nanotubes on pore walls. The integration of the two
aspects of this work will yield potentially robust structures for applications
where an abundance of nanotube arrays is needed for system efficiency. Such
applications include entrapment of DNA and proteins, catalytic supports,
desalination of seawater, and hydrogen storage for fuel cells. Knowledge
generated in this investigation can be extended to the fabrication of other 3D
macroporous materials, such as semiconductors. The success of the project thus
offers exciting prospects for the exploration of carbon nanotubes for
applications in the nanotechnology arena and across science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;