* 0210844
* NIRT: Two- and Three-Dimensional Assembly of Nanoelectronic Components by DNA Scaffolding
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* T. Andrew Taton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,100,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. An interdisciplinary team will
investigate the use of DNA as a programmable scaffolding upon which
nanocomponents precisely self-assemble as a possible basis for an electronic
circuit manufacturing technology. Rather than using the techniques of current
semiconductor chip manufacturing, in which features are written onto the
structure by a lithographic process, this approach will exploit programmed
Watson-Crick base-pairing for precision assembly limited only by the 0.34
nanometer nucleotide separation. The research activities in this proposal are
focused on 1) Design, synthesis, and assembly of 2D DNA crystal scaffolding for
the self-assembly of arrays of closely spaced Au-nanoparticles, 2) Design and
synthesis of Au-DNA conjugates optimized for electron tunneling properties and
for high-yield assembly to 2D DNA crystals, 3) Characterization of electronic
transport properties of the DNA-assembled Au-nanoparticle arrays to establish
the suitability of the DNA scaffolding, tethers, and other structural elements
for use as passive host scaffolding for electronic nanocomponents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will address basic scientific and engineering
challenges in the development of DNA nanotechnology for the precise assembly of
components for nanoelectronics and other applications, such as nanorobotics and
nanomaterials. It will systematically explore basic chemical, physical, and
electronic issues related to nanoparticle/DNA design, chemical compatibility,
assembly methods, electrostatic interactions, electronic transport, and
interactions with surfaces, among others. The study will stimulate interactions
among a highly interdisciplinary team of experts representing the fields of
Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering. This
project will contribute to educational and human resource development by
supporting three Ph.D. students. We also expect to involve several M.S. level
students in this work and provide research opportunities for undergraduate
students through existing directed studies and internship programs at the
University of Minnesota. It will help to establish relationships between the
University of Minnesota and New York University, as well as with industry
through the interactions with Nanoprobes Inc. Finally, this project will enhance
the infrastructure for nanoscience research at the University of Minnesota by
providing funding for the unique nanoscale electronic characterization system to
be used in these studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;