* 0210436
* Expanding Dendroarchaeology into Northern Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Ronald Towner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 107,965.00

With support of the National Science foundation, Dr. Ronald Towner and his
colleagues will conduct archaeological tree-ring research at prehistoric cliff
dwellings in the remote Sierra Madre of northern Sonora, Mexico. These
spectacular structures rival the more famous cliff dwellings of US Southwest in
size and construction techniques, but have received virtually no attention from
scientists. Our team of US and Mexican dendrochronologists and archaeologists
will collect tree-ring samples and archaeological data from these enigmatic
structures in order to (a) develop an absolutely dated annual tree-ring sequence
for northern Mexico and (b) generate baseline archaeological information, such
as detailed site maps, for the previously undocumented cliff dwellings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of absolutely dated tree-ring sequences in
the area will be a major advance toward providing Christian calendar dates for
many archaeological sites in northern Mexico. Such a breakthrough will help
historians, archaeologists, and anthropologists delineate important aspects of
the development and decline of complex societies in Mexico, such as Casas
Grandes, and illuminate aspects of the interaction between prehistoric societies
in the US Southwest and northern Mexico. By dating the rooms and structures, it
will be possible to study the behaviors and social organization of the site
inhabitants and, on a larger scale, examine issues such as migration, trade, and
the transfer of technologies and ideas between prehistoric groups in northern
Mexico and the southwestern United States. In addition, the baseline
archaeological data will provide important information relevant to current and
future research questions and management decisions by the Mexican government
regarding these irreplaceable pieces of their national patrimony. The project
will also help Mexican scientists learn tree-ring sample collection techniques,
thus enabling them to conduct future research at sites in northern Sonora and
Chihuahua. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the project tree-ring samples
themselves contain important environmental information. The many tree species
used in the cliff dwellings are different than those found in the United states
and exhibit different growth patterns. These patterns are a result of somewhat
different climatic regimes in northern Mexico and will help in identifying
climatic relationships between the US Southwest and northern Mexico. The
absolutely dated ring sequences, therefore, will contribute significantly to
future studies of past hemispheric climatic variability and models of short- and
long-term weather phenomena such as the southwestern monsoons, El Nino, and La
Nina.&lt;br/&gt;