* 0210512
* Self-Assembled Polydomain Ferroelectric and Ferromagnetic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Alexander Roytburd, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2005
* USD 345,399.00

The project is a collaborative theoretical and experimental study of self-
assembled oxide poly-domain architectures in film/substrate heterostructures.
The polydomain structures of thin films on substrates are strongly determined by
their mechanical constraints: the misfit between the film and substrate, the
orientation and local structure of the film/substrate interface, and the
geometri-cal configuration of the film. The goal of this research is to design
controlled polydomain struc-tures through constraint engineering to obtain
enhanced functional properties of ferroelectric and ferromagnetic film
materials. Different techniques of constraint engineering (modification of
film/substrate misfit, patterning of films and film/substrate interfaces) will
be employed to achieve this goal. These techniques will be developed and tested
on PbTiO3-Pb(Zn,Ti)O3 (PZT) tetragonal films, which demonstrate strong
piezoeffects. Subsequently, the techniques will be ap-plied to films of highly
adaptive ferroelectrics with compositions near the morphotropic phase boundary
in the PZT system. Polydomain engineering will also be applied to ferromagnetic
oxides of the La1-xSrxMnO3 system, which exhibit colossal magneto-resistance and
promising mag-netostrictive properties. The research objectives are sought
through a combination of theory, modeling and experimental verification of
theoretically obtained domain design principles. Theo-retical work will include
analysis of internal stresses and energetics of polydomain structures, phase
field modeling for non-patterned films, and finite element analysis (FEM) for
local stress effects and patterned films. The experimental work will consist of
thin-film processing, engi-neering of patterned films, design of polydomain
structures and their characterization by X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy,
scanning force microscopy and magneto-optical imaging tech-nique. Measurement of
electric, magnetic and mechanical properties of films will also be per-formed.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in
areas of electronic materials science having technological relevance. An
important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. The combined resources, including
experimental and theoretical methods, provide special opportunities for
education and training of graduate stu-dents involved in highly
interdisciplinary forefront research.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;