* 0210438
* NER:  Nanofabricated Optical Devices Based On Single Photon Tunneling
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Christopher Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 07/31/2004
* USD 85,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale
Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. Strong evidence of
a single-photon tunneling effect, a direct analog of single-electron tunneling,
has been obtained recently in our measurements of light tunneling through
individual subwavelength pinholes in a thick gold film covered with a layer of
polydiacetylene. The transmission of some pinholes reached saturation because of
the optical nonlinearity of polydiacetylene at a very low light intensity of a
few thousands photons per second. This result has been explained theoretically
in terms of "photon blockade", similar to the Coulomb blockade phenomenon
observed in single-electron tunneling experiments. The single-photon tunneling
effect may find many applications in the emerging fields of quantum
communication and information processing. The experiments reported so far have
been performed for random pinholes that are naturally present in thin metal
films. There is no detailed knowledge on the shape and size of the pinholes
necessary to produce this effect under controlled conditions, which severely
limits advancement of the theoretical description of the effect and its possible
applications. We propose to expand these experiments to study single-photon
tunneling effect in well-controlled geometries, by making use of ion-beam
milling fabrication techniques. Based on this research we are going to explore a
number of novel device ideas in the areas of optical communications and quantum
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;