* 0210400
* NIRT - Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Investigations of Fluid Interactions/Transport in Nanodomains and Around Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Robert Pfeffer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 09/30/2008
* USD 904,525.00

This grant is funded in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Fluidization and transport of micron-
sized powder materials are routine unit operations for large-scale manufacturing
and processing of a variety of particulate products in many industries, such as
petroleum, chemical, agricultural, food, pharmaceutical and ceramics. While many
of these industries can benefit from the unique properties of nanostructured
materials, little attention has been paid to the fluidization and transport of
nanoparticles. In this proposal, the challenging problem of understanding the
physics of fluidization and transport of nanoparticles, in order to be able to
process them to manufacture nanocomposites with tailored properties, is
addressed. Normally, nanoparticles cannot be fluidized because of the very large
interparticle forces that exist between them. Recent research, however,
indicates that nanoparticles can be fluidized at gas velocities well above the
minimum fluidization velocity of the primary particles without being elutriated,
because they form large stable agglomerates. These agglomerates are very porous,
allowing for a variety of physical and chemical surface treatments that take
advantage of the extremely large surface area of the nanoparticles. The NJIT/IIT
research program includes experiments to study the flow behavior of
nanoparticles in conventional, rotating and circulating fluidized beds.
Theoretical modeling and computer simulations, using kinetic theory at various
length scales, are also proposed. These models will be used to predict the size
and structure of agglomerates of nanoparticles and the flow behavior of
nanoparticles in risers. Experiments will also be performed to manufacture
nanocomposites with tailored properties by coating "fluidized" nanoparticles
with polymer or by mixing two different species of nanoparticles. The modeling
and computer simulations will provide predictive capabilities that will also
help in optimization and scale-up. The investigations at NJIT/IIT will be
complemented by research on the flow of fluids in nanoscale channels/cavities,
performed by the NIRT group at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
(WPI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another positive outcome of the research will be the
education and training of undergraduate and graduate students in the area of
particle technology, a relatively neglected area in engineering education but of
extreme technological, economic and environmental importance. This will be
accomplished in part by a new course in nanotechnology incorporating the results
of the research which will also help in disseminating the results. Moreover,
because of the large diversity of NJIT's and IIT's student body, many of the
students in the particle technology programs at both institutions, and who will
be involved with the proposed research, are women and underrepresented
minorities. Research and education collaborations and partnerships will also be
initiated with academic institutions, industry and government agencies involved
with the flow and processing of nanoparticles. Academic collaborations, in
addition to that with (WPI) include the Ecole des Mines in Albi, France and
Osaka Prefecture University in Japan. &lt;br/&gt;