* 0210997
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Soconusco Formative Project
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2003
* USD 11,997.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. Robert Rosenswig will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his archaeological
settlement survey in the Cuauhtemoc zone of the Soconusco, located on the
southern Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico. The region is particularly
significant as it includes some of the first sedentary communities in
Mesoamerica and the earliest evidence of emergent social complexity and
political hierarchy between approximately 1550 and 650 BC. The Soconusco also
has the best evidence in Mesoamerica of direct interaction with the Gulf Coast
Olmec - the first civilization the region. A pedestrian survey will
systematically cover 50 sq km and map changing political organization across the
landscape. This survey will take advantage of existing trenches dug for banana
irrigation to provide accurate subsurface information over a large area. With
reliable surface-subsurface correspondence, the distribution of settlements will
be documented with a degree of confidence not often possible with regional
surface survey. &lt;br/&gt;Power and hierarchy are arguably the most fundamental
issues addressed by anthropology and most other social sciences. Explaining the
emergence of sociopolitical hierarchy over centuries and millennia is a job
ideally suited to archaeology. Social scientists study the structure and
dynamics of unequal power relations in contemporary contexts. However, these
scholars are generally limited to a temporal breadth of decades, or with the
help of historical documents a few centuries. Archaeologists are in a unique
position to explore the origins of the institutionalized hierarchy that
permeates every aspect of modern life. Mr. Rosenswig's research will track the
development of sociopolitical complexity in the Cuauhtemoc survey zone over
nearly a millennia and will help to determine the nature of relations between
local elites and their Olmec counterparts who resided in Mexico's Gulf Coast.
Did sociopolitical complexity in the Soconusco coalesce as a result of contact
with the Gulf Coast Olmec of Tabasco and Veracruz? Did the Gulf Coast Olmec
actually make incursions into the Soconusco? Alternatively, is the impact of the
Gulf Coast over-emphasized in models of Formative Mesoamerican society? These
competing hypotheses revolve around the nature of an "Olmec Horizon" and strive
to understand Early and Middle Formative society and the nature of relations
between distant regions of Mesoamerica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taking advantage of
modern irrigation ditches and lack of later period occupation, the proposed
survey will provide reliable demographic changes at a regional scale. The
results of this study will further our understanding of the relationship between
local and interregional processes during the emergence of sociopolitical
complexity in the Soconusco. This research is also significant cross-culturally
as Mesoamerica is one of only a handful of areas in the world where
sociopolitical complexity emerged independently and the Soconusco contains some
of the earliest societies where this occurred. Mr. Rosenswig's research will
document the manner in which incipient sociopolitical complexity emerged and
will also assist in training a promising young
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;