* 0210543
* NIRT: Motion control platform for accurate measurement and manufacturing of nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* David Trumper, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 771,500.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Nano-scale positioning and control
technology will be essential both for nanotechnology research instrumentation
and for tools dedicated to fabrication and testing of nano-devices, but few, if
any, robust and reproducible solutions exist. To realize manufacture of
macroscopically useful systems, it is necessary to have mechanisms with
geometric precision and accuracy to facilitate the transition from nano-science
to productive nanotechnology. This will be particularly important for multi-
process manufacture and assembly of complexly shaped mechanisms. The objective
of this project is to produce a portable and accurate instrument for
sample/probe motion that is capable of performing at nanometer levels over
protracted time periods. The output of this work will be a compact and highly
integrated instrument, capable of reproducibly positioning a macro-sized object
such as a silicon wafer over the complete scan area of 50 mm x 50 mm and return
to a specified position thereby enabling observations of processes containing
nanometer-sized objects as well as the ability to 'pick and place' for multi-
component assembly. The instrument would enable nanometer resolution tools to
focus on a nano-device placed anywhere over the instruments operating range for
applications such as imprint lithography, lithographic self assembly, nanowire
circuitry and complex multi-process and multi-scale assemblies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This development will provide a facility for
nanotechnology studies in all fields for which fundamental measurements at the
limits of current technological capability are an issue, in particular, in the
fields of bio-mechanics, nano-electronics and nano-mechanics. Training of future
engineers in the emerging field of instrument and machine design for
nanotechnology applications will take place both during the development of the
instrumentation systems and through subsequent projects and graduate instruction
based around the developed facility. It is also envisaged that knowledge of
architectures for nanometer mechanism design will be incorporated into graduate
precision machine design courses. A new graduate course titled 'Mechanical
systems for nanotechnology' is currently being developed and will be offered in
the 2002 fall semester. Additionally, a project web-site will be developed that
will include links to logistical and technical discussion pages specific to this
project as well as links to related sites. As part of our outreach to the k-12
community there will be a section providing an overview of this work aimed
towards high school level readership.&lt;br/&gt;