* 0210785
* NIRT:  Size Dependence of Phase Transitions in Nanocrystalline Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Michael Aziz, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,105,632.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). This research project aims to explore: 1) the
nature of structure-property changes or phase transitions that occur in solid
materials in response to temperature, pressure, electromagnetic fields or
mechanical strain; 2) the size dependence of phase transitions in oxide
nanocrystals, focusing on electronic and lattice dynamics during the phase
transition; 3) the effects of interfacial energy and strain; and 4) the
influence of pressure, temperature, impurity doping and defect density on phase
stability. These studies will produce a multi-dimensional phase diagrams for
nanoscale oxide materials. In addition to training graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars in advanced research techniques relevant both to science
and technology, the combination of chemistry, materials science and physics
research issues will provide an intellectually rich educational environment. The
project brings together a multi-institutional team of faculty, postdoctoral
scholars and graduate students from chemistry, materials science and physics to
explore nanoscale materials and their possible uses in technology. Outreach
through Vanderbilt University's Explorations Web site will showcase this NSF
project for the general public. Connections to the Owen Graduate School of
Management will couple into the rapidly growing business interests in
nanoscience and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding structural
phase transformations in oxide nanocrystals is important to the development of a
number of important materials technology areas that include catalysis,
separation technologies, phosphor materials, thin-film electronics, photonics,
and environmental remediation. Students trained in these areas will compete very
favorably for jobs in high priority areas of interest to the academic,
industrial, and government laboratory sectors. This project is co-supported by
the Division of Materials Research, the Chemistry Division, the Physics
Division, and the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;