* 0210517
* NIRT:      Tailored Fluorinated Surfactant Templates for the Design of Ordered Nanoporous Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Hans-Joachim Lehmler, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,106,000.00

This interdisciplinary research team will address using a new class of structure
directing agents, fluorinated surfactants, for the design of ordered nanoporous
metal oxides and organic-inorganic hybrid materials. Fluorinated surfactants
provide a novel platform for both templating of and recovery from ordered porous
materials because they assemble more readily than hydrocarbon surfactants, form
stable phases of low interfacial curvature, and are both hydrophobic and
lipophobic. Departing from a traditional technique based on hydrocarbon
surfactants we will first systematically explore the effects of fluorinated
surfactant structure on the templating of porous silica. With a goal of
designing surfactant-templated nanostructures with more tightly controlled pore
architecture, this project will integrate molecular simulations, fluorinated
surfactant synthesis, phase characterization, and materials synthesis
techniques. We also will exploit the selective solubility of fluorinated species
in low surface tension fluids (such as supercritical carbon dioxide) to enhance
template recovery from nanoporous ceramics. Because fluorinated surfactants can
be extracted under mild conditions, their use is expected to improve methods of
synthesizing organic-inorganic hybrid materials with nanostructured
pores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-assembly of molecular precursors allows the
synthesis of nanostructured ceramics that approach the functionality and
efficiency of biological materials. "Functionalizing" the pore walls with
selected molecular fragments further enhances the potential of these inorganic
materials for catalysts, separation materials, sensors and miniaturized
diagnostic devices. The synergistic approach to the research and educational
activities of this project will advance the fluorosurfactant-based design of new
nanosystems by molecular templating and organic
functionalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in response
to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The award
is jointly supported through two directorates at NSF: (i) Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (Division of Materials Research in the Ceramics and Solid-
State Chemistry programs) and (ii) Engineering (Division of Design, Manufacture
and Industrial Innovation in the Nanomanufacturing program).&lt;br/&gt;