* 0210376
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Re-evaluating Collapse:  A Study of Urban Households from Kazane Hoyuk, Southeast Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Patricia Wattenmaker, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,927.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Wattenmaker, Mr. Trella will conduct archaeological
excavations at the Early Bronze Age (3000-2000 B.C.) city of Kazane Hoyuk, in
southeastern Turkey. Previous archaeological investigations have indicated that
by 2400 B.C., Kazane was the center of an early city-state, incorporating many
thousands of citizens including surrounding towns and villages. However, around
2100 B.C., the city itself shrank by roughly 60% in size. The changes evident at
Kazane are representative of changes in settlement patterns in other parts of
Upper Mesopotamia (southeastern Turkey, Northern Syria and Northern Iraq), where
many larger towns and urban centers either contracted to a small portion of
their previous size or were abandoned completely at the end of the third
millennium. These excavations are intended to provide a better understanding of
both the social and environmental processes leading up to these dramatic
changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its apex, Kazane was over 100 hectares (about
250 acres) in size with a surrounding city wall and a 20-meter high mound at the
center. Due to the fact that the city was completely abandoned by around 1800
BC, the architectural phases dating to the period of the site's contraction are
just beneath the present-day surface and are easily reached, making Kazane an
ideal site for this study. The goal of the excavations is to uncover a total of
400 m2 of occupation, split evenly between an elite, or upper-class domestic
area and a non-elite domestic area. Pre and post-contraction household data from
these areas will allow for the monitoring of change throughout a range of socio-
economic levels within the urban center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
collected during these excavations will consist of architectural plans, domestic
refuse such as discarded animal bones, broken pottery and stone tools and
environmental data in the form of paleobotanical and phytolith samples. Although
some researchers suggest that the collapse of city-states at the end of the
third millennium was entirely the result of an abrupt change in climate, local
factors such as the intensification of food production and an increased emphasis
on the consumption of craft goods may have also played a role in pushing large
cities like Kazane to their environmental limits, leaving them prone to
collapse. In an effort to untangle these connections, shifts in food production
over time will be monitored through detailed analyses of faunal remains and
paleobotanical samples. Changes in craft production and consumption will be
detected by comparing densities of pottery and other craft goods from successive
phases of occupation. Finally, paleobotanical and phytolith analyses will detect
shifts in the frequencies of drought resistant crops and weeds, which will speak
to changes in climatic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, while
certainly shedding light on the collapse of city-states in the third millennium
B.C., will also speak to larger issues such as the long-term effects of
agricultural intensification and resource extraction. It will also provide for
the continued training of Mr. Trella in both excavation and artifact analysis
and continue the spirit of collaboration between American archaeologists and
Turkish museum officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;