* 0210972
* IRCEB: Interactive Effects of UV Radiation and Temperature on Pelagic Foodwebs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Wade Jeffrey, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2005
* USD 2,518,830.00

0210972 &lt;br/&gt;Williamson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to understand how temperature and colored dissolved organic
matter (CDOM) influence the impact of UV on food webs in lakes. We hypothesize
that climate change will regulate UV damage at both the molecular level (by
altering temperature), and at the ecosystem level (by altering CDOM). We
hypothesize that high UV, low temperature conditions will favor plant-based food
webs while lower UV: temperature ratios conditions will favor bacteria-based
food webs, with important consequences for zooplankton, fish, and ecosystem
structure and function. A carefully focused set of analytical and experimental
approaches will test these hypotheses in the lab, and in the field at different
elevations with different UV and CDOM conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
widely recognized that environmental UV is damaging, but little is known about
how molecular repair of UV damage varies with temperature or how these effects
propagate up to the ecosystem level. The proposed research will advance our
understanding of how lakes are likely to respond to future changes in
temperature and UV related to alteration of climate and ozone. Students will be
closely integrated into the research to provide them with the diverse range of
quantitative skills necessary to tackle some of the complex issues that
environmental biologists face in this period of human-accelerated environmental
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;