* 0210283
* NER:  Synthesis of Boron Nitride Nanotubes for Nanoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Raj Singh, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 06/30/2004
* USD 80,000.00

ABSTRACT

0210283 Singh

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The primary
objective of this research is to develop a fundamental understanding for
synthesizing/manufacturing boron nitride nanotubes (BN-NTs) predictably and
reproducibly by Electron Cyclotron Resonance Microwave Plasma Chemical Vapor
Deposition (ECR-MPCVD). Pure BN nanotubes present an attractive opportunity for
practical applications. They offer a unique combination of electrical and
mechanical properties. Their predicted wide band-gap is independent of tube
structure, which reveals BN-NTs potential for new generations of nanoelectronic
devices based on field emission and cold cathode characteristics. This
exploratory NER project will use ECR-MPECVD to synthesize BN-NTs. The unique
features of this study will be to select novel metal-organic precursors,
incorporate appropriate catalysts, and provide special surface pre-treatments to
enhance formation and growth of single and multi-walled BN-NTs. In addition, in
situ monitoring of plasma chemistry and processing parameters will be performed
to relate to BN-NTs formation and growth. The proposed research will investigate
two unique aspects: (1) Roles of the precursor chemistry on the synthesis of BN-
NTs, and (2) Effects of substrate pretreatment such as surface modification by
seeding and ion implantation on the BN-NTs formation and growth. In addition,
influence of special catalysts such as Li3N and Mg3N2 on the synthesis of BN-NTs
will be investigated. HRTEM, EELS, SEM, TED and possibly other analytical
techniques will characterize the nanotubes. In addition, selected electrical
properties of BN-NTs will be measured for applications in electronics.

On a broader scale, a successful completion of this research will lead to a
knowledge base for synthesizing BN-NTs with exceptional electrical, thermal, and
mechanical properties for applications in electronics. It is expected that
future generations of nanostructure electronic devices can be based on BN-NTs.
For example, BN-NTs may serve as a perfect nano-insulating tubular shield for
any conducting material encapsulated within. This offers the possibility of
nanotube electrical transport tailored over a wide range. Unique field emission
and cold cathode characteristics of BN-NTs have applications in flat panel
display devices. Another important goal of this project is to train graduate
student and research associate/post doc through participation on this research
project and their MS and Ph.D. theses. In addition, minority/women high school
and undergraduate students will also be mentored and exposed to this research.