* 0210223
* NIRT: Enhancing the Properties of Nanoscale Electrospun Polymer Fibers thru Chemical Architecture, Surface Texturing Optimization Processing Protocols
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Norman Wagner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,087,500.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Team (NIRT), co-funded by the Divisions of
Materials Research (DMR), Chemical and Transport Systems (CTS) and Design,
Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation (DMII) will use genetically directed
synthetic methods to permit exact control of the placement (at intervals of .6
nm, 1.0 nm, and/or 1.6 nm) of reactive chemical groups along a polypeptide
backbone. These reactive groups will be both biologically active and
electroactive providing novel materials for processing into fibers via
electrospinning techniques. The fiber morphology, which will be varied by a
judicious choice of processing conditions, will be characterized by electron
microscopy, small angle neutron scattering and Raman spectroscopy. Mechanical
properties of individual fibers will be evaluated using MEMS and NEMS devices
while the biological activity of the electrospun fiber mats will be investigated
by cell incubation studies.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The results of these
investigations will provide molecular design rules for future biomaterial
constructs and will lead to a new generation of tissue scaffold materials for
wound repair. The hybrid bio-electronic materials that result will address some
of the lifetime and brightness issues for next generation flat panel computer
displays that are critical for future industrial manufacturing. The integration
of this research and education through externship experiences at DuPont and the
development of new courses on nanomaterials design and processing will provide
knowledge and an experience base that will equip students with the work-force
ready skills critically needed by industry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;