* 0210230
* NER:  Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Extraction Process for Forming Nanoporous Materials for Low-k and Biosensor Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,986.00

Materials with controlled nanoporous structures will be developed for potential
applications in the areas of microelectronics and biosensors. The goal is to
couple a nanotemplating methodology for creating nanophase separated materials
with supercritical CO2 extraction of one of the phases. The advancement of the
proposed methodology over the current state of the art includes increased
flexibility in the types of matrix materials which can be used, as well as
processing advantages over methods in which the porogen is removed from the
matrix by thermal degradation. The scientific challenge of the proposed work
lies in understanding the polymer physics associated with extraction of the CO2
soluble component without collapse of the matrix. In essence, this is related to
the glass transition, plasticization effects, the viscoelastic properties of the
matrix and the stresses incurred due to extraction. We will prepare spin-on
films at Texas Tech, as well as working with collaborators at IBM, to prepare
nanophase separated morphologies. The films will contain a component which is
insoluble in supercritical CO2 and will also contain a soluble component which
can be extracted. Characterization of the properties of the films before and
after exposure to supercritical CO2 extraction will be performed, including
measurement of the dielectric properties, thickness and refractive index. In
addition, films will be studied by Fourier transform infrared spectrometry,
transmission electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. Two graduate
students and one undergraduate researcher will perform the research under the
direct supervision of the PIs.