* 0210485
* NER:  Polymer Nanowires Synthesized on a Flat Surface Via a Surfactant Template
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Edgar O'Rear, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,987.00

Nanoscale materials offer many potential technological applications due to the
unusual properties inherent in these materials compared to their traditional
macroscale analogues. Conducting polymers are prime targets for nanoscale
synthesis as their conductivity is greatly enhanced by highly oriented
morphologies. In this proposal, The PI's show for the first time that oriented
polyaniline (PANI) nanowires, with almost uniform radii, have been oxidatively
synthesized on highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) and on mica using
an&lt;br/&gt;adsorbed surfactant template. They have also synthesized similar
structures, but not as ordered, using polypyrrole. The dimensions of the
synthesized structure vary depending on the substrate. If a way can be
determined to produce conducting nanowires with almost uniform radii so that
their center-to-center distances are regular and controllable, then this would
have substantial impact in many areas, particularly in the microelectronics
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The important technological discovery that has
allowed them to make these advances is the fact that adsorbed monolayers of
surfactant can form very unique structures at the solid-liquid interface. The
type of structures range from cylinders, spheres and flat bilayers on
hydrophilic surfaces, to half cylinders, half spheres and monolayers on
hydrophobic surfaces. Using the results of work done by others, they were able
to choose a specific surfactant structure as a patterning template. Their
experiments have been successful, in the specific case of adsorbed half-
cylinders the resulting film also has what appears to be a half-cylinder
morphology for certain polymers and surfaces. The dimensions of the fillers have
been measured to be between 50 and 100 nm in diameter, and as long as 150
microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exciting new discovery and the work described
in this grant have all been completed over the last 4 months. Although AFM
micrographs clearly support their claims, their understanding of some critical
issues is not complete. For example, the structures vary significantly in
dimension (height and width) depending on the substrate and monomer that is
used. The wires coalesce; one of the most important issues is to understand why
these wires coalesce, and determine, if possible, a way to reduce or arrest
coalescence. They know almost nothing about the properties of these nanowires,
including their conductivity, and clearly the properties of the wires is
extremely important. This grant will enable them to explore all of these issues
and help them to achieve the ultimate goal, the synthesis of fully dispersed
nanowires oriented in one direction over very large length scales.&lt;br/&gt;