* 0210437
* NER:  Mechanically "Tuning" and "Switching" the Dynamics of Molecular Motors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Dudley Herschbach, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,489.00

This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF 01-157. The research team
will develop a broadly applicable conceptual framework to describe how tension
on a DNA polymer can produce both the "tuning" and "switching" phenomena
observed in DNA polymerase motors. This work entails developing theoretical
models for the interaction of external forces with the conformational dynamics
of the motor. It is also necessary to understand how molecular anisotropy in
combination with the energy from a non-equilibrium chemical reaction biases
Brownian fluctuations to drive the motor in a preferred direction. Like any
nanoscale device, Brownian motors derive great benefit by working with rather
than against thermal noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to constructing an
appropriate theoretical framework and demonstrating its utility for the
interpretation of single molecule experiments, the team hopes to translate
insight gained from the study of biological motors to the design and control of
engineered motors that perform specific functions at the nanoscale. The broad
impact of this work is that it may not only shed new light on the mechanism by
which DNA replication is controlled in cells but also lead to novel strategies
for controlling molecular scale processes and the function of
nanodevices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly funded by the Divisions
of Physics and Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate
and the Division of Electrical and Communications Systems in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;