* 0210452
* NER:  Social and Ethical Dimensions of Nanotechnology
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Robert Hull, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 106,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;NER: Social and Ethical
Dimensions of Nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;Project # 0210452&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Gorman, University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best time to make
certain a technological revolution will be beneficial to society&lt;br/&gt;is in
the beginning. Progress in nanotechnology requires cooperation
among&lt;br/&gt;engineers, scientists, ethicists and social scientists focused
on advancing the field in a&lt;br/&gt;way that promises the maximum benefit to
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory-type award amounts to 'proof of
concept' effort concerning the ability of the interdisciplinary team at the
University of Virginia to work together on a NIRT project to develop new
directions in the understanding of societal implications of nanotechnology. Two
specific elements are involved. The first step is initiation of a new research
project in the MRSEC. This project is defined by interaction among the co-PIs
and involves a new graduate student who is interested in societal dimensions of
nanotechnology. She is conducting a new project in the MRSEC and the work
reflects on her own process of enculturation into the laboratory environment--
particularly the social and ethical dimensions of her project choices and
research. An outside consultant is assisting in the training of student in
participant observation techniques and methodologies.. This shared supervision
is a model for what we hope to accomplish with a NIRT
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second element involves the development of case
studies related to the societal implications of new nano-technologies within the
MRSEC. To engage current graduate students, the project provides $2000 awards
for 4 students. They are to develop case-studies for presentation in Rosalyne
Berne's section of TCC 401 to about 60 engineering undergraduates in their
fourth year, and also in Mike Gorman's first-year honors course for entering
engineers. The objective is production of two case-studies, each prepared by a
team consisting of one MRSEC graduate student and one student with an
appropriate STS background, either in our systems engineering/ethics option or
from the Institute for Practical Ethics. The case-studies cover social and
ethical dilemmas in nanotechnology research that are extrapolations from current
research. This pairing process is a first step towards the kind of longer-term
pairing of MRSEC and STS students called for in our
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end result of all of these efforts will be a
demonstration that a focus on societal dimensions can enhance the value of the
scientific research produced by a MRSEC. Ethics are not just overhead, i.e., an
important activity that diverts scientists and engineers from their real work.
Nanotechnology will fail to realize its full promise if social dimensions are
not built into the research program. GMOs are an example: a technology designed
to feed the world that is being rejected by much of the world on ethical
grounds. Nanotechnology risks mistaking technological possibility for social
opportunity. Research into societal dimensions is therefore critical to the
success of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;