* 0210240
* NER:  Nanofabrication Using Sub-wavelength Near-field Nano-optical Laser Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Suman Das, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,981.00

This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. This project is to develop a
nanofabrication technique based on near-field optics to manipulate, modify and
process matter at the nanoscale. This approach exploits the interaction of
matter with the evanescent electromagnetic field of a laser exiting from a sub-
wavelength aperture probe placed in close proximity (at a distance an order of
magnitude smaller than the laser wavelength) to a substrate. This approach
integrates techniques of microfabrication and MEMS, sub-wavelength photonics and
near-field optics to produce structures in the sub-100 nm regime. The research
consists of five tasks: 1) Near-field optics modeling and analysis, 2) Design
and fabrication of the near-field optical probe, 3) Development of a high
precision positioning stage for the optical probe, 4) Nanoscale laser materials
processing and characterization, and 5) Fundamental studies on nanoscale
transport phenomena and light-matter interaction. Together, these tasks will
establish the scientific and technical basis for a near-field nano-optical laser
processing technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have the following
impact on nanoscale science: 1) A scientific foundation for understanding the
fundamental physical mechanisms governing transport phenomena in near-field
nanoscale laser-matter interaction. 2) A scientific basis for systematic design
of apparatus for near-field nano-optical laser materials processing. When
successfully completed, this research will result in the following impact on
nanotechnology: 1) New techniques for very rapid fabrication of two-dimensional
and three-dimensional nanostructures. Applications include massively parallel
maskless nano-lithography, massively parallel ultrahigh density magneto-optic
phase change data storage, maskless nanoscale patterning of optical and photonic
bandgap structures, polymeric and biological materials, and nanoscale laser-
assisted chemical vapor deposition. 2) New techniques for massively parallel in-
situ material characterization, process monitoring and manipulation at the
nanometer length Applications include massively parallel nanoscale temperature
measurement, flow control and valving in massively parallel micro- and nano-
fluidics, and manipulation of biological molecules in vivo. Several industrial
interactions are anticipated as a result of successful technological
developments from this research. This project will train undergraduate and
graduate students in the exciting fields of MEMS/microfabrication, photonics and
near-field optics. Research results will be disseminated in national and
international conferences and journal publications. Scientific fundamentals of
near-field laser-matter interactions will be incorporated into an existing
graduate course in Laser Materials Processing.