* 0210383
* NIRT:  FRG:  Collective and Quasiparticle Properties of Nanocrystals and Nano-Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* John Markert, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,800,000.00

A fundamental competition between order and disorder lies at the heart of
materials science and technology. Interactions between atoms or electrons spaced
sub nanometer apart can lead to collective organization into states with long-
range order. Order in electronic states gives rise to physical consequences such
as magnetism, ferroelectricity and superconductivity. In bulk materials, the
collective electronic properties exhibit a characteristic length scale called
the coherence length, which corresponds to the minimum grain size in
superconductors, and in ferromagnets the domain wall width. These length scales
generally exceed or are comparable to geometrical parameters of nanostructured
materials. For these reasons nanostructured materials represent an important new
frontier for the study of collective electronic behavior. This interdisciplinary
research team will study the physical consequences of nanometer-size dimensions
on collective and independent electron properties in individual nanocrystals and
in controlled nanocrystal arrays. It is unique in the combination of expertise
in materials synthesis, materials characterizations and theory that has been
brought together at a single institution. It also forges a close partnership
with one leading company in information technology and two foreign institutions.
Educationally, this NIRT will help lead the campus-wide initiative at UT Austin
for training the next generation of scientists in nanoscience through the
integration of research and education and a strong partnership with the newly
established Center of Nano- and Molecular Science and Techology. It integrates
diversity by actively recruiting graduate students in minority groups. It
further reaches out to K-12 education in the Austin area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
program brings together expertise in advanced synthesis of metal and
semiconductor nanostructures, expertise in nanoscale characterizations of
structural, electronic, transport, optical and magnetic properties, and
expertise in mesoscopic and many-body condensed matter theory, working together
in a single institution to explore the physical consequences of nanometer-size
dimensions on collective and independent electron properties in individual
nanocrystals and in controlled nanocrystal arrays. Of particular interests are
ferromagnetic, superconducting, and normal metal nanocrystals, and
ferromagnetic, semimagnetic, and normal semiconductor quantum dots. In
ferromagnetic and superconducting systems the emphasis to date has been on the
collective properties that underlie, for example, the use of ferromagnets for
information storage and the potential use of small superconductors as quantum-
bits. As these particles become smaller, the physics of the magnetic anisotropy
barriers essential for information storage will be altered, and
superconductivity will be destroyed, respectively. This regime is a frontier for
fundamental physics and for materials physics and chemistry, and will be the
focus of this research program. This research team also forges a close
partnership with one leading company in information technology and two foreign
institutions. It will strengthen educational and training efforts at UT Austin
in nanoscience and nanotechnology by designing a new curriculum that removes
barriers between current disciplinary specialization in different majors and
provides an excellent training ground for the future generation of scientists in
nanoscale science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;