* 0210583
* NER:    Spin Injector for Nanomagnetics and Spintronics Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Richard Kurtz, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2004
* USD 85,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale
Science and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157,
in the NER&lt;br/&gt;category. The proposal focuses on the development and
characterization of&lt;br/&gt;one unique class of metal-semiconductor
heterostructures, which potentially&lt;br/&gt;will result in production of a
spin injector. Specifically, problems exist&lt;br/&gt;in characterizing the
nature of spin transport and scattering through the&lt;br/&gt;interfaces of
nanomagnetic and spintronic materials. As one considers&lt;br/&gt;various
potential hybrid structures, the need to be able to probe the&lt;br/&gt;spin-
dependent transmission properties of the interfaces
between&lt;br/&gt;semiconductors, ferromagnets, non-magnetic metals, and
insulators becomes&lt;br/&gt;critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our objective is to
fabricate and characterize a structure that will allow&lt;br/&gt;one to
interrogate the spin-dependent transmission properties by providing&lt;br/&gt;an
easily-controlled source of spin-polarized electrons. The device
uses&lt;br/&gt;circularly-polarized light to excite spin-dependent carriers
within GaAs,&lt;br/&gt;and incorporates a Ag thin-film quantum-well spin-filter
to energy select&lt;br/&gt;the hot electrons. This source of energy-selectable
spin-polarized&lt;br/&gt;electrons then forms the substrate for the subsequent
growth of magnetic&lt;br/&gt;structures. We will characterize the degree of
spin-polarization by using&lt;br/&gt;the empty minority states of a Co film
grown on this spin injector as an&lt;br/&gt;analyzer. While changing the doping
of the GaAs provides a coarse energy&lt;br/&gt;selection, judicious choice of
the Ag thickness provides a fine-tuning of&lt;br/&gt;the energy of these
electrons via the energetics of the relevant Ag&lt;br/&gt;quantum-well
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our plan to demonstrate, refine, and calibrate this
device involves the&lt;br/&gt;growth of quantum-stabilized Ag films on cleaved
GaAs(110) and on GaAs(100)&lt;br/&gt;wafers. We have already shown that these Ag
films exhibit quantum-well&lt;br/&gt;states and they will be used to further
energy-filter the spin-polarized&lt;br/&gt;electrons. To analyze the spin-
polarization of these electrons, we will&lt;br/&gt;epitaxially grow Co on the
Ag/GaAs structure and calibrate the&lt;br/&gt;spin-dependent transport into the
empty minority-state bands, both as a&lt;br/&gt;function of the polarization of
the electrons from GaAs as well as the&lt;br/&gt;magnetization of the Co. Future
extensions include the incorporation of an&lt;br/&gt;Al2O3 insulating barrier to
test the operation in practical spin-tunneling&lt;br/&gt;devices. Throughout the
research plan, emphasis will be placed on&lt;br/&gt;correlating
atomic/morphological and electronic properties of
nanophase&lt;br/&gt;heterostructures with ensuing spin-dependent
conductance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project impacts the field of magnetics in
several ways. This&lt;br/&gt;structure provides an inexpensive tool to
interrogate spin transport&lt;br/&gt;properties and provides an alternative to
spin-polarized photoemission and&lt;br/&gt;inverse photoemission. Once
calibrated, it can be used to quickly evaluate&lt;br/&gt;the spin-dependent
transport properties of advanced materials such as&lt;br/&gt;half-metallic thin-
films. Furthermore, it can be used in a direct manner&lt;br/&gt;to provide
valuable data on the spin-dependent scattering processes that&lt;br/&gt;occur at
the interfaces of spintronic structures.&lt;br/&gt;