* 0210714
* NER:  Role of Elastic Anisotropy in Semiconductor Nanopatterning
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* John Kieffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2005
* USD 155,440.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was submitted in response to
the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The project
will explore the role of elastic anisotropy in the self-patterning of
semiconductor nanostructures, possibly catalyzing a new class of high
performance nanostructure devices. The project aims to venture into an emerging
concept in nanoscale science and engineering using a fundamentally new and
interdisciplinary approach, which combines the complementary expertise of the
investigators. During the exploratory phase, the role of elastic anisotropy in
three-dimensional semiconductor nanopatterning will be established. To this end,
ternary alloy films with varying alloy composition, lattice misfit, and
thickness will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy; their elastic anisotropies
will be measured using Brillouin scattering and interpreted using atomic-scale
simulations. Using these alloy films as the spacer material in quantum dot
superlattices, the relationship between the elastic anisotropies and the long-
range order of the resulting quantum dot arrays will then be established. The
work accomplished in this NER project may lay the foundation for a larger effort
to develop three-dimensional nanopatterning methods for use in a wide variety of
innovative nanostructure devices.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
basic exploratory research issues in a topical area of materials science with
high technological relevance. An important feature of the program is the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. Graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students will participate in this project, and will be involved with
growth and characterization of semiconductor nanostructures, elastic property
measurements, and computer simulations. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;