* 0210284
* NIRT: Semiconductor Metal Oxide Nanoparticles for Visible Light Photocatalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Chin-Pao Huang, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,123,954.00

This proposal describes a systematic study of the synthesis, characterization,
and application of TiO2 nanoparticles as photocatalyst. The potential of the
nanoparticles to absorb in the visible range by tailoring the surface,
structural and compositional properties will be studied. Specifically, the
multifold objectives of this proposal include the utilization of a unique
physical vapor deposition process to obtain TiO2 nanoparticles with particle
sizes ranging between 1 and 20 nm, and to reproducibly dope the nanoparticles
with various dopants. These nanoparticles will be characterized for structural,
chemical and optoelectronic properties. Of particular interest is the
characterization of the valence band and conduction band structure by XPS, UPS,
and EXAFS. We will also utilize first-principles calculations to acquire an
atomistic understanding of nanoparticle properties. The theoretical models will
be used to develop an understanding of the chemical and photochemical properties
of pure and modified TiO2 nanoparticles. Modification involves the selective
decoration of nanoparticle surfaces with noble metal particles including Ag, Au,
Pt, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is used as a
photocatalyst for environmental cleanup. Upon absorption of light, it helps
break down toxic chemicals in air and in water. TiO2, however absorbs only UV
light. It would be more useful if its absorption of the visible light can be
enhanced since most of the sunlight is in the visible range. This proposal
describes a systematic methodology to increase visible range absorption by
changing the particle size, composition and surface
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in response to the
solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The award is
jointly supported through two directorates at NSF: (i) Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (Division of Materials Research in the Ceramics program) and (ii)
Engineering (Division of Chemical &amp; Transport Systems).&lt;br/&gt;