* 0210061
* Collaborative Research:  Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Growth Mechanisms in Combustion involving Cyclopentadiene and Indene
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Adel Sarofim, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 03/31/2006
* USD 135,002.00

This is a fundamental molecular analysis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH) growth processes in combustion systems involving cyclopentadiene (CPD) and
indene, which contains the CPD moiety. These compounds, which are present in
combustion effluents, are of interest because of their roles as intermediates in
the formation of potentially mutagenic PAH which contain five-membered rings, as
well as in the formation of fullerenes and soot. Cyclopentadiene and indene are
important in growth of PAH from combustion processes because they form
resonance-stabilized radicals that are reactive at multiple sites. Study of
reactions involving these compounds in well-designed molecular systems leads to
better understanding of the underlying chemistry of PAH growth from combustion
and of conditions that control the formation of toxic air pollutants and soot.
Previous work indicates that cyclopentadienyl and indenyl radicals add to the pi
bonds of the parent molecules (CPD and indene) that contain external CPD
moieties. Subsequent reactions lead to the formation of ortho-fused PAH via one
of two pathways: one involving expansion of both five-membered rings to form PAH
with only six-membered rings by a route similar to that for cyclopentadienyl
radical combination to form naphthalene; the other involving formation of a
norbornenyl-type bridged intermediate followed by ring opening and loss of a C1
species to form PAH that retain one CPD moiety. This second pathway is a route
of PAH formation not previously proposed. Experiments at Georgia Tech extend
work on CPD and indene chemistry to thermal reactions of these compounds with
three other species: styrene, acenaphthylene, and phenanthrene. Formation of PAH
and growth by addition of cyclopentadienyl and indenyl radicals to other types
of pi?bonds is studied. Styrene is the simplest aromatic molecule that contains
a vinyl substituent; these species are common in combustion systems due to the
abundance of acetylene. Acenaphthylene is representative of fully conjugated PAH
containing external five-membered rings; other examples found in combustion
systems include acephenanthrylene and aceanthrylene. Phenanthrene is a PAH that
contains a pi?bond that is less conjugated than other aromatic pi?bonds; another
combustion-generated PAH with this feature is pyrene. Thus, the proposed study
will significantly expand the understanding of the growth of carbon moieties in
combustion systems from addition of cyclopentadienyl and indenyl radicals and
subsequent PAH fusion. Semi-empirical molecular modeling has been performed on
the CPD/indene system to study alternative PAH formation pathways. Qualitative
agreement was obtained between experimentally observed and computed partitioning
between PAH product channels. Quantum mechanical theory has been applied to the
study of carbon growth processes involving acenaphthylene. This study includes
ab initio modeling at Utah of the CPD/indene system to refine computational
methods and verify semi-empirical modeling results. A computational study of the
new cyclopentadienyl and indenyl addition pathways being investigated
experimentally is conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve chemical mechanisms of
PAH and soot formation in combustion systems, using a tight coordination of
experimental and computational approaches. The project combines experimental and
computational expertise of investigators at two institutions. This collaboration
will require a close interaction and will broaden the research capabilities of
each group.&lt;br/&gt;