* 0210806
* NIRT: Nanotubes and nanowires as biological sensors and actuators: Approaching the single-molecule limit
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Lloyd Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 1,449,999.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The aim of this project is the development and
use of biologically modified nanotubes and nanowires as electrical probes of
biological activity. Researchers will develop a new type of nanoscale probe, the
"nano-coax", that can serve as a molecular probe only nanometers in dimensions.
This new probe involves attaching biomolecules specifically to the end of
silicon nanowires and carbon nanotubes, providing a very highly localized
sensing region. The electrical response of the nanoprobe will be measured over a
wide frequency range from kilo-Hertz to Giga-Hertz. The researchers will also
explore the use of the nanoprobe as a molecular-scale actuator, using an applied
electrical control signal to induce a change in activity of biological molecules
tethered to the end. The research involves an interdisciplinary team of
chemists, molecular biologists, and electrical engineers. The outcome of the
research will be the development of a new set of bioanalytical tools able to
rapidly detect biological species with unprecedented selectivity and sensitivity
approaching the single-molecule limit. Successful use of nanoprobes as
biological actuators would permit the direct manipulation of biological
processes at the nanometer scale. The research involves a large component of
graduate and undergraduate education and training. Graduate students will work
together with faculty and undergraduate students as part of an interdisciplinary
team. Faculty researchers will train graduate students and undergraduate
students in state-of-the-art methods of materials fabrication and biological
analysis, providing a workforce well-trained for industrial and academic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at the development of a
revolutionary kind of biological sensor. Recent advances have led to the
development of tiny wires ("nanowires") only a few nanometers in diameter. In
this research project, an interdisciplinary team of scientists will fabricate
nanowires and then attach biological molecules, such as DNA and proteins, to
them. The researchers will then investigate the electrical signals generated
when these "nanoprobes" interact with other biological molecules. The research
has the potential to lead to major advances in the development of highly
sensitive detectors able to identify minute quantities (perhaps as little as a
single molecule) of biological molecules. The researchers will also explore the
use of nanometer-sized probes to induce changes in biological activity, with
long-term potential for biomedical applications. This project is co-supported by
the Division of Materials Research, the Chemistry Division, the Division of
Bioengineering and Environmental Systems, and the Chemical and Transport Systems
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;