* 0210293
* NER:  Coulomb Crystals of Carbon Single-Walled Nanotubes (SWNTs); Manipulation, Separation, and Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Walter Lempert, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Tissue
* 08/31/2004
* USD 95,000.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) award to Ohio State University is
supported by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS) and Physics (MPS), and this proposal
was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and
Engineering" (NSF 01-157). With this award, Professors Subramaniam and Lempert
will synthesize, separate and manipulate single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs)
using Coulomb crystals in plasmas. Coulomb crystals will be formed with SWNTs
(or aggregates thereof) at the lattice centers either by introducing these into
a striated DC glow discharge plasma or by synthesizing them in-situ, the latter
being accomplished using carbon monoxide and a nickel catalyst. Because of the
large aspect ratios, Coulomb crystals formed with SWNTs are expected to have
unusual structure and properties, and they will provide a unique environment in
which fundamental understanding of nanotube formation and growth processes may
be studied non-intrusively using spectroscopic methods. The SWNTs suspended in
the Coulomb crystal will be separated and manipulated depending on their
electrical characteristics and size using Scanning Tunneling Microscope
conducting tips. With this award, students will be trained in the synthesis and
modification of carbon nanotubes.

Single-walled carbon nanotubes suspended in Coulomb crystals will be prepared
using an electric glow discharge plasma or by chemical methods from carbon
monoxide in the presence of a nickel catalyst. Carbon nanotubes formed will be
separated and manipulated based on their electrical properties and size using
Scanning Tunneling Microscope conducting tips.