* 0210928
* Bridging the Digital Divide by Using Self-Directed Learning Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Kevin Clark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/2004
* USD 97,005.00

The purpose of this project is to describe an exploratory research project that
focuses on technology and learning. The research addresses critical issues
related to improving how technology is utilized in underserved populations to
improve its pedagogical impact. This is accomplished by studying how self-
directed learning communities (SDLC) are formed and sustained, as well as the
motivational issues related to technology access and implementation. These
issues are vital to maximizing the potential benefits of current efforts to
bridge the digital divide, which have primarily focused on providing access to
hardware, software, and content. Self-directed learning communities are defined
as a vibrant, participative, and culturally aware human environment that
promotes learning opportunities to enhance the potential of its members. This
definition has been adapted from "learning cities" definition of the European
Lifelong Learning Initiative (ELLI). Through this exploratory research, I will
be able to begin to establish an empirically based repository for research and
practices related to the digital divide and the impact of self-directed learning
communities. For this SGER research project, I will focus on a single learning
community for a year in and effort to develop concrete data and techniques that
may be used in future research. To this end, I will seek to answer the following
research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the essential factors of a self-
directed learning community?&lt;br/&gt;2. How should we assess student
progress?&lt;br/&gt;3. What kinds of implementation models are valid and
replicable?&lt;br/&gt;Because self-directed learning communities emerge
spontaneously instead of being created formally, I will observe and document
their formation. Investigating the formation to these self-directed learning
communities is crucial and requires the analysis of the roles, relationships,
attitudes, and needs of the stakeholders involved. In an effort to establish a
benchmark, extant data, which may include standardized test scores, will be
used. As the self-directed learning community emerges, the factors effecting its
formation will be identified and analyzed. Once the factors are investigated,
the researcher will work with the stakeholders of the learning community to
create assessment measures. The assessment measures will be used to validate the
factors and test for their generalizeability to multiple self-directed learning
communities. Because self-directed learning communities are innovative in the
way that I am applying them, some of the research effort will be spent
identifying and analyzing what these constructs are and how they impact
learning.&lt;br/&gt;