* 0210752
* NIRT: Advanced Characterization Techniques In Optics for Nanostructures (ACTION)
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,334,582.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and
Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Recent advances have made it
possible to assemble materials and components atom by atom, or molecule by
molecule allowing for controlled fabrication of nanostructures with dimensions
of from 3 to 100 nm. Compared to the behavior of isolated molecules or bulk
materials, the behavior of nanostructures exhibit important physical properties
not necessarily predictable from observations of either individual constituents
or large ensembles. Predominant at the nanoscale are size confinement and
quantum mechanical behavior observed in optical and electronic properties, as
well as distinct elastic and/or mechanical features. The possibility of
utilizing nanoscale behavior to enhance material properties and device functions
beyond those that we currently consider feasible is widely anticipated. These
new materials and devices herald a revolutionary age for science and technology,
provided we can observe the detailed operation and discover and utilize the
underlying principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developments in nanotechnology
present an outstanding challenge to characterization (measurement) technology by
requiring nm-scale 3-D measurement capabilities. While the technology for
synthesis has rapidly advanced, optical characterization of nanostructures is
still in its infancy. We will build on existing expertise and infrastructure at
Boston University and University of Rochester and develop a toolbox of novel
nano-optical characterization techniques to discover and understand the novel
properties of nanostructures. The Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
(NIRT) program in Advanced Characterization Techniques in Optics for
Nanostructures (ACTION) will develop measurement methods to study and understand
nanostructures. Solid immersion microscopy techniques combined with metal-tips
will provide unprecedented resolution for spectroscopy of quantum dots and other
semiconductor systems. The ultimate goal of the proposed program is to develop
robust and efficient optical techniques at a spatial resolution on the order of
10 nm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond building the required tools to investigate
novel properties of nanostructures, we will apply these tools to help answer
fundamental questions facing nanoscale researchers today. In the area of quantum
information processing, we will investigate the experimentally inaccessible
regime of closely coupled quantum dots, the coherence of excited states, and
quantum dots in tunable microcavities; in the area nanomechanical systems, we
will explore the detailed mechanisms of energy dissipation and phase noise in
resonant nanostructures; in the area of nanophotonics, we will directly
determine the local modal volumes of defect states in photonics bandgap
structures and investigate the nanoscale origins of mode leakage; and in the
area of ultrasonics, we will measure the elastic properties of solids at the
nanoscale, exploring the high frequency regime of nanoscale stresses for the
first time.&lt;br/&gt;