* 0210176
* NIRT:  Synthesis and Control of Molecular Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Alex Zettl, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,354,000.00

CCR-0210176 Crommie, Michael

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. The main objective of this project is to
develop and characterize mechanical devices at the nanoscale. This will be
performed through the creation of new, synthetic molecular machines purposefully
designed in a molecule-by-molecule fashion. In order to achieve this goal an
interdisciplinary team of researchers has been gathered that will engage in the
following activities: 1) chemically synthesize new molecules having tailored
properties to be used as nano-machine components, 2) adhere newly synthesized
molecules to prepared surfaces and demonstrate mechanical functionality, 3)
combine photolithographic MEMS technology with carbon growth techniques to
create electro-mechanically actuated molecular motors from carbon nanotubes. Two
new categories of functional molecular assemblies are expected to result from
this research. The first involves chemically engineered molecules designed with
specific mechanical functions in mind. This research thrust will be supported by
a strong chemical synthesis effort aimed at the development of new classes of
molecules able to undergo conformational changes when triggered by an outside
stimulus. The second category involves the engineering of multi-wall carbon
nanotubes to form the basis of a new mechano-molecular technology. This effort
is expected to culminate in the demonstration of the first functional nanotube
motor.

