* 0210501
* NER:  Field Effect Transistor Using Long Conjugated Semiconducting Molecular Wires
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2003
* M. David Curtis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 12/31/2003
* USD 80,000.00

0210501&lt;br/&gt;Guo&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to the
Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157,
in the NER category. The focus of this proposal is to study the electrical
properties of a special class of molecules, namely, conjugated polymer wires,
and to implement transistor structures based on the field effect. Devices based
on organic materials have been identified as one alternative for future
electronics. The attractive features of molecular electronics are that it
provides an opportunity to study a new group of materials on the molecular
level, while offering us a whole new micro- and nanoelectronics technology.
Currently there are two areas of research in organic electronics, one is
molecular electronics, and the other is organic thin film transistor. In the
molecular electronics area, there have been several successful demonstrations of
experimental working devices. One of the biggest challenges, however, in the
application of molecular electronic device is the difficult in connecting
individual molecules to form functional circuits. As a result, practical
applications of molecular devices have been primarily aimed at memory circuits,
where the circuit's layout is relatively simple. In another area, researches on
organic thin film transistors (TFTs) based on conjugated polymers and oligomers
have been conducted for over a decade, and have been envisioned as an
alternative to the more traditional a-Si TFTs. However the extremely low
mobility of these organic films has presented an immense challenge, and placed
serious limitation to its practical application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the technical difficulty in these two ends, we
propose to use three types of conjugated macromolecules to implement transistor
structures. These molecules are semiconducting conjugated polymers that are in
the form of long rigid wires. The PIs will synthesize and fabricate the device
such that the two ends of the molecule will covalently bond to the source/drain
electrodes. Through a systematic study of this type of molecular transistor,
they would like to address both the device performance issues such as whether
these semiconducting wires can offer sufficient conductance and drive capability
for practical applications, as well as their extendibility to implement simple
molecular circuits based on the operation principle of field effect transistor.
In comparison with conventional semiconductor devices, a remarkable aspect of
molecular wires is that their response may be dominated by quantum coherence
effect, possibly even at high temperature. So the proposed molecular wire
transistor can also help to understand many outstanding questions on transport
phenomenon in such structures. They believe that with advanced nanofabrication
technologies and the organic synthesis expertise of this NER team, they are in a
unique position to realize the proposed molecular wire transistor, and to study
various transport properties in this new class of molecular
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;