* 0210879
* NER:  In-Situ Second Harmonic Generation Studies to Describe Nanoscale Phenomena at the Surfaces of Microparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

Studies of nanoscale phenomena relevant to environmental preservation and
verification of new express and nonintrusive methods to control pollution on the
nanoscale are of tremendous importance to improve quality of life and help in
the creation of more efficient and clean manufacturing processes. Water
purification and quality control techniques can be significantly refined if
interactions at the interfaces of colloidal particles can be investigated at the
molecular scale. The objective of this research is to exploit and extend the
capabilities of the non-linear optical method of second harmonic generation
(SHG) to study model nanoscale interactions at the interface of micron-size
colloidal particles. More specifically, the adsorption of cationic and anionic
surfactants at micron-size charged silica and alumina particles in water will be
investigated by SHG. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SHG is a second-order nonlinear
optical process and has been proven to be highly surface-specific probe of
interfacial structure and surfactant adsorption at surfaces in particular. Its
application to study nanoscale structures at the surfaces of micron-size
particles has not been developed to its full potential due to some
methodological problems and lack of extensive knowledge about the nature of the
particle-surfactant interactions. It is expected that this research will bring
new understanding of the adsorption processes at the particle surfaces, which
will help to further promote the application of the SHG method to study
surfactant nanoscale structures on colloidal particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
SHG spectrometer will be built based on an available femtosecond laser and will
be employed for these studies. It will be built in collaboration with Prof. John
Conboy, Department of Chemistry, who has rich experience in vibrational sum
frequency generation spectroscopy and is also a senior member of the research
team. He and Dr. Zhorro Nickolov, who is a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department
of Metallurgical Engineering, will be closely collaborating with the PI on all
research issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SHG of water molecules oriented by the
charged particle interfaces will be monitored as a function of surfactant
concentration in the solution. The adsorption of the surfactant is expected to
reduce the polarization of the interfacial water molecules by screening the
surface charge of the microparticles. This would lead to a corresponding
decrease in the SHG signal which can than be measured and quantified.
Alternatively, dyes resonantly absorbing at the fundamental infrared wavelength
and therefore having a strong SHG signal, will be adsorbed at the particle
surfaces and used to establish a constant high level of SHG signal. Then the
surfactant will be added and as a result of displacing the dye from the particle
surfaces the SHG signal will decrease. Consequently surfactant adsorption free
energy and surface coverage can be evaluated in both cases. The risk elements in
the proposal are connected with the necessity to discriminate between the SHG
signals characterizing the particle interface and SHG signals which may be
generated by the bulk of the particles, and by bulk water. Also, the competition
between the surfactant and the dye for adsorption at the particle surfaces
should be accounted for. The project will have a significant impact on advancing
of the research in nanoscale phenomena in colloidal systems and on creating
capabilities to perform high-level in-situ nonintrusive studies on particle
interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;