* 0210124
* NER:  Light-Weight Minimally-Intrusive Damping Films Featuring Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Pulickel Ajayan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Oscar Dillon
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This project investigates the potential for augmenting damping
in&lt;br/&gt;composite structures by taking advantage of the energy dissipation
between&lt;br/&gt;densely packed, highly interconnected networks of multi-walled
carbon&lt;br/&gt;nanotubes (nano-films) . The novel, nano-engineered damping
films&lt;br/&gt;developed in this project are expected to offer several
advantages: &lt;br/&gt;1) Nano-films show no degradation in structure/properties
upto 600 deg C &lt;br/&gt;and are expected to offer superior performance and
reliability for high&lt;br/&gt;temperature applications. 2) Nano-films do not
exhibit resin penetration&lt;br/&gt;when co-cured within composite structures
and could potentially be&lt;br/&gt;seamlessly integrated into heterogeneous
systems. 3) Nano-films offer&lt;br/&gt;multi-functionality in terms of enhanced
stiffness in addition to damping&lt;br/&gt;augmentation. The specific stiffness
of nano-films are expected to be an&lt;br/&gt;order of magnitude greater than
commercially available viscoelastic&lt;br/&gt;polymer films. This research
project is directed towards further exploring&lt;br/&gt;and developing these
concepts so as to enable the efficient synthesis of&lt;br/&gt;these novel
multifunctional materials into multi-scale structural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves strong interdisciplinary
collaboration between&lt;br/&gt;material science (patterning and assembly of
nanostructures) and&lt;br/&gt;mechanical engineering (damping and stiffness
increase in composites). &lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the training
of 1 Ph.D student and several&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students (under the
Undergraduate Research Projects - URP&lt;br/&gt;Program) at the Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;