* 0210613
* NER:  Developing a Nanoscale Strain Gauge
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Mark Vaughn, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 08/31/2004
* USD 108,923.00

The objective of this project is to develop a nanoscale "strain-gauge" to
measure flow-induced stresses at an interface. This molecular probe will be
developed from a flexible macromolecule such as a single-strand DNA with
fluorophores conjugated to each end. One end will be tethered to the phase
interface and the other will extend freely into the deforming phase. In the
presence of fluid flow, the molecule will change configuration, based on the
local hydrodynamic forces. This change will be measured by fluorescent resonance
energy transfer (FRET), which provides a nanoscale "ruler'" for measuring the
distance between two fluorophores. FRET provides a sensitive means to measure
distances between fluorophores that are 1-9 nm apart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
technique will initially be developed to map the flow field immediately adjacent
to an interface as a means to study the effect of flow and/or deformation on
interfacial properties. However, the technique will also be useful in studying
the effects of flow in self-assembled monolayers and tethered macromolecules. It
will also help verify multiscale modeling techniques by providing accurate
measurements of molecular-scale response to macroscopic forces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both undergraduate and graduate students will be directly
involved in the development of the technique and will be trained in material
science applications of fluorescent microscopy and in bioconjugate techniques.
Results from the this study will also enhance the classroom experience for
students in courses such as fluid mechanics by providing a visual example of
flow/boundary interaction.&lt;br/&gt;