* 0210384
* NIRT:  NER:  Biosynthesis of Germanium Oxide Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Gregory Rorrer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/29/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER.&lt;br/&gt; This exploratory proposal
embraces two themes of the NSF Nanoscale &lt;br/&gt;Science and Engineering
Program, including 1) Biosystems at Nanoscale, 2) Manufacturing
&lt;br/&gt;Processes at the Nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
proposed research is to demonstrate the feasibility of a process &lt;br/&gt;for
biosynthesis of germanium oxide nanoparticles. The PIs specific objectives are
to: 1) Establish cultures of photosynthetic marine diatoms known to co-
assimilate soluble silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge), including Cylindrotheca
fusimormis, Cyclotella nana,and Phaeodactylum &lt;br/&gt;tricornutum; 2) Develop
a two-stage photobioreactor for biological manufacture Ge-oxide
&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles by marine diatoms, and identify soluble Si/Ge feeding
strategies that sustain Ge-&lt;br/&gt;oxide nanoparticle formation; 3)
Characterize the composition and size of nanoparticles by &lt;br/&gt;TEM/EDAX;
and 4) characterize photonic properties of extracted nanoparticles by
&lt;br/&gt;photoluminescence spectroscopy before and after thermal annealing or
H2 reduction.&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes that the biomineralization capacity of
marine diatoms can be harnessed to &lt;br/&gt;manufacture germanium oxide
nanoparticles that ultimately could be processed into photonic
&lt;br/&gt;materials. The synthesis of quantum dots by the atomic assembly of Ge
atoms or Ge-oxide &lt;br/&gt;nanocrystals on silicon substrates is an emerging
area of nanotechnology, as these light-emitting nanomaterials have novel optical
/ electronic properties. Current technology for manufacture of Ge-oxide
nanocrystals involves exotic and cumbersome processes at extreme conditions,
such as laser ablation, cluster beam deposition, or DC magnetron sputtering. In
contrast, diatoms could manufacture monodisperse Ge-oxide nanoparticles at the
atomic scale by biologically-mediated processes at ambient conditions, using the
nanobiochemical machinery of the cell itself. He proposes that Ge-oxide
nanoparticle production by diatoms can be accomplished in two stages. In Stage
1, diatoms are grown to high cell density on a soluble Si substrate (e.g.
silicic acid) to the point of Si depletion in the liquid medium. In Stage 2,
soluble germanium (e.g. germanic acid) is continuously added to the dense diatom
suspension at sub-lethal concentration. Diatoms assimilate soluble Ge, and then
biologically polymerize soluble Ge to Ge-oxide nanospheres, which accumulate
within the cell since they cannot be readily assimilated into the silica cell
wall. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If this proposed research is successful, then a
biotechnology-derived route to synthesis of &lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles or
nanocomposite materials with optoelectronic properties would be demonstrated and
the impact will be significant. &lt;br/&gt;The research plan will be co-directed
two chemical engineers with respective expertise in cell &lt;br/&gt;culture of
marine organisms and semiconductor materials synthesis. Graduate students
working &lt;br/&gt;with the PIs would be uniquely cross trained in two high-
technology areas: biotechnology and &lt;br/&gt;electronic materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;