* 0210549
* ITR:  Synthesis and Characterization of a Light-Driven Molecular Motor
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Thomas Bell, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,170,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) award to University of
Nevada Reno is supported by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS), Physics (MPS) and
Electronic and Communications Systems (ENG), and this proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157).
With this award, Professor Frederick and his team will synthesize a molecular
motor that exhibits unidirectional rotary motion upon light absorption. The
motor consists of a rotor chromophore geared into a chiral "ratchet" base. The
base and rotor can be functionalized for incorporation into a variety of
nanostructures. Motor operation will be modeled by molecular dynamics
calculations, and its actuation and positional control will be measured
experimentally using polarized light when the motor is immobilized on a surface.
The motor also will be incorporated into biopolymers, such as DNA, and measuring
light-induced conformational changes will test motor functions. The results of
modeling and experimental testing will be used to optimize the molecular design.
This motor potentially offers unprecedented positional and temporal control, as
well as high rotary speed. Students will learn and do research in molecular
design and synthesis, surface immobilization and characterization, polarized
laser excitation and fluorescence microscopy, biopolymer techniques, and large
molecule dynamics calculations.

With this award, a team of research scientists with expertise in organic
synthesis, molecular spectroscopy, biophysics, and molecular modeling and
dynamics will design, construct, and test a molecule-sized motor, capable of
converting light energy into directed mechanical energy. Polarized laser light
will be used to drive the motor, potentially offering precise positional control
and extremely high rotary speeds. The motor will also be incorporated into large
biomolecules, such as DNA, to control their shape and function. Students working
on the project will receive advanced training in molecular design and synthesis,
laser spectroscopy and microscopy, computer modeling, and molecular biology.
Potential applications of these molecular motors include light-controllable
drugs, molecule-sized switches and pumps, and friction-free materials, as well
as engines and propellers for nano-machines.