* 0211367
* Ecological Modeling: From Individual Utilization of Space to Community Structure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* George Cosner, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2005
* USD 269,970.00

Cosner&lt;br/&gt;0211367&lt;br/&gt; The investigators derive and analyze
mathematical models&lt;br/&gt;that describe how spatial aspects of the
environment and the ways&lt;br/&gt;that organisms utilize space and disperse
through it influence&lt;br/&gt;the dynamics of populations and the structure of
ecological&lt;br/&gt;communities. The underlying motivation for the project is
to gain&lt;br/&gt;a better understanding of how spatial effects can threaten
or&lt;br/&gt;maintain biodiversity or affect interactions between
important&lt;br/&gt;types of organisms such as crops, pests, and biological
control&lt;br/&gt;agents. The project is focused primarily on edge-
mediated&lt;br/&gt;effects in habitat fragments and on the effects of
nonrandom&lt;br/&gt;dispersal. The main goal is to gain insight into the ways
that&lt;br/&gt;edge-mediated effects and dispersal behavior influence
the&lt;br/&gt;persistence or extinction of species. Understanding edge-
mediated&lt;br/&gt;effects is important because one of the most significant ways
in&lt;br/&gt;which humans alter natural environments is by
fragmenting&lt;br/&gt;habitats and thus creating edges. The investigators study
many&lt;br/&gt;spatial effects, including edge-mediated effects,
via&lt;br/&gt;reaction-diffusion models. However, reaction-diffusion
models&lt;br/&gt;assume random dispersal, and the dispersal patterns of
some&lt;br/&gt;organisms are affected by behavioral responses to the presence
of&lt;br/&gt;prey, predators, or conspecifics. Reaction-diffusion
equations&lt;br/&gt;cannot capture those effects, so the investigators model
them&lt;br/&gt;with more general forms of quasilinear parabolic
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations. The investigators use methods
and&lt;br/&gt;results from the theory of partial differential
equations,&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, and nonlinear functional analysis to
develop&lt;br/&gt;the mathematical framework needed to analyze the
models.&lt;br/&gt; The investigators study mathematical models for the
ways&lt;br/&gt;that plant and animal populations are affected by the size
and&lt;br/&gt;spatial structure of the environment they inhabit and by the
way&lt;br/&gt;they move or spread through the environment. The goal of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is to gain a better theoretical understanding of
how&lt;br/&gt;spatial effects influence the persistence or extinction
of&lt;br/&gt;populations. The underlying motivation is to provide
insights&lt;br/&gt;into the impact of spatial effects on biodiversity and
on&lt;br/&gt;economically important organisms such as crops and pests.
The&lt;br/&gt;potential practical benefits of the project are improvements
in&lt;br/&gt;decision making in areas such as land management,
conservation,&lt;br/&gt;and urban planning. Much of the project is focused on
the&lt;br/&gt;effects of habitat edges, because one of the main effects
of&lt;br/&gt;human activity on the environment is to divide it into
fragments&lt;br/&gt;and create edges, for example by building roads.
Different&lt;br/&gt;organisms respond to edges in different ways; for example, a
new&lt;br/&gt;road may isolate a population of one species of animals
that&lt;br/&gt;refuse to cross it but may add to the mortality of
another&lt;br/&gt;species of animals that do attempt to cross. When
population&lt;br/&gt;interactions such as predation by one species upon another
are&lt;br/&gt;combined with spatial effects, the results can be complex
and&lt;br/&gt;sometimes counterintuitive. To understand them the
investigators&lt;br/&gt;derive mathematical equations that incorporate spatial
effects&lt;br/&gt;and population interactions and analyze those equations
to&lt;br/&gt;determine when they predict persistence of populations
versus&lt;br/&gt;when they predict extinction. To conduct the analysis
the&lt;br/&gt;investigators use and develop various mathematical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;