* 0211376
* Gene Silencing Mechanisms in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* James Birchler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 08/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

Genes transformed back into the organism of origin often cause silencing of
dispersed homologous copies, including the endogenous gene. Two types of
silencing occur. One is transcriptional and involves changes in chromatin
structure as evidenced by the accumulation of Polycomb Group proteins on the
silenced transgene insertion sites. The other involves post-transcriptional RNA
turnover in a similar manner to RNA interference. Emerging evidence has
indicated potential connections among RNA interference, post-transcriptional
silencing and transcriptional transgene silencing. In this project, a genetic
and molecular approach will be undertaken to determine any relationship among
these types of silencing. Transgenes of the Alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh) and
white (w) eye color genes in Drosophila will be used as a model system. First, a
series of constructs will be transformed that do or do not exhibit gene
expression to determine whether transcriptional silencing requires the
expression of the silencing gene to occur. If silencing can only occur when the
homologous sequences are expressed, an RNA mediated process would be implicated
in causing the chromatin changes that are associated with the cases of
transcriptional silencing. Secondly, the interrelationship between RNAi-like
mechanisms and transcriptional silencing will be examined. A construct predicted
to induce post-transcriptional silencing of Adh will be tested for its ability
to produce either type of silencing. Next, mutations that block post-
transcriptional silencing will be tested for their influence on pairing
sensitive silencing. Further, a transgene predicted to generate double stranded
RNA homologous to Adh promoter regions will be produced and tested for its
ability to induce transcriptional silencing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of
gene silencing are likely to reveal new information about gene expression and
nuclear dynamics in multicellular eukaryotes. One role of these silencing
mechanisms is as a protection against viruses and transposons, although many of
the genes that have been identified in the process are also known to affect
developmental mechanisms. Understanding the basic processes of gene silencing
has the potential to lead to virus protection and to have applications in gene
therapy.