* 0211359
* Landscape Heterogeneity, Patch Connectivity, and Host-Parasitoid Population Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* James Cronin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 369,558.00

Landscape heterogeneity, patch connectivity, and host-parasitoid population
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;NSF Ecological Studies Grant
(DEB-0211359)&lt;br/&gt;September 1, 2002 - August 31,
2005&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The fragmentation and loss of natural habitats is a
dire world-wide problem. Ecologists have made significant in-roads toward
understanding the impact that increased habitat fragmentation or spatial
patchiness might have on the long-term persistence of predator-prey populations.
However, most fragmentation studies have disregarded the vegetational cover that
exists between patches (known as the matrix), generally assuming that the matrix
is featureless and neutral to the movements and population fluctuations of both
predator and prey species. In reality, the matrix is complex and ever-changing.
Any alteration in matrix composition may significantly impact how predators
interact with their prey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal outlines a course
of study designed to address how different matrix types influence the movement
and population fluctuations of an herbivore and its predator. The planthopper,
Prokelisia crocea, and the parasitoid wasp, Anagrus columbi, which are
distributed among discrete patches of prairie cordgrass in the Great Plains of
the United States form an ideal system for this type of study. The crux of this
proposal is a relatively large-scale field experiment that is designed to alter
the ability of planthoppers and wasps to move among patches (i.e., patch
connectivity) by embedding cordgrass patches in either of two dominant matrix
types (mudflat or the exotic grass species brome). Emigration, immigration, the
pattern of spatial spread, and the within-patch distribution of insects will be
assessed from the recapture of fluorescent-marked individuals. The experiment
also will be carried out over 3 spatial scales and 6 generations to provide
information on the effect of the matrix manipulation on parasitism and density
fluctuations among patches and over time. Never before has the patch structure
and matrix been manipulated in predator-prey population studies in the field. As
a complement to this field experiment, trials will also be conducted to
determine the behavioral basis for matrix-dependent movement patterns of the
planthopper and wasp. Finally, based on information derived in the above
studies, a simulation model will be developed with the goal of evaluating the
impact of habitat fragmentation and degradation (e.g., changes in the landscape
matrix) on the long-term persistence of predator-prey
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Results from this renewal of NSF grant
DEB-9973789 should provide critical and much needed information on the effects
of heterogeneous landscapes on predator-prey interactions, and hopefully
catalyze a broader approach to studies of predator-prey interactions. This
research also has broad ramifications for conservation programs that are
interested in the connectivity of reserves: a matrix that facilitates dispersal
(i.e., a high-quality matrix) may serve a function identical to that of stepping
stones or corridors. Finally, this research may have a direct bearing on the
success of pest management programs that employ strategies that purposely modify
the matrix (e.g., through inter-cropping, terracing, or leaving some fields
fallow). Knowledge of the effect of these changes on pest and natural enemy
movement and interactions may be critical to developing a successful pest-
control program.&lt;br/&gt;