* 0211818
* Collaborative Research: Ecological Correlates of Introgressive Hybridization Between Native and Introduced Populations of Salmonid Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Margaret Ptacek, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2006
* USD 167,286.00

This proposal focuses on the ecological and genetic impacts of the introduction
of non-native rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) on native gene pools of
threatened Yellowstone cutthroat trout (O. clarki bouvieri). In addition to
competition, predation and the introduction of disease organisms by introduced
species, for some native fish species, a major threat is that of hybridization
with the introduced species. Hybrids, if fertile, can spread and cause the
complete replacement of parental genes with those of the introduced species.
This study is designed to determine the extent of hybridization between
Yellowstone cutthroat trout and rainbow trout as well as the degree of genetic
dilution that has occurred in native gene pools. In addition, the study will
also test whether particular features of the environment (temperature,
elevation, stream flow, etc.) are correlated with the presence or absence of
pure species or hybrids. In this manner, the study will determine if particular
environments favor the spread of hybrid fishes, or provide an advantage to the
remaining pure populations of Yellowstone cutthroat trout.

This study will provide the first documentation of the pattern of genetic
invasion of rainbow trout and begin to explore the ecological mechanisms that
are responsible for this pattern. If environmental correlates are found which
predict the success of native Yellowstone cutthroat trout over hybrids, such
habitats can be given top priority for conservation. Only through a combined
approach of understanding both the ecological and genetic factors that influence
the success of invasive species, can we ever hope to deter their spread and save
native gene pools