* 0211974
* RUI: Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Extracellular Complementation in Streptomyces coelicolor
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Joanne Willey, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 12/31/2004
* USD 190,000.00

The goal of this research is to elucidate the structure of a detergent-like
molecule, SapB, required for morphological differentiation in the bacterium
Streptomyces coelicolor. The developmental cycle of this microbe begins with the
germination of exospores resulting in the extension of multinucleate vegetative
hyphae into a solid substrate. These form a dense network of filaments until
signaled to differentiate into upwardly growing hydrophobic aerial hyphae, which
then septate into spores to begin the cycle anew. Aerial hyphae formation is
dependent on the products of the bald (bld) genes, which in turn regulate the
production of SapB; bld mutants produce smooth colonies consisting only of
vegetative substrate hyphae and are blocked in SapB biosynthesis. Extracellular
complementation is observed when purified SapB is added to any bld mutant during
growth on rich medium. SapB has a structural role in differentiation,
functioning as a surfactant to facilitate upward growth of aerial filaments by
releasing the surface tension at the colony/air interface. The gene(s) for SapB
and its structure remain elusive. This program of research will use a
biochemical approach to purify and elucidate the structure of SapB. Structural
studies will begin with SapB purification. Its structure will then be determined
by mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance studies to be performed in
the laboratories of Drs. Charles Iden and Francis Picard, respectively at the
State University of New York, Stony Brook.

The resolution of the structure of SapB will advance the understanding of the
role of extracellular communication in the morphological differentiation in this
filamentous bacterium. In addition, this research will increase our appreciation
of the role of intercellular communication in developmental processes in
general. Undergraduate students will be involved in the project and trained in
Molecular and Cell Biology.

