* 0211446
* 2002 Summer Conference on General Topology and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,08/31/2004
* Ralph Kopperman, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 08/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

DMS-0211446 Ralph D. Kopperman

Topology, which grew from Geometry, is the study of shapes and their behavior
under deformation, and of limits. It is an important field in its own right and
has applications in other fields of Mathematics, and also in a wide range of
other sciences including Computer Science, Chemistry, Physics and Biology. The
Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications was first held in New York in
1984; it has been held each summer since then, except 1986. For most of its
existence this series of conferences has been an important part of the
international topological landscape. Most of the participants have been
Americans, but an increasing number come from across the world. Until 1994, all
these conferences were held in the United States, but to encourage and support
worldwide participation, that year the Conference was held in Amsterdam, and it
has since been held in Mexico City and North Bay (Ontario); about half of the
future Summer Conferences are expected to be held in the United States. The
holding of the conference in the southern hemisphere for the first time, in New
Zealand, recognises the topological strength of that country. It is also
expected that this will lead to increased participation in the conference series
by topologists from south-east Asia and Australia. This year the conference will
be held at the University of Auckland, New Zealand, July 1 to 4. More details
about the conference may be found at the conference website
http://www.math.auckland.ac.nz/Topology-2002/

