* 0211054
* Integrated Studies of Floral Development, Traditional and Molecular Systematics, and Floristics in the Violet Family (Violaceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Shirley Tucker, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2005
* USD 115,477.00

0211054 Ballard and Tucker Generic distinctions and major subdivisions within
many angiosperm families commonly hinge on characteristics of floral symmetry or
architecture, and morphology of the reproductive structures themselves. This is
true in the violet family (Violaceae), a moderate-sized family of angiosperms
with a broad range of growth forms from large tropical forest canopy trees to
fingernail-sized Andean puna rosettes. Predominately insect-pollinated, the
family nevertheless boasts a wide range of floral and fruit morphologies on par
with that in whole orders of other angiosperms. An apparently simple trend from
actinomorphy to extreme zygomorphy, coupled with increasing elaboration of
staminal nectaries in floral spurs, has figured heavily in generic concepts as
well as in assignments to tribes and subtribes. Recent studies of generic
relationships based on sequences of the trnL-F and rbcL chloroplast regions,
however, reject the simplistic trend in floral symmetry and nectary development,
as well as the current traditional classification based on this trend, revealing
instead several independent origins of bilaterally symmetrical floral types with
spurs from different radially symmetrical spurless lineages. Furthermore,
pantropical Hybanthus, the third largest genus in the family, splinters into 7
separate groups distributed across the family, suggesting that its distinctive
"landing platform" flower is a recurrent evolutionary syndrome. The second
largest pantropical genus, Rinorea, is also substantially heterogeneous and non-
monophyletic. The proposed research program will integrate comprehensive floral
developmental investigations to clarify floral evolution; systematic studies of
macro- and micromorphological characters, chromosome numbers, xylem anatomy and
pollen morphology to reevaluate circumscriptions and distinctions of genera and
diagnosable segregates; and inferences of generic relationships from chloroplast
trnL-F spacer and rbcL gene regions to provide a robust molecular phylogenetic
foundation on which to test relationships and develop a predictive
classification. Complete generic circumscriptions using the new and pre-existing
traits, and a new intrafamilial classification, will then be developed using
examinations of key herbarium collections at the Missouri Botanical Garden in
St. Louis, Missouri; Royal Botanic Garden at Kew, England; and the National
Museum of Natural History in Paris, France. Field work in Latin America by the
investigator and his students and herbarium and laboratory training for graduate
students add to the broader impacts of the work, as does collaboration with a
leading plant morphologist, Dr. Shirley Tucker at UC-Santa Barbara.